In the Hamptons, the locals have put up barricades to limit parking and deployed enforcement officers to ticket outsiders. Jersey Shore towns have banned short-term leases and Airbnb rentals. The Suffolk County executive’s office taunted Mayor Bill de Blasio: “Do your job. Figure out a plan to safely reopen your beaches.” Since the coronavirus pandemic began, tensions have repeatedly flared over whether too many New York City residents have decamped to outlying vacation areas, potentially taking the virus with them. But now the region appears on the brink of a full-fledged (and nasty) battle over beaches, touched off by the city’s decision to keep its shoreline closed. In normal times, the Memorial Day weekend start of beach season sparks a mass migration from the city to Long Island, the Jersey Shore and, to a lesser extent, Connecticut. But Mr. de Blasio’s delay in opening the city’s beaches for swimming — on Friday, his office suggested they could reopen in June — has led to a backlash from local officials in those areas. The officials say they fear that their shorelines will be overwhelmed by an exodus of sun-starved New Yorkers blocked from their own beaches, which can in normal times attract a million people a day. To maintain social distancing, beaches across the region are moving to limit access to everyone. On the Jersey Shore, some towns are reducing parking and keeping their iconic boardwalks closed, with seaside restaurants providing takeout and delivery service only. In Spring Lake, beachgoers must now buy daily beach badges in advance; nearby Asbury Park is limiting sales of beach badges and selling them only through an online app. In Connecticut, state beaches are allowing people to gather in groups of five people or fewer, with 15 feet between beach blankets. But special rules have also been adopted to keep outsiders away. Westchester County, just north of the city, has restricted its beaches at Playland in Rye and Croton Point Park to county residents. In Groton, Conn., only residents can use Eastern Point Beach on weekends and holidays. The most sweeping rebuke of outsiders, however, seems to be coming from Long Island, many of whose beaches are convenient to New York City. Officials in Long Beach, whose oceanfront is particularly popular, said that turning away nonresidents was a “lifesaving” measure. “It’s a shame Long Island has to turn away city beachgoers to protect its residents and ensure safe beaches, but until the mayor gets his act together and makes his own beaches safe, that’s the only responsible move,” said State Senator Todd Kaminsky, a Democrat on Long Island who helped lead the charge for such restrictions. “As soon as New York City does the right thing, Long Island should welcome back its neighbors as long as safe volumes can be maintained,” he said. The Suffolk County executive, Steve Bellone, closed two county-run beaches — Smith Point, on Fire Island, and Cupsogue Beach, in the Hamptons — to nonresidents. He took to Twitter to chide Mr. de Blasio, who had earlier in the week said restrictions “should not be about any ill feeling toward people depending on where they come from.” “This isn’t about ‘ill feelings’ — there is reduced capacity,” Mr. Bellone tweeted. Oyster Bay, Hempstead and Brookhaven, all on Long Island, have also moved to limit access. Farther east, the Town of East Hampton suspended the sale of nonresident parking permits and began enforcing summer beach parking regulations early this year. These kinds of restrictions do not apply to state-run beaches like Jones Beach and Robert Moses State Park, mileslong expanses that Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo announced would be open to all, at a reduced capacity, starting on Friday. Mr. de Blasio, however, has warned that opening the city’s 14 miles of public beaches may pose risks to the strict social-distancing rules that city health officials have credited with helping to ease the peak virus infection rates seen in April. It is part of a difficult balance Mr. de Blasio has tried to strike between providing critical cooling options without squandering the city’s hard-fought gains in bringing case numbers down. The mayor has declined to give a date for the reopening, or to say what restrictions will be imposed. Coney Island and Brighton Beach in Brooklyn, Orchard Beach in the Bronx and some of the beaches in the Rockaways are all operated by the city. But at his daily news briefing on Friday, he said, “The fact is, we are getting the lifeguards ready right now.” City lifeguards have been called into pools for their annual training and testing, said Henry Garrido of the lifeguards’ union, District Council 37. “They’re being trained to get ready to open the beach early in June,” Mr. Garrido said. The Nassau County executive’s office initially called the mayor’s decision “irresponsible and shortsighted.” Laura Curran, the Nassau executive, has since had conciliatory discussions with Mr. de Blasio. Still, she signed a measure on Wednesday to restrict access to Nickerson Beach, just east of Long Beach — specifically until New York City beaches reopen. The measure noted the need to “protect the health, safety and welfare” of residents from outsiders who could “crowd out access” at Nickerson. The next day, Mr. de Blasio urged city residents to refrain from traveling to Long Island, asking them to “keep it local.” Jane Meyer, a spokeswoman for the mayor, said Long Island would benefit from the city’s decision to keep its beaches closed for now. “The fate of our whole region rests on New York City’s ability to continue to drive down this virus,” she said. The political back and forth continued with at least two city councilmen calling for retribution, suggesting sardonically that suburbanites be excluded from Manhattan events like SantaCon and the St. Patrick’s Day Parade and that New York City tax commuters. Updated May 20, 2020 If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. Over 38 million people have filed for unemployment since March. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Donovan Richards, a councilman who represents much of the Rockaways, noted that Queens had long welcomed the Long Islanders who park on city streets to go to Rockaway Beach. “Maybe we should start charging them for beach parking,” Mr. Richards said. “In a pandemic, when we should all be pulling together, not being divisive, they’re drawing these lines, with the perception that New York City is infecting everybody.” Councilman Justin Brannan, who represents parts of Brooklyn, said the restrictions were “just not the message you want to be sending right now.” “They come to our city and enjoy what our tax dollars pay for, and now we can’t go to their beaches?” he said. New York City has had roughly 200,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus and more than 20,000 deaths, a toll that exceeds those in most countries around the world. Long Island has also been a hot spot in the outbreak, with roughly 78,000 cases and roughly 4,400 deaths. The difficulty in keeping beachgoers out of the water was exemplified on Friday afternoon, when a 24-year-old man drowned in the ocean off Rockaway Beach while trying to swim. Corey Johnson, the New York City Council speaker, said that not having lifeguards on duty would create dangerous situations at beaches. “I’m not sure it’s realistic to believe that people will not attempt to swim,” Mr. Johnson said, “and we don’t want to be arresting people in the midst of this pandemic.” Dana Rubinstein contributed reporting.
