 This is a terrible day for The New York Times – and freedom of expression everywhere. On Sunday afternoon, the Times announced that James Bennet, its editorial page editor, would resign, and Jim Dao, his deputy, would be reassigned. Their crime: publishing an opinion piece from a United States senator Times staffers and readers did not like. DAN GAINOR: NEW YORK TIMES SURRENDERS TO STAFF REVOLT OVER COTTON OP-ED AS EDITORIAL PAGE EDITOR RESIGNS Last Wednesday the Times ran an op-ed from Senator Tom Cotton, R-Ark., suggesting American soldiers should be used to quell protests and violence related to the killing of George Floyd. To be clear, I thought Cotton’s op-ed was wrong. Last week I tweeted that invoking the Insurrection Act, which would allow active-duty soldiers to patrol in the United States, “is not a good idea.” The Insurrection Act should be a last resort. Even at its worst, last week’s violence did not rise to a level that police and the National Guard could not control. (And the way the piece compared the potential use of soldiers against the Floyd protests or riots to their use during the civil rights era to desegregate Southern schools was unnecessarily provocative.) But opinion pages exist to offer a diverse set of viewpoints. Knowing what people in power like Senator Cotton are thinking is especially important. Instead, Times readers – and more crucially, staffers – said the op-ed page should not have published Senator Cotton’s opinion at all. They called it racist and specifically dangerous to African-American employees at the Times. At a time when social media giants like Facebook and powerful technology companies like Amazon are openly censoring views they do not like, the fact that the Times – and other newspapers too – have also backed away from free speech is troubling and dangerous. “As a black woman, as a journalist, as an American, I am deeply ashamed that we ran this,” Nikole Hannah-Jones, a prominent Times reporter, wrote on Twitter. Roxane Gay, a regular contributor to the Times op-ed page, tweeted that “running this puts black @nytimes writers, editors, and other staff in danger.” At first Bennet and A.G. Sulzberger, the publisher of the Times, defended the Times’s right to publish the piece. “I believe in the principle of openness to a range of opinions, even those we may disagree with, and this piece was published in that spirit,” Sulzberger emailed Times reporters on June 4. But as the backlash worsened, Sulzberger changed his mind. By Friday he told reporters he found the piece “contemptuous.” Now Bennet, a sterling journalist who was once considered a front-runner to be the paper’s top editor, is out. And, according to the New York Times on Sunday evening, “Jim Dao, the deputy editorial page editor who oversees Op-Eds, is stepping down from his position…and taking a new job in the newsroom.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Remember: this was not a case of the paper publishing a plagiarized or fictionalized article. Seventeen years ago, The Times faced another crisis, after Jayson Blair – a young reporter and rising star – was discovered to have fabricated parts of several articles. I remember that debacle well. I was a reporter at the Times then. During a meeting, I famously asked Howell Raines, the paper’s editor, if he believed he had lost the confidence of the newsroom and would consider resigning. He did soon after. My colleagues and I were furious with Blair, and with Raines, who had enabled him. We believed in the mission of the Times, to report the news as honestly and completely as we could. And though I had never worked on the opinion page, I believed in its core mission – to encourage discussion and debate, even when those views might be uncomfortable to some. Bennet and Dao believed in those values too. Last year, they published an op-ed from me about the potential harms of cannabis, even though Dao knew many readers might disagree. Sunday, the Times has stood up for a different set of values; the values of conformity and groupthink and stifling dissent. I have a hard time imagining the Times’s next op-ed editors would run my cannabis piece. And if the opinion page will not publish unpopular views, what hope do reporters have of writing articles that break news that runs against the Times’s increasingly openly leftist attitude? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At a time when social media giants like Facebook and powerful technology companies like Amazon are openly censoring views they do not like, the fact that the Times – and other newspapers too – have also backed away from free speech is troubling and dangerous. For democracy to flourish, we all need to be willing to hear each other. But if the most powerful platforms in American media are afraid to run voices that might make people uncomfortable, how can we? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ALEX BERENSON

 The Chinese Communist Party has a long history of exploiting crises to advance its strategic hegemony. During the 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, for example, China invaded India while America and the Soviet Union were distracted. China’s war prize: the annexation of part of India’s Aksai Chin. Today, behind the cloak of a pandemic the Chinese Communist Party itself created, we are witnessing similar kinds of strategic behavior as China seeks to advance its own agenda and Chinese propagandists seek to advance a pro-authoritarian government narrative. Based on this behavior – including China’s attempt to snuff out democracy in Hong Kong – let’s consider whether COVID-19 might better stand for China On to Victory In Death by19 ways. GINGRICH & CHRISTENSEN: CORONAVIRUS WAS A WAKEUP CALL – NOW US-CHINA POLICY MUST BE REIMAGINED Here is a chronology beginning in late 2019: In mid-November, new pneumonia cases from a novel coronavirus start appearing in Wuhan. While the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) later suggests this outbreak started in a Wuhan wet market, two government laboratories in Wuhan handle exotic coronaviruses harvested from wild bats. In addition, China has had a coronavirus outbreak in at least one other lab in the past. Two Chinese scientists from the South China University of Technology identify the Wuhan Center for Disease Control as the possible source.  On Dec. 30, Dr. Li Wenliang sends a message to fellow doctors in a chat group warning of human-to-human transmission and community spread. He and seven other whistleblowers are detained by police and censured. Dr. Li later dies from the virus.  On Dec. 31, local Chinese officials bleach the Wuhan wet market. Doing this destroys the best possible evidence that could determine whether the wet market is the source of the coronavirus. Meanwhile, the virus samples gathered have yet to be shared with the world.  From early December through Jan. 20 this year, the CCP hides the virus from the world behind the shield of a puppet World Health Organization. China denies international experts and those from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention access to Wuhan to study the virus. On Jan. 14, the WHO tweets that “preliminary investigations conducted by Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission” of the coronavirus. On Jan. 7, Chinese President Xi Jinping issues demands to a CCP Politburo Standing Committee to “contain the outbreak.” Yet Xi allows Chinese diplomats to travel to the White House a week later to shake the hands of President Trump and his trade team. Only after the Phase I trade deal with the U.S. is signed on Jan. 15 does Xi reveal on Jan. 20 the “demon” virus the Chinese Communist Party has allowed to spread.  On Jan. 21, despite promising in the Jan. 15 trade deal not to steal American intellectual property, the Wuhan Institute of Virology – where the deadly virus may well have originated – applies for a patent on Remdesivir, a therapeutic developed by an American company. The clear objective: break the American patent.  By late January, the CCP locks down internal domestic travel but keeps international travel open until the end of March. While more than 5 million Chinese citizens flee Wuhan before its lockdown, hundreds of thousands of Chinese citizens fly around the world spreading the virus, thereby turning what could have been a contained outbreak in Wuhan into a global pandemic.  On Jan. 31, President Trump makes a courageous decision. He suspends and limits the entry into the United States of foreign nationals who had been in People’s Republic of China within 14 days of their attempted entry into the United States. The CCP calls it an “overreaction.” A day later presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden calls Trump a “xenophobe.” While hiding the China virus from the world, the CCP turns from a large net exporter of personal protective equipment (PPE) to a huge net importer.  China’s PPE hoarding including over 2 billion coveted N-95 masks – helps create a deadly shortage among doctors and nurses from Milan to New York and beyond.  After the Wall Street Journal publishes an opinion piece (not a news article) on Feb. 3 criticizing the Chinese virus response, the CCP revokes the credentials of three Journal reporters based in Beijing on Feb. 19. A month later, it revokes the credentials of reporters from The New York Times and Washington Post and – in violation of Hong Kong’s Basic Law – extends the bans to reporting from Hong Kong.  In late January, Beijing officials prevent the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing sample isolates of the novel coronavirus with the University of Texas biocontainment lab. This overrules an initial agreement by the Wuhan lab to share these samples. The CCP installs People’s Liberation Army Maj. Gen. Chen Wei, the Chinese military’s top epidemiologist and virologist, into a senior position at the Wuhan Institute of Virology.  As the CCP quells the outbreak in Wuhan, in part by barricading citizens into their own homes, it uses its vast stockpile of PPE to profiteer. Chinese enterprises hawk masks, gloves, gowns, and goggles at huge markups – even selling PPE at inflated prices back to countries like Italy that had originally provided the PPE. To further profiteer, China begins to flood world markets – from Spain, Turkey and the Netherlands to Georgia, the Czech Republic and the United States – with defective test kits and PPE.  Rather than fix the problems, the CCP blames “user error.”   On April 4, following a well-established playbook of capitalizing on international crises, a Chinese Coast Guard vessel sinks a Vietnamese fishing trawler. The CCP then adds 80 more islands, reefs and other sea features to further assert its false territorial claims in the South China Sea. The U.S. State Department warns the CCP to “stop exploiting the distraction or vulnerability of other states to expand its unlawful claims.” On April 24, Europe bows to CCP pressure by whitewashing China’s culpability in a European Union report on disinformation campaigns about the virus. On April 30, in a demonstration of “Wolf Warrior” diplomacy that rejects any acknowledgment of blame, the CCP warns the Netherlands to change the name of its de facto embassy in Taiwan or face a halt in PPE and a Chinese boycott of Dutch products.  On April 29, a senior CCP official blames the Trump administration for “wasting weeks after the threat posed by the virus first became apparent.”  On May 13, the FBI and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency issue warnings that hackers with links to the CCP are attempting to steal the intellectual property of the American and other foreign companies seeking to develop a vaccine – this despite a CCP promise in the Phase I China trade deal to stop stealing America’s intellectual property. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER On May 18, the CCP promises $2 billion over two years in assistance for the pandemic response globally. This is a fraction of the more than $9 billion in U.S. funding to benefit the global China virus response and less than China borrows from the World Bank. China has failed in its attempt to block 193 other member states from adopting a resolution that calls for an impartial, independent, comprehensive investigation into the WHO’s response and the origins of the virus. But the CCP has already begun to try and stall these important investigations. On May 22, after subduing Hong Kong protesters with a lockdown and “under the cover of the virus,” the CCP moves in for the democracy kill with a new security law. This law will put Chinese security officials into the streets of Hong Kong, escalate surveillance of Hong Kong citizens, and impose a social credit score system designed to punish peaceful protests and dissent. This jackboot follows the April arrest of 81-year old Martin Lee, the founder of Hong Kong’s Democratic Party; news publisher Jimmy Lai; and more than 10 prominent pro-democracy leaders. As we move forward in time, there will likely be many more political, economic and military gambits added by the CCP to exploit a pandemic that the CCP’s own bad behavior created. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The irony, of course, is that the CCP is now propagating the myth that the Chinese authoritarian rule provides a superior system of governance to the free and democratic rule of law. If public opinion polls are to be believed, however, nobody is buying what the CCP is selling. We here in America surely are not buying it; and the CCP is hereby on notice that we are not distracted. We know exactly what the CCP is attempting to do. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM PETER NAVARRO 

Arkansas Sen. Tom Cotton explains the inside story of his New York Times op-ed ‘Send in the Troops’ on ‘Sunday Morning Futures.’ Bruce Springsteen wrote, “No retreat, baby, no surrender.” Clearly, he wasn’t talking about The New York Times which saw the resignation of a top editor Sunday. The Gray Lady has been setting a surrender record in the past few days that would be the envy of Neville Chamberlain.The Times, D-NY, ran an op-ed from Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., earlier this week that urged the president to “Send In the Troops” to quell the rioting across the nation. Cotton said President Donald Trump should deploy the Insurrection Act, which is supported by “58 percent of registered voters.” DAVID MARCUS: TOM COTTON'S NEW YORK TIMES OP-ED HYSTERIA REVEALS SHOCKING COWARDICE AT THE PAPER
The paper has been capitulating to the leftist mob, including its own employees, ever since. Times staffers reacted with what the Daily Beast called an “Open Revolt” and forced their bosses to give in to the mob on Thursday, after the bosses initially supported publishing the opinion piece. First, Times leadership backed off their initial support. Then they held a staff meeting and announced the op-ed wouldn’t be running in the print paper. Late Friday, the paper added 322 words to the op-ed and gave in once more.
That wasn’t enough. On Sunday, the paper announced that “James Bennet, Editorial Page Editor since May, 2016, is resigning effective immediately.” That’s the kind of resignation people make when their cowardly bosses abandon all journalistic ethics and throw you under the bus. It’s also unclear if “resignation” was code for “You’re fired!”
“Jim Dao, the deputy editorial page editor who oversees Op-Eds, is stepping down from his position,” the paper announced in a story about the public relations disaster. But there’s more. Here’s a summary from The Times about the office revolt over the op-ed. “As of Thursday evening, over 800 staff members had signed a letter protesting its publication, addressed to high-ranking editors in the opinion and news divisions, as well as New York Times Company executives.”
The article went on to note: “Dozens of Times employees objected to the Op-Ed on social media, as well, despite a company policy that instructs them not to post partisan comments or take sides on issues.” Just in case you thought the paper was somehow neutral.
Reaction to the news about Bennet was swift. President Donald J. Trump tweeted mocking the paper: “Opinion Editor at @nytimes just walked out. That’s right, he quit over the excellent Op-Ed penned by our great Senator @TomCottonAR. TRANSPARENCY! The State of Arkansas is very proud of Tom. The New York Times is Fake News!!!" he wrote. Cotton also tweeted writing, "I'm beginning to suspect that @nytimes is not an objective, unbiased source of news. New York magazine Washington Correspondent Olivia Nuzzi noted that the whole fiasco had benefited Cotton. “This entire episode could not have gone better for Tom Cotton if he wrote the script himself.”
The Times’s cave-in to its leftist staff became very obvious when it added the Editor’s Note to the op-ed earlier this week. Here’s the money line to appease the mob: “we have concluded that the essay fell short of our standards and should not have been published.” “Should not have been published!” Perhaps The Times should change its slogan and have those words appear on every edition of the paper. The appeasement continued by whining about “the tone of the essay,” saying it “in places is needlessly harsh and falls short of the thoughtful approach that advances useful debate.” Wow, “needlessly harsh?” Our cities are burning and being looted, including New York, where this travesty of journalism is published, but let’s not be needlessly harsh. The paper didn’t hide the reason for its wimp out. It’s there in the first sentence: “this essay met strong criticism from many readers (and many Times colleagues), prompting editors to review the piece and the editing process.” The parenthetical says it all. Coddled Times staffers were mad that someone expressed an opinion they didn’t agree with. The result is the far-left Times, one of the most influential news outlets in the nation, is being pushed into complete loony land. You can’t have that at The Times, where even the allegedly right-leaning staffers regularly take left-wing positions. Columnist Bret Stephens, who Times employees seem to despise for being right-wing, hates both the Second Amendment and is an avowed Never Trumper. His most recent piece was headlined, “Donald Trump Is Our National Catastrophe.” But you’re never left enough for The Times now. The paper had already capitulated Thursday night, claiming the Cotton op-ed “fell short of the newspaper’s standards” in a separate article. Spokeswoman Eileen Murphy pretended “that a rushed editorial process led to the publication of an Op-Ed that did not meet our standards.” This wasn’t the first time Executive Editor Dean Baquet cowered in front of The Times mob. In August, the paper ran a five-word headline that was skewered by the left, especially at The Times. The headline said simply: “TRUMP URGES UNITY VS. RACISM.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The headline was changed multiple times and then Baquet held an embarrassing staff meeting where he was criticized for not being liberal enough. He admitted “that our readers and some of our staff cheer us when we take on Donald Trump, but they jeer at us when we take on Joe Biden.” Things have devolved since, which explains the latest freakout. Opinion editor Bari Weiss described the conflict as the “civil war inside The New York Times between the (mostly young) wokes and the (mostly 40+) liberal.” The result is that the far-left Times, one of the most influential news outlets in the nation, is being pushed into complete loony land. “They call it ‘safetyism,’ in which the right of people to feel emotionally and psychologically safe trumps what were previously considered core liberal values, like free speech,” explained Weiss. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP She’s spot on. America’s left has radicalized in ways we’ve seen only in places like Cuba, Venezuela and the old USSR. It’s not just the rioters in the streets. It’s the people who claim to report on the news in an objective way. They have taken the knee and bowed to their woke employees, deciding that opposition voices are not welcome … because they are scary. Every fight in the near future will be like this — one of safety vs. liberty. And The Times no longer pretends to believe in liberty, just surrender. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAN GAINOR

 Pandemics are public health emergencies; they aren't supposed to be political. Yet, the American people have been subjected to Draconian lockdowns for months that have stripped our Constitutional rights -- to assemble, worship or even to leave our homes to go to work -- to prevent the spread of the coronavirus we've been told by government and health officials alike is extremely contagious and would kill scores if we didn't comply. We've been told that if we didn't obey the mandated national quarantine and other government guidelines and restrictions that the U.S. health care system could collapse. This means millions of businesses haven't opened their doors for months, causing a decimated economy and the loss of more than 40 million jobs. Approximately 57 million children, grades K-12, haven't gone to school since March. Places of worship have been closed, weddings and funerals canceled and professional sports on hiatus while beaches, swimming pools and millions of restaurants, bars, gyms and hotels remain shuttered nationwide. ELIZABETH AMES: DID GEORGE FLOYD'S HORRIFIC DEATH IGNITE A CORONAVIRUS POWDERKEG? Even our nation's beloved Disneyland, "The Happiest Place on Earth," had to close the doors of its amusement parks and furlough more than 100,000 workers in April. That's just the tip of the iceberg. Families across the country have been heartbreakingly restricted from saying goodbye in person to loved ones dying in hospitals and nursing homes. Americans have been forced to delay cancer screenings and other medical procedures that put our health at risk while also being forced to wear masks and practice social distancing or risk getting fined as much as $1,000 in places like Massachusetts. All of this was in the name of protecting vulnerable populations and curtailing the spread. Did the virus that robbed us of our basic freedoms and livelihoods just vanish overnight?  Now, we're seeing massive gatherings in cities across America protesting the wrongful death of George Floyd. Although our nation is rightfully appalled by the police brutality that led to his alleged murder, it doesn't eliminate the fact that the stringent social distancing rules that have been imposed on the masses have been completely ignored by tens of thousands of protesters and rioters -many of whom aren't wearing masks. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But perhaps more troubling is the same government officials and so-called experts that implored us to #StayHome these past few months -- no matter how difficult -- have been noticeably silent about the throngs of protestors congregating shoulder to shoulder. Why is that? Did the virus that robbed us of our basic freedoms and livelihoods just vanish overnight? Or have we been led astray by power-thirsty officials and other "experts" who may have been wrong about the transmission of the virus all along? These are questions many Americans are now asking including Donald Trump Jr., the president's son, who tweeted on Monday: "Why is the media no longer concerned, and often almost gleeful, about all the mass gatherings that would have been so deadly due to COVID 19 just a few days ago? I guess these people magically aren't 'killing their grandmas' by going outside anymore?!?" The government that's been ignoring the potential spread of the virus from the massive crowds of protestors for over a week now is the same government that arrested a hair salon owner in Texas last month for daring to reopen her business to feed her family. It's the same government that arrested a paddleboarder in Malibu, California, in April for violating the lockdown order. And it's the same government that imposed steep fines or threat of imprisonment to any business owner that dared to reopen without permission. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Here's the deal. If someone contracts COVID-19, there's a four- or five-day incubation period, on average, before symptoms manifest. So, if the virus is as contagious as we've been told, we should soon be seeing a surge in new cases and hospitalizations given the mass gatherings began May 26. If that's not the case, then citizens should demand government officials revoke mask and social distancing requirements, reinstitute our freedoms and reopen schools, sports arenas and the entire economy -- today. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ADRIANA COHEN

 On May 22, President Trump observed, “In America, we need more prayer, not less.” In light of recent events, I couldn’t agree more. Now, perhaps more than ever, Christians need to come together to pray for America. Our houses of worship are essential places providing essential services, and we must begin the process of returning to our churches in a safe way. Almost every church in America has been shut down for months, even on Easter Sunday. The president pointed out that it is not right for some governors to allow liquor stores and abortion clinics to reopen but require churches to remain shuttered. When he boldly stood up for religious liberty by calling for America’s churches to reopen, that resonated with millions of believers around the country. ADRIANA COHEN: CORONAVIRUS 'SHELTER-IN-PLACE' ORDERS -- DID THEY SUDDENLY VANISH? After the president’s remarks, he called me and made it very clear that he’s not asking for churches to open capriciously. It ought to be done carefully, and it needs to be done now. Of course, each congregation needs to make wise decisions according to their individual situations. At First Baptist Dallas, we have been very cautious about this. From the beginning, we have said that we are going to be data-driven, not date driven. We heeded the advice of our federal, state and local authorities. Recently, we observed an overall plateau in the number of COVID-19 cases in our area and a decline in the percentage of positive cases to overall tests. Based on these metrics, we prayerfully decided to partially reopen on June 7. Our church opened at 20 percent capacity, using a reservation system. In our “contactless service,” we didn’t exchange printed programs or pass offering plates; instead, we provided receptacles for offerings and decision cards. We encouraged social distancing and placed hand-sanitizing stations throughout our campus. We also strongly encouraged everybody to wear face masks. Unfortunately, wearing a mask has become a political issue for many people. It’s not a political issue; it’s a medical issue. It’s not about your freedom; it’s about keeping other people safe. Some believers will remain in quarantine while others will be on campus, but we are all part of the same family — and someday soon we will be together again. Some people say, “I feel comfortable not wearing a mask.” But it isn’t about you; it’s about other people. Yes, a mask may to some extent protect you from the coronavirus, but it’s more effective in keeping others around you from contracting it. The New Testament is filled with principles that say we ought not use our freedom to hurt other people. Romans 14:7–8 says, “Not one of us lives for himself, and not one dies for himself; for if we live, we live for the Lord, or if we die, we die for the Lord.” Philippians 2:3–4 says, “Do nothing from selfishness or empty conceit, but with humility of mind regard one another as more important than yourselves; do not merely look out for your own personal interests, but also for the interests of others.” What we do affects others, and we are to look out for the welfare of others. While you may feel OK about not wearing a mask, you may be around an elderly person or a person with respiratory problems who could die if they contracted this virus. That’s why we’re asking everybody to wear a mask so that we can protect one another as we worship together. Now, just because churches begin gradually reopening doesn’t mean it is the right thing for every person right now. At First Baptist Dallas, we encourage those who have underlying health issues or feel they are especially susceptible to this virus to stay home and continue worshipping with us on our iCampus at 9:30 and 11 a.m. We will also stream our live services on our website. Regardless of whether people worship with us in person or at home, they are an important part of our church. In Ephesians 3:14–15, Paul said there is one family — the family of God. Some members of the family have gone ahead of us; they are in heaven. Some are on earth. But if we are believers, we are all part of the same family. The same thing is true of our churches. Some believers will remain in quarantine while others will be on campus, but we are all part of the same family — and someday soon we will be together again. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now, we’ve seen that tensions are high as people begin to go out into the community. I think one word that needs to characterize the way we interact during this time is grace. All believers need to exercise grace, love and understanding toward one another, especially in this transitional reopening process. But it’s clear that Christians across America are ready to get back to in-person worship in a safe atmosphere, and it’s time for our nation’s churches to reopen. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Make no mistake: Voter fraud is real. Democrats, the anti-Trump news media and the so-called public interest groups on the political left will tell you otherwise, but they are either lying or totally ignorant. Voter fraud is a threat to the integrity of our elections, the heart of our democracy. Democrats want to make the problem worse with their new voting laws. I believe this issue is incredibly important, now more than ever. So, as part of my ongoing Election 2020 podcast series, I decided to examine voter fraud in depth in this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World.” RNC CHAIR MCDANIEL: DEMOCRATS AND VOTER FRAUD IN NEVADA — HERE'S HOW IT WILL IMPACT YOU My guest is Hans von Spakovsky, a senior legal fellow at the Heritage Foundation and manager of the think tank’s Election Law Reform Initiative. He is one of the preeminent experts on election law and election fraud and explains how Democrats are pushing proposals that will clearly make fraud more prevalent. Anyone who denies the existence of voter fraud in the U.S. needs to go to Heritage’s online database, where they will find 1,285 proven instances of it – including 1,110 criminal convictions. Some of the stories are quite striking. In 2016, for example, Elbert Melton, the former mayor of Gordon, Ala., illegally notarized two ballots, without witnesses present, while running for reelection. Melton won the race by only 16 votes. Many local and state races are decided by such small margins. He was convicted of absentee ballot fraud, removed from office, and sentenced to one year in prison. The biggest way to expand voter fraud is to expand voting by mail. And Democrats want to impose universal vote-by-mail across the country. Traditionally, voters have long been able to request that an absentee ballot be mailed to them if they have a valid excuse for not being able to go to their local polling place – the physically disabled or sick, and of course our troops stationed abroad and their families. This is still the case in most states, but some – such as Oregon – simply mail an absentee ballot to every single registered voter. The problem with mailing ballots like this is that the lists of registered voters across the country are in terrible shape, and states do a poor job of cleaning their voter rolls. In fact, most states have given up on doing so. Every time they try, well-funded liberal groups accuse them of purging active, eligible voters from the rolls to suppress voting. As a result, ballots get mailed out to people who no longer live at the same addresses because they have moved or died. Therefore, a precious item, perhaps our society’s most valuable – the ballot – is just out there, for anyone to exploit. It isn’t that difficult to imagine how people could fill out fraudulent ballots, mail them in, and have them counted. Voting by mail also leads to ballot harvesting – the practice of allowing third parties to collect voters’ ballots and turn them in together to polling stations. Imagine a political operative or a campaign volunteer showing up at your front door to collect your ballot and deliver it for you. Your ballot would no longer be secret, but more importantly, the operative or volunteer could pressure or even intimidate you to vote a certain way – especially if you are sick, elderly, or speak poor English. Another invitation for dishonest elections and inaccurate voting is same-day registration. Under this system, if you aren’t registered to vote, you can register on Election Day and immediately vote. Election officials have no time to verify your information or determine if you’re even an eligible voter who lives at the address that you provide. Democrats are pushing all of these measures in earnest. They included each one and many more in HR 1, the very first bill that Democrats introduced after they retook control of the House in 2018. And House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., included the same measures in her $3 trillion monstrosity of a bill that is supposedly meant to stimulate the economy amid the coronavirus pandemic.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Pelosi and the Democrats are using the coronavirus as an excuse to impose these voting laws and other far-left ideas on the country. As Hans von Spakovsky explains to me, Liberia had a successful election in 2014 despite the Ebola epidemic. Wisconsin also held an election without problems earlier this year, as did South Korea, amid the current pandemic. Polling places just need to institute the necessary safety measures, which they can do. The fearmongering from the news media and the left about the consequences of holding the November election in person has no basis in reality. But Democrats are still pushing these voting laws as a deliberate strategy to maximize their ability to win elections. I’ve spent a lifetime in politics and don’t remember anything this bad, where people are so blatantly and openly willing to push illegality – in this case in the form of voter fraud. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As von Spakovsky notes, Democrats have gotten to the point where they believe the ends justify the means. They believe that President Trump is so terrible and evil that anything they do to win, even cheating, is justified. I hope you will listen to this week’s episode to learn how Democrats are trying to steal not only the November election but also future elections. And I hope you will listen to my next episode, set to air Wednesday, on the nationwide riots and protests following the killing of George Floyd.  To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

 From the Civil Rights movement of the 1960s to the 2009 Tea Party March on Washington in 2009 to the annual March for Life in our nation’s capital, peaceful protests have been a hallmark – and strength – of American democracy. But the violence that has erupted around the protests over the death of George Floyd has nothing to do with democracy. Attacks on law enforcement officers and innocent civilians; looting and burning small businesses (often in minority neighborhoods) – this is criminal behavior. It is the work of anarchists and lawless mobs, instigated by those who want to take advantage of the tragedy that occurred in Minneapolis. State and local law enforcement are responsible for protecting the public – including those engaged in civil protests – and going after those engaged in criminal violence. If police forces need help, governors may call upon their state National Guard to lend a hand. JAMES CARAFANO: LIKE HEROES OF D-DAY, NATIONAL GUARD MEMBERS NOW DEFEND US – THIS TIME FROM RIOTING IN US U.S. Attorney General William Barr has said that federal law enforcement also has a role in “apprehending and charging the violent agitators who have hijacked peaceful protest and are engaged in violations of federal law.” He added that the “violence carried out by Antifa and other similar groups in connection with the rioting is domestic terrorism and will be treated accordingly.” He’s right, if there are violations of federal law. The Federal Anti-Riot Act (18 U.S.C § 2101) allows the federal government to go after anyone who “travels in interstate or foreign commerce” or who uses “any facility of interstate or foreign commerce, including, but not limited to, the mail, telegraph, telephone, radio or television” to “incite a riot; or to organize, promote, encourage, participate in or carry on a riot; or to commit any act of violence in furtherance of a riot.” So anyone who travels from out of state or uses his phone or his computer with the specific intent to instigate and participate in riots is violating federal law. It also applies to those who “aid or abet” anyone else to carry out such acts. Someone found guilty can be fined, imprisoned for up to five years or both for each violation. The law contains an unusual provision that shows Congress was quite serious about using it to stop the type of anarchy we are seeing in some of our nation’s cities today. It directs the attorney general, when he believes that any person has violated the law, to “proceed as speedily as possible with a prosecution … and with any appeal” that may result “from any decision adverse to the government resulting from such prosecution.” The Justice Department also has the ability to use a criminal civil rights statute against those members of Antifa and other domestic terrorist groups who use face masks and disguises intended to hide their identity. Congressional intent is clear here: when riots break out, the executive branch must act as quickly as possible to go after those who are fomenting mayhem. This provision was used successfully to prosecute three white supremacists who traveled from California to Virginia in August 2017 to incite and organize violence in protests being held at the University of Virginia. In May of last year, a federal district court in U.S. v. Daley ruled that this statute was constitutional, rejecting the defendants’ arguments that it was not within the power of Congress to pass such a criminal law. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The Justice Department also has the ability to use a criminal civil rights statute against those members of Antifa and other domestic terrorist groups who use face masks and disguises intended to hide their identity. The statute, 18 U.S.C. §241 prohibits conspiracies to “injure, oppress, threaten or intimidate any person … in the exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege secured to him by the Constitution or laws of the United States.” It also prohibits individuals from going “in disguise on the highway or on the premises of another, with intent to prevent or hinder his free exercise or enjoyment of any right or privilege so secured.” These rioters are arguably violating the rights of peaceful protesters, business owners and law enforcement officers to exercise their free speech rights, to own private property and protect their lives, and to carry out their duties to protect the public and enforce law and order. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Violating this statute is punishable by up to 10 years in federal prison. Ironically, the disguise language was inserted into the statute to go after the Ku Klux Klan (KKK). It may be applicable here, as it seems obvious that Antifa and other radical groups have adopted the KKK’s tactics of violence and masking. State and federal law enforcement have to act to stop violent criminals from hijacking of the “peaceful and legitimate protests” – as Barr termed it – over George Floyd’s death. This type of criminal behavior has no place in a civilized, orderly society where we work out our problems peacefully through debate, political action and the democratic process. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY HANS VON SPAKOVSKY Cully Stimson is a senior legal fellow at the Heritage Foundation. Both are former Justice Department lawyers.

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Nancy Gray and her husband, Kenneth, stood guard over her mother's Illinois bridal shop for hours on Sunday, as looters took advantage of the protests related to the death of George Floyd. Gray said she passed the broken windows of the First Midwest Bank though tear gas, which stung her eyes and made her husband unable to see, The Chicago Tribune reported. Her mother’s store, Creaciones Morelos on Broadway in Aurora, was one of many businesses that were damaged when crowds reportedly clashed with police, including lighting a dumpster on fire. “My heart was beating so fast,” she told The Tribune. “It was heart-wrenching to see how they were destroying all these other businesses, and you couldn’t do anything about it.” MICHIGAN RESTAURANT OWNER SAYS HE USED FACEBOOK TO IDENTIFY SUSPECTS INVOLVED IN PROPERTY DESTRUCTION Gray said she was at her home in Oswego on Sunday night when a cousin sent her clip of a jewelry store near her mother's shop being robbed. That's when Gray and her husband decided to act. “Much like my family, they’ve come from little to nothing,” Kenneth Gray told The Tribune. “And they’ve worked hard, day in, day out, to make sure that their family is taken care of, and to make sure that they have a legacy to leave for them.” The store windows remained intact and the contents were thankfully not looted. However, Gray claimed she saw someone trying to sell looted goods in front of them, out on the street. “That’s not right,” Gray said. “This is not the way to do it. You’re hurting your community, like [the] minority community.” The couple also told the Tribune that they saw other business owners step in to protect their property. Men from a nearby barbershop offered to help the Grays defend the store and the couple repaid the kindness by helping board up another shop that had its door damaged. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “It’s disappointing,” Gray added. “You don’t even know if you want to continue with this business if this is what we’re looking forward to at this point.”

Bill Hanisch, owner of Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop in Minnesota, joins ‘America’s Newsroom.’ Graduating high school during a pandemic is no piece of cake – inspiring one Minnesota baker to give away more than  800 cakes to local seniors in celebration of their accomplishments. Bill Hansich, owner of Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop, wanted to do something sweet for the senior students graduating from Red Wing High School this year. The teens finished school on a difficult note,the Minneapolis Star Tribune reports, with traditional commencement plans upended amid the COVID-19 outbreak. 
      Bill Hansich, owner of Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop, wanted to do something sweet for the senior students graduating from Red Wing High School this year.
      (Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop) AMERICA TOGETHER: UPLIFTING STORIES OF AMERICANS FIGHTING THE GOOD FIGHT The small business owner initially planned to bake and donate a cake for all 220 members of the Red Wing senior class last month. However, word quickly spread, and donations poured in from schools, parents, residents and other business owners with requests to bake cakes for their seniors, too. To date, Hanisch Bakery has produced more than 800 free, frosted cakes for 2020 grads at 12 schools, Hanisch told told “America’s Newsroom” host Ed Henry during a recent appearance. 
      To date, Hanisch Bakery has produced more than 800 free, frosted cakes for 2020 grads at 12 schools.
      (Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop) “It started out as an idea to support our seniors here in Red Wing and it grew and blossomed. We are accepting donations, because 12 towns and 800 cakes is a lot of baking!” he joked. FOLLOW US ON FACEBOOK FOR MORE FOX LIFESTYLE NEWS Acknowledging that the feat has been a “labor of love” for the staff, Hanisch described the support from the local community as “absolutely amazing.” Though times are challenging, the baker said that he hopes the free cakes encourage the senior students to celebrate their achievements and look forward to bright futures ahead. 
      Acknowledging that the feat has been a “labor of love” for the staff, Hanisch described the support from the local community as “absolutely amazing.”
      (Hanisch Bakery and Coffee Shop) “Life is going to throw you curveballs… but this is a way to show them that their community is going to support them now, and down the road,” Hanisch said of the effort. CLICK HERE FOR FOX NEWS' CONTINUING CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE According to the Star Tribune, the 7-inch, two-layer cakes typically retail for $28, and the donations are covering only the cost. The bakery is turning no profit on the sweet treats for the senior students.

 America is at a crossroads. Violent riots threaten our communities just as we begin to reemerge from months in lockdown. Now we face a choice between peace and fear, order and anarchy, light and darkness. Governors and mayors across the country acted in fear when they shuttered small businesses and closed houses of worship. As a result, millions remain out of work. Substance abuse, depression and suicide are on the rise. In response, Americans from all over the country turned to faith and called for reopening while Leftist politicians shamed them. As New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy put it, those who disobey social distancing orders have “blood on [their] hands.” NEWT GINGRICH: DEMOCRATS WANT TO STEAL NOVEMBER ELECTION – HERE'S HOW Now more than ever, we need peace, order and faith as our country reels following the senseless death of George Floyd. But, as thousands of looters and rioters ransack stores, burn churches and spread violence across our nation, where are these same Leftist politicians that chided faithful and freedom-loving Americans just weeks ago? Where were they as St. John’s Church in Washington, D.C., burned? I will always stand up for Americans’ First Amendment rights — whether it be peacefully protesting or practicing their faith. However, in no way is the behavior we are seeing a peaceful demonstration. The Constitution does not protect or condone setting churches ablaze, looting stores and destroying property. Yet, as these vigilantes take to the street, I have yet to hear any state or local leaders cry “social distancing” and break up these mass gatherings out of coronavirus concerns. The Leftist media suddenly isn’t concerned about the threat of coronavirus spreading among large crowds of angry protesters, when just weeks ago they lauded the arrest of hairdressers for reopening their shops. New York City Mayor Bill DeBlasio, who recently ordered the arrest of courageous New Yorkers seeking to worship at synagogues over COVID-19 concerns, now stands in the streets as looters shatter windows and steal countless business owners’ livelihoods. The same politicians who once called for total lockdowns of their states are now allowing looters and rioters to destroy the communities they claim to love. There is a difference between taking to the streets to peacefully protest the wrongful death of George Floyd and the destruction of property and entire communities that we are seeing. I grieve for Floyd’s family and look forward to justice being served. But the hypocrisy from Leftist leaders has only added fuel to this fire. The same politicians who once called for total lockdowns of their states are now allowing looters and rioters to destroy the communities they claim to love. Make no mistake, these destructive actions are compounding problems that will harm African-American communities more than we can imagine. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In Minneapolis, rioters have burned low-income housing and a police precinct. In Dallas, a store owner was beaten unconscious by individuals who certainly were not honoring George Floyd’s memory. In our nation’s capital, the historic St. John’s Church, which Mayor Muriel Bowser forcibly shuttered for months, was set on fire by the same anarchists the mayor refused to remove from the streets. It’s sickening to see groups like ANTIFA use George Floyd’s death as an excuse to tear down our nation’s institutions and sow discord. New York's top terrorism official says anarchist groups initially planned to incite violence at protests nationwide. It takes a special kind of evil to take advantage of the nation’s grief and organize riots that have destroyed communities across the country. This terrible situation has only been exacerbated by the poor leadership of governors and mayors who have chosen to lock up business owners instead of the violent rioters terrorizing their cities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We must root out this darkness. As Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. once said, “Darkness cannot drive out darkness, only light can do that.” Our governors and mayors need to refocus their priorities. They need to take a stand against violent anarchists burning cities to the ground, not hairdressers seeking to reopen their shops. Now is the time to honor George Floyd’s memory by restoring order, stopping these violent rioters in the tracks and letting light drive out the darkness. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. KEN BUCK

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Landing my job at Lord & Taylor in New York was something of a dream come true. Beginning in grade school, I had done all kinds of things for pay – ran errands for Howie, the owner of a local candy store, mowed lawns, shoveled snow, delivered newspapers and been a receptionist and janitor at our local church. But it felt different to put on a suit and step into the grandeur of American retail. I had shopped the store all my life with my parents, gazed admiringly at its windows at Christmas, and had always enjoyed the gentle, calm atmosphere. Pinning on my name tag that first day, I felt like I was joining part of a long and storied history. PAUL BATURA: AMID CORONAVIRUS CRISIS, LOOK FOR THESE MESSAGES OF HOPE AND INSPIRATION At first selling men’s suits and then shoes, the role was a good fit for me. I enjoyed talking with people and helping them, and the company’s motto made for a happy and satisfied clientele – the customer was always right. Bosses can make or break a job wherever you work. I went through a lot of them at Lord & Taylor, but there’s one, in particular, I’ll never forget. Sidney Rosenthal was short and stocky, a big shock of graying hair combed across his head. He was in his late 60s, had deep jowls and a gravelly voice. Even though he was diminutive in size, he used to take long strides as he hustled from the floor to the stock room to retrieve shoes. I liked Sidney immediately. He was kind and courtly and made me laugh. Told me all kinds of crazy and funny stories. He could be grumpy and used to complain when folks wouldn’t buy, especially if he thought they had a lot of money. Truth be told, he thought everybody was rich. “Look at the rock on that lady’s finger,” he would say. A lifetime bachelor, Sidney lived alone in a small apartment. He mentioned a brother, but no other family member. I remember he had a thing for Elizabeth Taylor, used to talk about her all the time, but never seemed to be dating anyone. He joked that the men’s shoe department was a bad place to meet rich widows. The attorney told me I had been named in his will and invited me to his office for a public reading of it.  One day I found Sidney sitting alone and unresponsive in the shoe department before the store opened. Most of the lights were off, and his stoic posture startled me. His eyes were open, but there he sat just staring off into the distance. I quickly dialed 911. It turned out Sidney had tuberculosis. When I went to visit him in the hospital, I had to put on a gown and mask. He said very little, fading in and out of consciousness.  Within a week he was gone. I received a call from his lawyer a few weeks later. The attorney told me I had been named in his will and invited me to his office for a public reading of it. At the time, I was still in college and scraping by like every other 20-something. Honestly, though I grieved my boss’ passing, the news that I was named in his will kind of intrigued me. With no wife or much family and a spartan lifestyle, was he worth big bucks? After all, we’ve all read the stories about the millionaire next door. Sitting in a small office with a few other individuals, including Sidney’s brother, who was a crossing guard, the attorney read the following: “To my good friend and colleague, Paul Batura, I leave my valuable record collection, including my all-time favorite album, ‘Saturday Night Fever.’ I have wonderful memories of our long conversations about our mutual love of music.” Sidney’s entire “collection” consisted of 12 records. And I had absolutely no recollection of us ever talking about a “mutual” love of music. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As it was, Sidney liked to talk, and I liked to listen and ask him questions. I guess he simply interpreted my inquisitiveness for an appreciation of music. It’s been many years since my friend passed away, and whenever I see the albums on my shelf, I think of him and smile. It was greedy and selfish of me to think about receiving some financial windfall. I’m not proud to admit it. It turns out, I received something even more valuable than money, though, and I’m not talking about disco music and John Travolta. Instead, I received a reminder that sometimes the best thing you can give to people is your attention and your interest. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As we head into this strange COVID summer of 2020, adjusting to a new normal as we go, “Stayin’ Alive” – one of the hits of the famed “Saturday Night Fever” soundtrack – remains the top priority of everyone. Along the way, though, don’t forget that the best way to thrive while “Stayin’ Alive” is to show interest in other people. Don’t think less of yourself – just think of yourself less and more of those around you. In the end, that approach will leave you the richest man in town. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

 George Floyd was killed in Minneapolis last week when a police officer used brutally excessive force to arrest him. It was the latest in a string of high-profile cases nationwide in which citizens, most of them African Americans, died from reckless police force. Once again, protests over police brutality turned violent and rioting ensued. The U.S. is torn apart over the national mass quarantine. Liberal blue states accused red restart states of recklessly endangering national health by allowing their populations to go back to work before the virus has left. Red states countered that blue states were hypocritical in wanting federal money to subsidize their locked-down residents while expecting other states to generate needed federal revenue. They also contended that there was no longer scientific evidence to justify the lockdown. CORONAVIRUS FACE MASKS SHOULD BE WORN IN PUBLIC, WHO SAYS IN UPDATED GUIDANCE The nationwide protests and rioting have inadvertently adjudicated the issue: States cannot jail the law-abiding barber who wears a mask at work but allow the arsonist without one to roam the streets burning with impunity. There is mounting evidence that an array of federal officials had plotted to disrupt Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign and his presidential transition, leaving Trump supporters furious. Meanwhile, likely Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden is sequestered in his basement. He often appears confused. Yet Biden seems content that the more people do not see or hear him, the more they like the idea of him as president. Indeed, the more inert Biden has become, the more his poll numbers have risen against Trump and his tweeting. As the U.S. protested and bickered, China attempted to strangle what was left of Hong Kong’s enfeebled democracy. China’s theory seemed to be that if it’s going to be blamed for the spreading virus due to its deceit anyway, it might as well not let such a pandemic go to waste. The Chinese strategy in reaction to disclosures that it hid vital data about the virus and exposed the world to contagion while it quarantined its own cities has devolved from “So what?” to the current “What exactly are you going to do about it?” China also decided to ramp up its perennial border confrontations with India, as its forces encroached on Indian soil in the Himalayas. What better way to show the world that a defiant China is dangerous than agitate the world’s largest democracy? Beijing has warned European nations that if their independent media continued to condemn China, there could be commercial retaliation. A few European journalists still exposed Chinese deceit, even as shaken EU leaders backtracked and tried to contextualize Chinese misbehavior. Japan and South Korea worried that China might move on Taiwan. They knew that if China did, only the United States — convulsed by quarantines, riots and a contentious presidential race —could stand up to Beijing. For years, China has bullied and waged a virtual commercial war against Asian democracies such as Japan, South Korea, India and Australia. It has subverted almost all international trading norms. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The Chinese government assumed that Western elites would get rich by being complicit in China’s cheating and would thus help sell out their own countries. They were mostly right on both counts. As China westernized its economy, it conned gullible Western officials that eventually it planned to become a useful member of the family of nations. In truth, China strategically hoarded cash from its asymmetrical trade surpluses. It planted its functionaries throughout transnational organizations and subverted them. It beefed up its military and planted island bases in international waters. It compromised strategically important nations by investing in their infrastructure through its neo-colonial and imperialist multitrillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative. China may have been forced by the global epidemic to give up its nice-guy façade. But it has insidiously pivoted from global friend to its new role as overt global villain. If the world had been anxious over the intentions of a suspiciously nice China, it will become downright terrified of an overtly hostile China. In other words, China is not wasting the disaster of the Wuhan outbreak. It once gained a lot by faking friendliness, but now it seems to think it has no choice but to get even more by being authentically belligerent. As part of the about-face, China no longer flatters the West in passive-aggressive fashion, but rather shows its disdain for a weak Europe and an increasingly divided U.S. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP China’s real message to a fence-sitting world? While America tears itself apart with endless internal quarreling and media psychodramas, while Europe appeases its enemies, and while the rest of Asia stays mute, waiting to see who wins, China is now on the move — without apologies. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

 In normal times, no one would feel the need to point out the total absurdity of a movement called “Defund the Police.” The insanity of such a concept would be self-evident to anyone possessing the faculty of reason. The move to cut funding for police departments around the nation is motivated by the brutal and clearly unjustified May 25 killing of George Floyd, a black man who died when a Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. Floyd was handcuffed on the ground, not resisting arrest and posing no threat to the four officers who arrested him for allegedly committing a minor crime – passing a counterfeit $20 bill. All four officers have since fired and been charged with either second-degree murder or aiding and abetting second-degree murder.  LOS ANGELES TO SLASH UP TO $150M FROM LAPD BUDGET, REINVEST INTO COMMUNITIES OF COLOR Floyd’s killing – captured on cellphone video – has shocked millions of people around the world. As a result, we are no longer in normal times. Peaceful protests – as well as rioting and looting – have broken out in many American communities. Some of the groups protesting to achieve racial justice have gained frightening traction pushing the idea that slashing police budgets nationwide would help create safer communities and more peaceful interactions between blacks and whites. This is utter nonsense. We are a nation that continues to grapple with violent crime. According to the FBI, for example, an estimated 16,214 people were murdered in the United States in 2018. If we had fewer police on our streets that tragic figure would be higher. And you can bet that criminals would commit more robberies, assaults, rapes, burglaries and other crimes as well if there was a smaller police presence on the streets. We need police to continue to fulfill their vital function of protecting the innocent and holding lawbreakers accountable. And so, anyone who cares about America should proclaim from the rooftops that “defunding the police” would produce terribly dangerous consequences. Police officers in the United States risk their lives to serve and protect their fellow citizens. The overwhelming majority of officers are outstanding public servants who each day perform their difficult duties for all the right reasons. This defunding makes as much sense as cutting funding for a hospital or a school where a doctor or teacher has engaged in criminal conduct against a patient or student. Certainly, there are individual cops unworthy of the badges they wear, whether due to corruption, incompetence or hot tempers that get out of control. A small number of officers hired to fight crime turn into criminals themselves, violating the rights of citizens, engaging in police brutality, and – on rare occasions – even killing innocent people of all races. But the solution to this problem lies in specifically identifying the officers acting improperly within police agencies – and removing those who are incorrigible. Further, when whole departments show systematic patterns of improper behavior, wholesale leadership changes must be made The truth is that a small number of people in every profession engage in criminal conduct. We’ve all seen news stories about pedophile priests, doctors who rape patients, teachers who assault students, lawyers who swindle elderly clients out of their life savings, corrupt politicians who take bribes, and more. In all these professions, wrongdoers must be identified and removed from their positions – and imprisoned if convicted of crimes. In the slow and excruciating death of George Floyd, our nation witnessed just how horrific a situation can become when bad cops walk the street. Fortunately, justice now appears to be moving swiftly in that Minneapolis case. Defunding police departments, however, would only make positive reforms all the more difficult to achieve. In a troubling move, for example, the mayor of Los Angeles has proposed cutting as much as $150 million from funding for the city’s police department. This defunding makes as much sense as cutting funding for a hospital or a school where a doctor or teacher has engaged in criminal conduct against a patient or student. In all these cases, the criminal cops, doctors and teachers would not be the ones to suffer as a result of defunding. Hospital patients, students and the general public would suffer instead. When our communities hire police officers, we ask them to risk their lives to keep our families and neighborhoods safe. According to the FBI, 89 officers were killed around the nation in the line of duty in 2019. These deaths were a tragedy that should not be ignored.  The least we can do for our police officers is to ensure they have the best possible training and equipment – and enough funding for adequate staffing. Years before he became president, Teddy Roosevelt served as New York City’s police commissioner. In his autobiography, he wrote about his longstanding commitment to adequately fund police departments. “I have not the slightest sympathy,” he wrote, “with any policy which tends to put the policeman at the mercy of a tough [criminal], or which deprives him of efficient weapons.” With the turmoil and strife that have wracked our nation following the killing of George Floyd, perhaps it’s understandable that many people are acting and reacting out of emotion rather than logic. But we can do better. It is shameful that a real opportunity to tackle unresolved racial discord is being hijacked by anarchists who want to destabilize our nation. Following the killing of George Floyd, we have witnessed at least a dozen additional deaths in senseless violent riots. One of these tragedies occurred with the death of David Dorn, age 77, who was killed while trying to protect a friend’s pawnshop from rampaging looters in St. Louis. Dorn, a black man, was a retired police captain. His black life mattered. The fact that he was killed by looters rather than by white police officers does not make his death any less tragic. A former colleague recalled Dorn as someone “very dedicated to youth, especially disadvantaged youth” who “wanted to see them succeed.” Dorn “wanted to be a role model for those young men and women,” the former colleague said. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We owe it to the memory of officers such as David Dorn – and all honorable police officers continuing to serve their communities – to keep supporting the work of law enforcement. And even more than that, we owe it to all our fellow citizens to pursue policies – including adequately funding our police agencies – that will best protect our families and neighborhoods going forward. As Americans of all races and backgrounds, let’s work together to make our police forces better. Let’s consider any and all substantive proposals truly aimed at their improved performance. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s help all officers embrace the role of “guardian” as passionately as they embrace the role of “enforcer.” Let’s continue our quest for equal rights and equal justice for all. And let’s continue our journey toward racial reconciliation and improved race relations. But let’s set our sights on real solutions rather than becoming distracted by nonsensical faddish slogans such as “Defund the Police.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CURTIS HILL

 Let the naysayers neigh. President Trump was right all along when he said America’s strong and growing economy would bounce back from the coronavirus pandemic faster than almost anybody expected. We have a way to go, but we are on our way – unless governors and congressional Democrats more concerned about the next election than American workers can somehow stop the juggernaut. The latest jobs report shows that the U.S. economy added more than 2.5 million jobs in May, confounding analysts who had predicted a loss of between 7.5 and 8.5 million jobs. This means the U.S. economy outperformed expectations by over 10 million jobs in just one month. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE DROPS TO 13.3% IN MAY, SIGNALING RETURN OF US JOBS The unemployment rate, meanwhile, fell to 13.3 percent – a full 1.4 percentage point drop, contrary to fears that it could surge to as high as 20 percent. As significantly, the unemployment rate declined despite the fact that labor participation rate – the percentage of the population working or actively looking for work – increased, as 1.75 million people joined or rejoined the workforce. While the surge of job creation is directly attributable to the gradual lifting of stay-at-home orders by various states and localities, the torrential pace of the recovery – especially at such an early stage – is also a product of the underlying economic strength we built up before the novel coronavirus reached our shores. Let’s also give credit to the American workers, who are flocking back to work despite the availability of overly generous unemployment insurance benefits. As demonstrations across the country have shown – and May’s employment data confirms – America is ready to get back to work. “We were very strong. We had the greatest economy in the history of our country. We had the greatest economy in the history of the world,” President Trump said at a recent news conference. “And that strength helped us get through this horrible pandemic.” Indeed, this unprecedented economic rebound was no accident. President Trump took bold action starting from the early days of the pandemic to protect American workers and businesses from the devastating impact of state and local lockdowns. "We're going to rebuild [the economy] again in honor of all those who perished today," the president said in April. "And I think the stimulus, coupled with this pent-up demand and everybody wanting to get out and go back to work … I think we're going to have … a tremendous surge." As we can now plainly see, the emergency policies that the Trump administration shepherded through Congress – unprecedented relief payments to individuals and families, massive financial assistance for the private sector, and paid sick leave for all workers affected by COVID-19 – allowed the U.S. economy to stabilize and begin its recovery far sooner than expected. As a result, businesses were able to stay afloat and keep employees on their payrolls while awaiting permission to reopen. America is ready to get back to work. The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) has proven especially valuable for small businesses that were having a hard time paying their employees, since the low-interest federal loans automatically convert into grants if the money is spent on normal operating expenses. Even New York Times reporter Neil Irwin tweeted that “the May employment numbers count as a strong win for PPP supporters.” Best of all, the record-breaking surge in job creation we saw last month is only the beginning. Not every state has yet largely reopened. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Not only are we seeing the economic benefits of those states reopening but, perhaps most impressively, they have done so safely and responsibly – despite the claims of shutdown advocates. According to ABC, “there were no major increases in hospitalizations, deaths or percentage of people testing positive in any of the 21 states.” “Now the trajectory is great,” President Trump said during a recent press conference, noting that some of the most economically significant states – including New York and California – are “barely included” in the jobs report because they are not yet fully open for business. The May jobs report may well increase political pressure to more fully reopen from residents of these states who are anxious to retake control of their lives and return to work.        CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Once these governors safely more fully reopen the remaining states, the U.S. economy will once again quickly improve. This will generate a wave of prosperity that our country can ride over time to even greater heights than we reached before the pandemic. It looks like our economy could experience a V-shaped recovery after all, just as the president promised. That is, unless shutdown advocates prolong the misery. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM ANDY PUZDER

 The horrific May 25 killing by a white Minneapolis police officer of George Floyd, a black man in handcuffs who was not resisting arrest, has shocked the world and left America at a crossroads. Will we as a nation finally do the work needed to achieve true and lasting racial equality? Or will we choose the status quo and fail to make the changes needed to eliminate the cancer of racism that has plagued America since Africans were first brought to the colonies in chains 400 years ago? While slavery is long gone, a racial double-standard continues to plague our police departments, public schools, courtrooms and boardrooms. And black Americans continue to suffer disproportionately from poverty, poorer health, lower educational attainment, worse housing and in other ways. ORGANIZERS AIM TO BRING A MILLION PROTESTERS TO WASHINGTON IN LARGEST BLM DEMONSTRATION YET Truth be told, abandoning our nation’s long and immoral history of racism should be an easy choice. But in reality, making the move to become an anti-racism nation will require some real soul-searching and policy changes. On Friday, Washington, D.C., Mayor Muriel Bowser renamed a street leading to the White House “Black Lives Matter Plaza.” This move by the black mayor of the nation’s capital, while unprecedented, was absolutely right. What Mayor Bowser has done with her action is to send a clear message to President Trump – a man born into wealth and white privilege who has no idea of the discrimination and indignities still suffered by African-Americans today. America needs a president who can understand that Black Lives Matter is something that our nation needs to embrace in words, actions and federal policy. You don’t have to be black to know that racism is an evil that should have been expunged from the American soul long ago – but President Trump is clearly oblivious to this indisputable fact.  Sadly, Trump has been pretty muted when it comes to speaking to the pain, outrage and anger coming from protesters of all colors across the globe outraged by the death of George Floyd. The president is clearly far more interested in tweeting insults and attacks against anyone who says something he perceives as negative about him. He is far more eager to show he is a tough “law-and-order” leader.  Trump has made the deliberate choice to be the “divider-in-chief” and created a mindset of “us vs. them” that is tearing our nation apart. In moments of national crisis, the American people have come to expect our president to take on the role of “comforter-in-chief.” Instead, Trump has made the deliberate choice to be the “divider-in-chief” and created a mindset of “us vs. them” that is tearing our nation apart. For America to be a great and moral nation it must care for all of its citizens, no matter their race, color, creed or citizenship status. And that is exactly what is missing at this moment. Black people in America aren’t looking for some magical instant solution to our pain, anger and distress resulting from systemic racism. We are looking for a meaningful dialogue on how American racism can get its knee off our necks. The George Floyd killing and the imagery of a white police officer pushing his knee into Floyd’s carotid artery for almost nine excruciating minutes represents a long-held symbol of racism and how black America interprets racism’s impact on our daily lives. From how our public schools are funded to how neighborhoods are policed, black Americans feel the systemic weight of racism in every chapter of our lives. We feel it when were are at the hospital and our physical pain is ignored. We feel it in our schools, where we see black educators being pushed out of the already under-resourced classrooms. We feel it at the bank when credit-worthy entrepreneurs are denied capital to start their new businesses. And we feel it when black parents are forced to have “the talk” with their children about interacting with law enforcement. Black people aren’t stupid. We know what works and what doesn’t, so we understand that those who give us empty phrases or buzzwords like “criminal justice reform” and “school choice” – or suggest another “task force” or “working group” be formed – won’t really improve our lives. If America’s elected leaders are truly committed to the work of fighting racism they must start by acknowledging that white privilege has always existed in our society and continues to exist. Yes, we know that the lives of black people have improved from the terrible days of slavery, to Jim Crow laws, to open and legally sanctioned discrimination. But we also know that claims that racism and inequality have disappeared are patently false, and we want our nation’s leaders to acknowledge this. This acknowledgment of reality should be quickly followed with collaborative solutions that incorporate the voices of those most harmed by privilege – black people. For far too long, we have watched misguided lawmakers pass policies and push half-baked solutions for black America, many resulting in more harm than good. And to be frank, we are tired. If you are in disbelief, just take a look at what happened this week in Minneapolis. After weeks of sustained peaceful protest and a tear-jerking memorial for George Floyd, the city has announced its plan to end the use of a highly frowned-upon and life-threatening chokehold by law enforcement.  OK, that’s a good step, but after weeks of protests much more is needed. To be honest, both parties have blind spots when it comes to fighting racism. But Trump seems more oblivious to this problem that past presidents in recent decades. Just take a look at Trump on Friday. In announcing improved jobs numbers as more businesses open after being closed due to the coronavirus pandemic, the president said that “hopefully George [Floyd] is looking down and saying this is a great thing that's happening for our country.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Mr. President, George Floyd is dead! He should be alive with us on this Earth today. He’s not going to get a job or get anything else from our improving economy. You have no right to hijack his memory and try to paint him as somehow cheering on your self-proclaimed achievements in office. Let him rest and peace and don’t try turning him into a political prop to boost your reelection campaign. Trump’s comments come on the heels of federal law enforcement officers clearing peaceful protesters from near the White House earlier this week so the president could stage a photo-op at a nearby church. The comments come as the president remains reluctant to acknowledge the power his words and is unwilling to answer the fundamental question being posed by peaceful protesters: “Do black lives matter and if so, what will you do to protect them?” In the fifth stanza of “Lift Every Voice and Sing” – often referred to as “The Black National Anthem” – songwriter James Weldon Johnson states: “God of our weary years, God of our silent tears.” And these words speak to the pain, anger and sense of neglect that African-Americans have been feeling. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We want answers. We want change. And most importantly, we want honesty about the past and current sins of America. We are tired of seeing our black mothers cry in silence. We are tired of seeing our fathers being weighed down by society. Now is the time for our tears to end, and for society to create a renewed contract with its all citizens, no matter what the color of their skin. This must be a renewed contract that focuses on listening, healing and ending the policies, practices and actions caused by racism in America. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM RICHARD FOWLER

 On June 6, 1944, among those to take the first harrowing steps on the wet sands of Normandy were National Guardsmen from Maryland’s 29th Infantry Division. They bled just as much as their comrades in arms. They fought just as hard to get off the beaches. And when those who survived crested the scrubby bluffs above the German defenses, they changed the course of World War II. Today we remember D-Day – exactly 76 years ago – as a signature achievement of the Greatest Generation. Still, D-Day was just one day. In addition to serving abroad, armed forces members from the citizen-militias of the colonial era to our modern-day warriors have safeguarded American communities faithfully and selflessly for two-and-a-half centuries. They saved San Francisco after the Great Earthquake and fire of 1906. They helped rescue New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina. Most recently, both National Guard and active-duty forces helped bend the curve during the COVID-19 outbreak. People marveled, for instance, at how quickly and efficiently they were able to convert New York City’s Javits Center into a hospital and staff it with armed services medical personnel. PETE HEGSETH BLASTS DC MAYOR, SAYS NATIONAL GUARD PREVENTED DESECRATION OF MONUMENTS Yet some would have you believe these servicemen and women have gone from heroic good guys to bad guys in less than a month. A chorus of critics – including some mayors, governors, activists, and journalists – are bemoaning the “militarization” of America. By this they mean employing troops to help restore peace in cities wracked by uncontrolled violence following the death of George Floyd, a handcuffed black man who died after a white Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. The National Guard tweeted Saturday: “Today, more than 43,300 National Guard members in 34 states and D.C. are assisting law enforcement authorities with ongoing civil unrest, while more than 37,000 Guard Soldiers and Airmen continue to support the COVID-19 response.” Complaints that the use of the National Guard creates a troubling “militarization” could not be more disingenuous. Let’s start by considering what military troops actually do when used in the U.S. Typically, the primary role they are assigned is guarding property. This mission doesn’t interfere with lawful protest in any manner. The presence of the National Guard is only a problem for people bent on destruction – those who want to break things, burn things and hurt people. In fact, people exercising their First Amendment rights – even those undertaking peaceful civil disobedience – are served as well. The military is there to protect them, too – and stop the violence and looting so they can peaceably demonstrate. The second mission the military usually performs in our country is supporting law enforcement. This is anything but “militarizing” the response. Rather, the military is freeing up, enabling and supporting police, fire, and EMT personnel so they can do their jobs. That makes our streets safer, not less free. Cities can use the military to help deal with rioting and looting without dishonoring the cause of peaceful protestors. In several of our cities, it is very clear that these additional resources are needed. Peaceful protesters fighting for a righteous cause are not the only people who have taken to the streets. Many others are trying to exploit the current protests over the death of George Floyd, using them as an opportunity to turn to rioting and looting – acts of violence that can’t be tolerated. Also in the mix are professional agitators –homegrown as well as foreign – from across the political spectrum. Dealing with all this is daunting. Not bringing in the assets needed to safeguard the rights, freedom and property of all citizens is just wrong. It is also worth reflecting on what the mission is and for whom the military work. When our soldiers are sent onto our streets, they are there to protect our freedoms, lives and property – not to take them away. Our troops serve under lawfully elected civilian authorities. They support those authorities; they don’t supplant them. And how those authorities may use those troops is governed by a plethora of laws, all of which have passed constitutional muster. To claim that having the military help quell violence is unconstitutional is utter nonsense. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Because the National Guard and active-duty forces serve under civilian authority, their effectiveness is often determined not by their training and capabilities (which are usually more than adequate), but by the competence of the civilian leaders who direct them. Cities can use the military to help deal with rioting and looting without dishonoring the cause of peaceful protestors. Washington is a case in point. Yes, there was much squabbling between the mayor and federal authorities over use of the National Guard. But after the squabbling ended and the Guard deployed, looting stopped. People continue to conduct lawful protests unabated. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP These are facts conveniently ignored by people who decry “militarization” and insult service members who are willing to put their lives at risk to keep peace on our streets. As we remember those American heroes who stormed the beaches of Normandy 76 years ago, we should also remember those soldiers here at home who stand guard on our street corners, protecting our individual rights as the nation works its way through an extraordinarily difficult season of division and disease. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

 Every cult has the same goal: the utter submission of its members. Cult members surrender everything. They give up their physical freedom – where they can go, who they can see, how they can dress. But more than that, they give up control of their minds. Cult leaders determine what their followers are allowed to believe, even in their most private thoughts. In order to do this, cults separate people from all they have known before. They force members to renounce their former lives, their countries and their customs. They allow no loyalty except to the cult. The first thing they attack – always – is the family. Families are always the main impediment to brainwashing and extremism. If you’re going to control individuals – if you’re going to transform free people into compliant robots – the first thing you must do is separate them from the ones who love them most. 'CULT MOM' LORI VALLOW'S EX-HUSBAND SUED HER YEARS AGO FOR ALLEGEDLY HIDING THEIR DAUGHTER: REPORT In 1932, Soviet authorities began promoting the story of a 13-year-old peasant boy called Pavlik Morozov. Morozov, they claimed, had taken the supremely virtuous step of denouncing his own father to the secret police for committing counter-revolutionary acts. Once exposed as a traitor, the boy’s father was executed by firing squad, supposedly for the safety of the state. Soviet dictator Josef Stalin elevated the boy to the status of a national hero for what he did. People wept in the streets when they heard his name. They worshipped him like a saint. Why are we telling you this? Because it’s happening here. In the last 10 days, some of our most prominent citizens have sworn allegiance to a cult. Converts go by the term “allies.” Like all cult members, they demand total conformity. They ritually condemn their own nation – its history, its institutions and symbols. It’s flag. They denounce their own parents. If you’ve been on social media recently, you’ve likely seen videos that illustrate this – such as one showing a girl attacking her mother and father for the crime of insufficient loyalty to Black Lives Matter. Reporter Hanna Lustig of Insider.com wrote about that video, and strongly approved of it. What you just saw, Lustig wrote, is a young person “modeling the most important tenet of ally-ship.” Modeling. Meaning, something done to encourage others to do the same. It’s working. In a video of a 15-year-old from Louisville called Isabella – and there are many like her – the girl is shown crying and saying: "I literally hate my family so much." She goes on to say her parents defended the killing of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer. And then she calls her parents racists, followed by an obscenity. “I hate my family so much.” Just a week ago, it would have been hard to imagine that. Now, Isabella is a social media star. Celebrities tweet their approval. She may have her own cult before long. But the revolution is young. Children attacking their parents is just the beginning. On CNN Friday, a man called Tim Wise told viewers that, going forward, parents must hurt their own children: Wise said: “I think that the important thing for white parents to keep in the front of their mind is that if black children in this country are not allowed innocence and childhood without fear of being killed by police or marginalized in some other way, then our children don’t deserve innocence. If Tamir Rice can be shot dead in a public park playing with a toy gun, something white children do all over this country every day without the same fear of being shot, if Tamir Rice can be killed then white children need to be told at least at the same age. If they can’t be innocent, we don’t get to be innocent.” Your children are no longer allowed to be innocent, says Tim Wise. Happy childhoods are a sign of racism. The man saying this – and being affirmed by CNN anchors as he does – is a self-described “anti-racism activist.” He has been saying things like this for a long time. More than once, Wise has suggested that he approves of violence against those who disagree. How does Tim Wise make a living? In part, by lecturing students. Your kids may have seen him speak. They’ve almost certainly heard a lot from people like him. In America’s schools, the revolution has been in progress for quite some time. Last February, to name one among countless examples, officials at schools in Rochester, N.Y., created a Black Lives Matter-themed lesson plan. The teaching materials dismiss America’s bedrock institutions – indeed, America itself – as inherently racist. Suggested questions for students include: “How does mass incarceration function as a mechanism of racialized social control?” One specific racial group was singled out for exclusive blame. The curriculum promoted a book titled, “White Rage: The Unspoken Truth of our Racial Divide.” In other words, children, there’s a reason hatred and inequality exist: these people did it! That’s what your kids are learning right now. Thursday, at Darien High School in Connecticut, Principal Ellen Dunn sent an email to parents promising to increase “the race-conscious education of our students.” To do that, Dunn distributed materials from the Southern Poverty Law Center. Ironically, the SPLC is itself a hate group. That has been documented extensively. Now their agenda is the school’s agenda. It’s what your kids are learning. In Washington, D.C., an elementary school principal in the affluent northwest section of the city recently wrote a letter announcing: “We need more White parents to talk to their kids about race. Especially now.” The letter singled out “White Staff and White community members,” whom the principal alleged had committed “both macro- and micro-aggressions” against “Staff of Color.” The principal did not specify what those crimes were. She didn’t need to. Their skin color was their crime. This is a national theme. It’s incredibly destructive and dangerous. Countless public schools are now using the 1619 Project from The New York Times as a curriculum. That project is the work of an out-of-the-closet racial extremist called Nikole Hannah Jones. Jones recently argued it’s not violence to loot and burn stores – its justified. Her propaganda is now mandatory in public schools in Buffalo, Chicago, Newark and Washington. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Many parents understandably deeply resent this. It’s deranged, its racist. Others don’t. They’re “allies.” They’ve joined in. One mother in London, where the cult is also spreading, posted a photo on Twitter of her daughter on blended knee, holding a sign declaring her “privilege.” The Cultural Revolution has come to the West. What will the effects of this be? Years from now, how will that little girl with the sign remember her childhood? Her mother took Tim Wise’s advice. She no longer has innocence. Will she be grateful for that? It’s hard to imagine she will be. She’ll more likely feel bitter and used. Because she has been used. Many will feel that way. Is there a single person who believes this moment we’re living through will end in racial harmony? Is that even a goal anymore? It doesn’t seem like it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It seems clear that many in power are pushing hard for racial division. For hatred. For violence. Let’s pray they don’t get what they want. Tribal conflict destroys countries faster than any plague. But keep in mind as this insanity continues that it’s not happening in a vacuum. Every action provokes a reaction – that’s physics. We don’t know where this is going. We don’t want to know. The cult members should stop now – immediately, before more innocents get hurt – and they will, if they don’t. Adapted from Tucker Carlson’s monologue from “Tucker Carlson Tonight,” on June 5, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 Our nation has seen days of protests, riots and looting in the aftermath of George Floyd’s horrific death in Minneapolis May 25. Now the narrative is starting to become distorted about systematic racism. I watched our country come together and lock arms against a murder by a police officer in the hours after the video of Floyd’s killing surfaced. As a matter of fact, some of the most conservative supporters of law enforcement have been vocal advocates for pursuing first-degree murder charges against those responsible for Floyd’s death. We are all united against this evil. JACK BREWER: GEORGE FLOYD RIOTS – HERE'S WHAT THIS GENERATION OF PROGRESSIVE LEADERS IS LACKING Then, the divisiveness of our politics quickly sparked the emotions of our hurt and angry brothers and sisters across America. Now all sides have started to take their eye off the enemy of racism by turning the conversation into a debate about whether systemic racism and oppression exist. In fact, anyone who looks at the number of blacks killed by cops as an accurate reflection of the systematic oppression blacks face in this country is completely missing the boat. This growing misconception could actually set our nation back further in the struggle for equality for all Americans. This perspective desensitizes the reality that the most underserved black people in our communities face. And it adds fuel to a fire that has already spread throughout the frustrations of protesters across our nation. If you wonder why black crime rates are so high, go spend some time in our inner cities to learn about the real issues facing young black men. This is the very definition of systematic racism and oppression. The facts are that the vast majority of black men in America never get into an aggressive altercation with police. But the harsh reality is also that many poor black boys are born fatherless and are forced to attend underperforming public schools. The National Principals Association reports that 71 percent of all high school dropouts come from fatherless homes -- that's 9 times the average. Additionally, 73 percent of African-American kids are born out of wedlock. (I understand the difficulties here as I had my first two children in this scenario.) As these black boys grow on their way to manhood, they lack positive male role models in their lives. They get trapped in an education system that won’t allow them to break out of their neighborhoods to attend better schools so that they can increase their chances of success. Please don’t try to justify this sad truth by placing blame on the black community while denying the realities of our history that include slavery, Jim Crow laws, redlining and implementing welfare policies that have rewarded fatherless homes. Next, layer this on top of mass incarceration for more black men in America than all of the world combined. It all adds up to real evil. If you wonder why black crime rates are so high, go spend some time in our inner cities to learn about the real issues facing young black men. This is the very definition of systematic racism and oppression. I’ve been blessed to teach and minister in prisons around the country, so I’ve witnessed first-hand the realities facing Americans who grow up fatherless and locked into communities that provide them with little opportunity. I’ve had the privilege of serving many of our black inner cities with my American Heroes program. It aims to bridge the gap of fatherlessness while using godly principles to change the evil culture that has hurt many of our black youth. For proof of what I’m talking about look at cities like Baltimore, where the population has fallen victim to decades of failed leadership, despite being given financial resources. The state of education in Baltimore is so bad that the neighboring state of Pennsylvania recommended that the state of Maryland take over the Baltimore public schools I was disheartened to learn that Baltimore schools spend $16,000 per student per year and yet they and their students are failing. It’s such an injustice. My own son’s private school costs substantially less than what Baltimore is spending on its students. This is the systematic racism I’m talking about. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER This fact should anger all Americans and motivate all of us to stand against this oppression toward poor black kids who are born into this injustice. Baltimore has received over $15 billion from the federal government in the last two years, yet the systematic oppression continues to shackle the most underserved. Let’s focus on what we can all do to make America stronger while healing the realities of years of oppression. I’ve been blessed to teach and minister in prisons around the country, so I’ve witnessed first-hand the realities facing Americans who grow up fatherless and locked into communities that provide them with little opportunity. As Americans, we need to focus on becoming the one nation under God that we all so proudly claim. Wake up America, we are all one race, as our DNA is literally the same. The CEO of 23 and Me put out a moving statement that acknowledged that 95.5 percent of our DNA is the same. As children of God, you may want to deny the existence of systematic racism but none of us can deny our direct moral responsibility to help the most underserved. This means that we all need to be doing our part to address the realities that face a large portion of black America. If we step away from our politics and meditate on God’s word, this will be what unites us all. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP My Bible tells me: “The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised.” (Luke 4:18.) It’s time for us all to put an end to the divisive narratives and open our hearts to do something about the issues at hand. CLICK HERE TO FOR MORE FROM JACK BREWER


 This week, The New York Times ran an op-ed by United States Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., urging that the military be used to quell the fires, looting and violence gripping the nation’s cities. A Morning Consult poll from this week found that 58 percent of registered voters agreed with that idea. But apparently it’s an opinion forbidden in the Times. Black staffers at the paper said the column made them feel unsafe. The day after it ran, the paper folded like, well, The New York Times, and apologized for it.DAN GAINOR: NY TIMES FLIP-FLOPS AND SAYS SEN. TOM COTTON OP-ED IT PUBLISHED ON RIOTING IS UNFIT TO PRINT Once, the separation between the news and Opinion page — church and state — at the Times was held up as an exemplar of objectivity in journalism. Now, reporters are dictating what views the paper is and is not allowed to publish. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Well, opinions of conservatives. If you’re the member of an organization that regularly blows up civilians and keeps women in servitude, come on in! In February, the Times ran a piece by Sirajuddin Haqqani, a leader with a little organization known as the Taliban. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s hear from someone else and trust readers can make up their mind — how quaint. The outraged claim they are afraid that Cotton’s words endanger people, but what they are really afraid of is people agreeing with him. Because the only way the words could lead to any action is if Cotton is convincing. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING DAVID MARCUS'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST

 A week ago, in the wake of a possible flattening of the COVID-19 growth curve, President Trump’s campaign could maintain some optimism. While polls suggested that the public trusted likely Democratic nominee Joe Biden as better than Trump at dealing with the health crisis, they continued to trust the president more on handling the economy. The polls were consistent with the idea that if he could convince the country to make the election about “who’s better for ensuring a strong American recovery?” he might be in a competitive position in November. Then came the death by asphyxiation of George Floyd under the knee of a Minneapolis policeman. DOUG SCHOEN: GEORGE FLOYD UNREST — ONLY THIS CAN SAVE DEMS FROM DEFEAT IN 2020 In a matter of days, President Trump – whose political superpower has been his ability to manage through chaos – appears unable to orchestrate a simple photo-op, and is besieged by indirect but clear sniping from the only living Republican ex-president, direct criticism from his first Defense secretary, and polls suggesting he’s disadvantaged in the GOP must-win states of Florida, Texas and Ohio. His ability to “ride the bronco” is what enabled him to survive four corporate bankruptcies before starting a political career and navigate countless crises throughout his political career – from the Access Hollywood tape, the Mueller investigation, impeachment and even the COVID crisis through May. The news may be dizzying. The tweets appear reckless. The threats may seem dire. But, to date, Americans have kept their eyes fixed on this rodeo. Initially, the president appeared to be politically well-positioned in the face of the news. He tweeted his support for a Justice Department investigation. With video evidence clearly making the case that it was murder – and the Minneapolis DA initially not arresting any of the officers involved – his tweets made clear a desire to appear on “the right side” of the issue. Then came a series of protests across the country that devolved into civic unrest in many cities. Many argued that the protests – even the riots – were a justifiable response to a history of black Americans being killed by police. Indeed, the two largest cases of urban unrest were ignited by incidents of police attacking black people – the LA Riots in 1992 sparked by the videotape of police beating Rodney King, and the 2014 protests– and ensuing “Black Lives Matter” movement – sparked by police in Ferguson, Mo., killing a black teenager accused of shoplifting. But even among those who justified the unrest, there was a sense that it, particularly the video of looting and violence, could result in a sense of “white backlash” and play into President Trump’s reelection effort. This is a president who used his inaugural address to promise to fight “American Carnage” and has successfully appealed to “white backlash” throughout his career. Even among those who justified the unrest, there was a sense that it, particularly the video of looting and violence, could result in a sense of “white backlash” and play into President Trump’s reelection effort. The history of urban unrest – starting with the 1967-68 riots, but extending through 1992 and 2014 – was consistent with the belief that Trump could benefit politically. Indeed, the 1968 riots helped both George Wallace and Richard Nixon run on “law and order” platforms, the 1992 riots arguably helped lead to the 1994 “Super Predators” crime bill, and the 2014 protests clearly, in the end, benefited Trump politically. Indeed, many assumed that the response would help Trump successfully benefit from the 2020 unrest. Among those was Trump himself, who came out strongly arguing for “law and order” –criticizing governors who were not dealing sufficiently harshly with protesters, sending the U.S. military into Washington, D.C., and suggesting he was going to send them into other cities as well. But so far, it hasn’t worked out politically as some expected. Trump’s poll numbers continue to decline – Biden currently leads him by eight points in the RealClearPolitics average – a larger amount than even Obama enjoyed when he first ran in 2008, and rather than voters reacting to video of urban looting, they appear more focused on pictures of the U.S. military occupying the Lincoln Memorial. The mood has gotten so bleak that many administration insiders – both anonymously and on camera – have distanced themselves from the president’s actions. While his supporters may cry “disloyalty” – it’s evidence of what those insiders are sensing about November. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What has Trump – along with many analysts – been missing? First off, they’re misreading history. Yes, if one studies 1968, 1992 and 2014, “law and order,” in general, and the GOP, in particular, became ascendant. But the real lesson is that in all three cases, the incumbent party (Dems in 1968 and 2014, GOP in 1992) was penalized – and voters opted for a change. Second, they – and President Trump – are misreading what folks mean by “law and order.” Yes, it was very much about cracking down on violent crime. But if you go back to the way Nixon talked in 1968 – there was a heavy rhetorical emphasis on “bringing the country together” and a clear optimistic message that “America is great because her people are great.” It’s a deft balance that to date, President Trump has appeared unable to manage. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In rodeo riding, the rigging is designed to irritate and make the bronco more aggressive. So, the rider needs two skills: the ability to hold the rigging tight – combined with an ability to jump with the bronco and relax the rigging to prevent the animal from jumping too aggressively. So far, the president seems to be holding tight – but in a way that’s only making his challenge more difficult. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ARNON MISHKIN

 Once again, President Donald Trump is being scapegoated for societal problems that he didn't cause. He didn't bring the coronavirus to our shores, and he has not created an atmosphere of racial disharmony in this country. Is there anything Trump's haters won't blame on him? They've been trying to remove him since before he was sworn in, and every time they fail, they find another excuse -- from the Russia-collusion hoax to Ukraine to the coronavirus to economic hardship from the shutdown to the murder of George Floyd to the subsequent mayhem in our cities. Trump roundly condemned George Floyd's murder shortly after it occurred, but that wasn't enough. He condemned the organized thugs who hijacked the protests to vandalize, loot and endanger innocent people, but that was unacceptable. HEATHER MAC DONALD: RIOTING, LOOTING, ARSON AND VIOLENCE HAVE BECOME A CIVILIZATION-DESTROYING PANDEMIC By condemning the anarchists, he was somehow chilling the peaceful protestors' free speech rights and showing insensitivity to their cause and their pain. After delivering a speech in the Rose Garden during which he promised to restore order to America, he walked across the street with a Bible in his hand to visit St. John's Church. That, too, was revolting to his detractors, who pilloried him for staging a photo op. Actress Debra Messing tweeted side-by-side images of Trump and Adolf Hitler each holding a Bible and said that it was "a dog whistle to white nationalists and Nazis." The virtue-signaling activist's allergy to the Bible might tell you all you need to know about her. Sen. Chuck Schumer was so outraged by Trump's visit to the church and the temporary removal of protestors there that he offered a "sense of Congress" resolution to condemn Trump. There is just no end to their posturing. People who viscerally hate Trump find fault in everything he does. But his supporters are on to this now. The haters have gone to the well too many times, and they are as intellectually dishonest as they are excessive. They are out-of-control bullies always unwilling to give him the benefit of the doubt. Those wrongly accusing Trump of dividing the nation are themselves tearing us apart at the seams. He's working to restore law and order, and they're trying to undermine the peace. People who viscerally hate Trump find fault in everything he does. But his supporters are on to this now. The haters have gone to the well too many times, and they are as intellectually dishonest as they are excessive. When your policies are dramatically improving the lives of minorities, which they were before the shutdown and will be again, it's unsettling to your political opponents whose power depends on winning 90% of the African American vote and who have nothing to offer except patronizing policies and vilification of Republicans. Democrats so thoroughly take their vote for granted that their standard-bearer, Joe Biden, says blacks who won't vote for him aren't black. The left has been demonizing Republicans as racist for decades. And it maliciously depicts Trump's signature stance on immigration enforcement as racist as well, which enhances its false narrative that Trump is presumptively racist and all of his actions should be viewed in this light. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So when Trump denounces antifa terrorists for turning our city streets into war zones; torching and pillaging commercial establishments; and injuring and murdering innocent people, he is accused of trampling on the Constitution. No. He is doing precisely what a president should do. He is upholding the Constitution by restoring law and order; reestablishing domestic tranquility; and protecting American citizens, their property and their livelihoods. He is not on some power trip here; he is trying to prevent criminals from engaging in wanton destruction and dismantling our civil society. Just as one can simultaneously defend the right of citizens to peaceably protest while condemning rioters and looters, one can support the overwhelming majority of good and honorable law enforcement officers while condemning renegade cops. If we surrender to domestic terrorists and criminals, we won't have a nation anymore, which is apparently what the anarchists want. Stunningly, they're making substantial progress. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti has proposed cutting $100 million to $150 million from the Los Angeles Police Department budget to reinvest it in communities of color. Do you think this conspicuous pitting of cops against minorities is accidental? If LA officials want to increase expenditures to minority communities, why gut the police budget? The obvious answer is that Garcetti is sending a message that cops are the bad guys and punishing them somehow helps minority communities. Neither minorities nor anyone else will benefit from emasculating the police force. It is indeed a sad day for America when people cheer on the disintegration of our society. Of course, decent and civilized people must denounce the murder of George Floyd and any other despicable incidents of police brutality, but that doesn't mean losing our heads and condemning all police officers by the very same type of stereotyping and antipathy that lie at the root of racism. We are all individuals and must be accountable for our own behavior, not smeared by a broad brush of indiscriminate condemnation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Couldn't Trump's opponents, who constantly accuse him of dividing the nation, just once try to join him in combating these deadly menaces threatening our society -- the virus, the economic shutdown and the violence in our streets -- instead of always focusing their energy on destroying him? Pray for cooler heads to prevail. Pray for America's peace. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID LIMBAUGH

 As the United States copes with the aftermath of the horrific killing of George Floyd by police in Minnesota and the massive protests that came after, we must not forget our previous crisis – the COVID-19 pandemic. It is clear that the blatant lies, destruction of samples, and silencing of doctors orchestrated by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) during the coronavirus pandemic amplified the devastation and tragedy the world has endured throughout the past few months. As more facts have emerged about the Party’s cover-up of the coronavirus outbreak and its aggressive actions that followed, Americans have become increasingly skeptical toward China’s communist totalitarian leadership. A Pew Research Poll found that 71 percent of Americans don’t trust General Secretary Xi Jinping to do the right thing in regard to foreign affairs. EX-NEW YORK TIMES REPORTER ALEX BERENSON: UNREPORTED TRUTHS ABOUT COVID-19 AND LOCKDOWNS The pandemic was a real wake up call for Americans and policymakers alike. It exposed how the Chinese Communist Party’s oppressive censorship of information, global disinformation campaigns, control over critical supply chains, and influence over international bodies threatens the United States. But the threats and challenges we face against communist-ruled China extend beyond those that arose as a consequence of the pandemic. As we wrote in October 2019 in Trump versus China: Facing America’s Greatest Threat, “The interests, security, and values that our country cherishes, and the free world in which we are accustomed to living are being challenged.” Ultimately, “General Secretary Xi Jinping and the Chinese Communist Party, are constructing a different kind of world that threatens the survival of our free and sovereign nation.” The Chinese Communist Party’s malign response to the coronavirus outbreak is evidence supporting this conclusion. These past months have confirmed that the U.S. belief that the People’s Republic of China (PRC) would adopt a more open and free system if it was incorporated into the international community was fundamentally wrong. We know now that China is controlled by the Chinese Communist Party which is committed to a Leninist ideology of power. In Xi’s own words, the CCP “has always adhered to the lofty ideals of communism.” The United States now finds itself at a critical juncture that will define the future of US policy toward the Chinese regime. The CCP clearly presents threats to the US. It is committed to Leninist totalitarianism which defines its goals and tactics. We can’t rebuild the relationship we’ve had for the past 50 years – we need to design a new one. A critical step in achieving this happened when the White House published the United States Strategic Approach to the People’s Republic of China. Unlike our approach in the past, which was founded upon what we hoped the Chinese Communist Party would evolve to become, this approach is rooted in the hard facts. It accepts realities about the Party and its aggressive actions — often in the Party’s own terms. The report outlined that the Chinese Communist Party’s ideology and tactics challenge our economic interests, values, and security. “To respond to Beijing’s challenge,” the report states, “the Administration has adopted a competitive approach to the PRC, based on a clear-eyed assessment of the CCP’s intentions and actions.” But now that we’ve identified the problems we face with the PRC, we need to build upon this approach to find solutions to overcome the challenges in this critical competition with China. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER We now need to design an all-of-government strategy based upon the framework of this report. We need to look at all of the laws, resources, communications platforms, agencies, departments, and tools that we have in place to facilitate the execution of this strategy. Congress needs to mobilize to fill in the gaps. Recently, we’ve seen the US government take strong actions against many of the CCP’s long-standing egregious behaviors. The State Department’s declaration that Hong Kong is no longer autonomous as Beijing approved a national security law proposal was important. President Trump’s announcement that the US will impose sanctions on officials who have had a role in “smothering” freedoms in Hong Kong is a strong step. The bipartisan passage of the Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act in Congress that will impose sanctions on officials and export restrictions on items that are involved in the oppression of minorities in Xinjiang will help respond to the CCP’s horrendous human rights abuses. Finally, the Trump administration’s intervention to reverse a Thrift Savings Plan decision that would have invested federal pension funds in Chinese companies that present national security risks and human rights concerns helped us avoid serious problems in the future. This level of momentum and determined resolve needs to continue. Overcoming this challenge will also require an all-of-society approach. There needs to be a focus on clearly communicating to the American people—using facts and evidence—how the behaviors of the CCP can affect our businesses, schools, and investment portfolios. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This influence extends to the movies we watch, products we consume, and social media platforms we use. To carry this effort forward, it needs to extend beyond the government and empower every American to stand against the Chinese Communist Party’s attacks on freedom, human rights, and the rule of law. These shared values and the ingenuity of the American people built the United States as the strong and resilient global leader it is today. Ultimately, they are what will see us through this competition with China. Claire Christensen is co-author of "Trump vs. China." To read, hear, and watch more of Newt’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

 When I served in the Army, I had the great privilege of serving in the storied 82nd Airborne Division as a supply officer and airborne rifle company commander. That’s the same Division that sent its paratroopers behind the beaches into the Normandy countryside in the early hours of June 6, 1944, knowing beforehand that it would be a hard-fought battle with staggering casualties. On that historic day, what we now call D-Day, nearly 1,500 paratroopers were captured or killed when they landed in Normandy, France. Several thousands more shed their blood on the beaches, fighting back against the Nazi forces dug into hardened positions on the shores. Operation Overlord was complex, the largest joint airborne and amphibious landing in human history. Allied forces were synchronized precisely at prearranged points on the battlefield, with 6,939 ships, 925 C-47 military airplanes carrying 23,000 paratroopers, and 156,000 Allied infantrymen on the ground. The 82nd Airborne had to complete a variety of objectives, seizing bridges, strategic junctions, and villages alongside the equally storied 101st Airborne Division. REBECCA GRANT: CRITICIZING TRUMP OK FOR RETIRED MILITARY LEADERS – BUT THEY CAN'T BE IMMUNE FROM CRITICISM That day began the liberation of Europe from the tyrannical power and control of Nazi Germany. The soldiers who stormed the Normandy beaches fought with valor, writing our Nation’s history with their courage, sweat, and blood. As for the heroes of World War II, it is the job of each of us to continue the fight to maintain their legacy of sacrifice—because time is running out to hear their stories. One fact is certain—America needs to hear them more than ever before.  CLICK HERE TO VIEW PHOTOS OF REP. MARK GREEN'S TRIP TO NORMANDY FOR THE D-DAY 75TH ANNIVERSARY COMMEMORATION The legacy of World War II was lasting freedom, not just for America, but for the entire world. It’s because of those brave warriors on the beaches of Normandy—and Iwo Jima, and Anzio, and so many others—that we’re able to look back on those bloody years with the deepest respect and admiration for those who laid so much on the altar of freedom. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER  It was an honor to serve in the same Division as those brave soldiers of just a few generations ago. And today, I’m proud to represent the troops and families of the 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell in Congress. ON SAD ANNIVERSARY, FEW TO MOURN THE D-DAY DEAD IN NORMANDY Last year, I was honored to travel to the beaches of Normandy in celebration of the 75th anniversary of their service. The opportunity to visit these historic beaches and honor our soldiers’ sacrifice was an experience I will carry with me forever. CLICK HERE FOR THE FOX NEWS APP As for the heroes of World War II, it is the job of each of us to continue the fight to maintain their legacy of sacrifice—because time is running out to hear their stories. One fact is certain—America needs to hear them more than ever before. The brave Americans who fought and died at Normandy gave their lives to preserve our freedom. It’s our duty to preserve their legacy with the respect and dignity they deserve.

 “Everyone is entitled to his own opinion, but not his own facts.” How quaint seems this trenchant observation by the late Daniel Patrick Moynihan, one of the greatest progressive thinkers of the 20th century’s latter half. Not because of the patriarchal pronoun presumptions of the aging white cis male. I refer to Senator Moynihan’s very assumption that there are facts. That there is an objective reality on which we can all agree, even if we disagree about what it means. And equally important, that there is a way of getting to facts, a common language of reason that enables us to investigate, communicate, and explicate. BEN SHAPIRO MOCKS NY TIMES' 'FULLY INSANE' APOLOGY OVER COTTON OP-ED: 'DON'T YELL AT US! WE'RE WOKE!' Senator Moynihan would not recognize that paragon of 21st-century progressivism, The New York Times. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER On Thursday, with its snowflakes in meltdown, the Times issued an apology. What triggered the staff? Was it an earthquake, perhaps? A mass-casualty attack? An assassination? A cinnamon rugelach shortage at Zabar’s? No, this unspeakable atrocity was an op-ed … by a conservative Republican senator … and a combat veteran from, you guessed it, the South! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Oh, let’s not be too hard on them. It took a day of full-day mau-mauing before the Times said “Uncle” – or whatever non-binary relation we use to convey surrender these days. The Upper West Side can rest assured there’ll be no more Tom Cotton screeds to churn bile through the avocado toast – they can go back to the thoughtful essayists of Hamas and the Islamic Republic of Iran. No more unnerving mentions of federal statutes like … dare I utter it … the Insurrection Act that have been on the books for two centuries. Fear not, the Gray Lady’s opinion pages will now get back to the laws that aren’t on the books – for example, did you know that “Without legal protection, a pedophile cannot risk seeking treatment or disclosing his status to anyone for support”? (And hey, hey, hey, what’s with the “his”?) CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Three big-name retired senior military leaders made headlines Tuesday and Wednesday when they sharply criticized President Trump’s leadership. There is nothing wrong with that – but their distinguished military service shouldn’t make their anti-Trump arguments immune from debate. Former military leaders have long been a force in American politics. In all, 26 of the 44 U.S. presidents have served in the military. Some – including George Washington and Dwight Eisenhower – have been top military commanders. Many former military members have served in Congress as well. Prior military service never stopped these veterans from taking strong political positions – or shielded them from criticism once they entered the political arena. DEROY MURDOCK: MATTIS WRONGLY CRITICIZES TRUMP – IGNORES FACTS ABOUT RIOTING AND PRESIDENT’S ACCOMPLISHMENTS So from that perspective, we should welcome the fact that former Secretary of Defense and retired Marine Gen. James Mattis, retired Navy Adm. Mike Mullen and retired Marine Gen. John Allen spoke out against Trump’s policies. But as these retired officers no doubt realized, President Trump – or anyone else – can also criticize them back. Given the tough language they aimed at the president, some return fire is in order. Here’s some of what they’ve been saying: Donald Trump is the first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people – does not even pretend to try,” Mattis wrote in The Atlantic. “We can unite without him,” Mattis continued, going on to declare the Trump has abused his executive authority. Mattis is not Moses bringing Ten Commandments on stone tablets. He’s that rare bird, a true contrarian who aggravated the Obama administration while on active duty, retired, and then went on to serve in and then clash with the Trump administration.  Granted, Mattis deserves credit, especially for rejuvenating nuclear command and control while he headed the Defense Department. But he’s over the top this time. The Mattis barrage was not new, helpful, or apt. You could hear his anti-Trump opinion on any street corner. On Tuesday, it was the turn of retired Adm. Mullen, who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from 2007 to 2011. In retirement, Mullen’s been no stranger to politics: The Washington Post pegged him as a potential Mike Bloomberg running mate in 2016. Yet Mullen went pretty far this week. He wrote in The Atlantic that he was “sickened” to see the clearing of protesters from Lafayette Square in front of the White House so Trump could walk to St. John’s Church to pose for photos. This “gave succor to the leaders of other countries who take comfort in our domestic strife,” Mullen wrote. Does Mullen mean China or Russia? If so, he is using fancy words to stop half an inch short of accusing Trump of aiding them. On Wednesday, retired Gen. Allen, now head of the Brookings Institution, predicted doom. “The slide of the United States into illiberalism may well have begun on June 1, 2020,” he wrote for Foreign Policy. Really? What is “illiberalism” anyway, and can I still get it if I’m wearing a face mask? Mattis and Mullen didn’t stop with Trump. They also lashed out at current Secretary of Defense Mark Esper, but in a particularly unkind way. Let me explain. “I think the sooner that you mass and dominate the battlespace, the quicker this dissipates and we can get back to the right normal,” Esper reportedly said on a Monday call with officials, according to news organizations. Neighborhoods aren’t “battlespaces,” said Mullen. Mattis rejected the idea of calling cities “battlespaces” to dominate. This was quite cynical on their part. Please understand that for anyone who’s dealt with the Pentagon in the last 20 years, “dominate the battlespace” is an epic cliché. It comes from early 1990s doctrine terminology, and refers to the area the commander can influence. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Obscure to you and me, perhaps, but something Mattis and Mullen knew well when they pilloried Esper. It’s sad that Mattis and Mullen were eager to catch him out. Anything to attack the Trump administration, I guess. Actually, Esper had something much more important to say at the Pentagon on Wednesday night. Here’s his direct quote: “National Guard forces did not fire rubber bullets or tear gas into the crowd, as reported.”  That puts the Lafayette Square walk in rather a different light. Let’s give Esper a break. He’s not the smoothest talker, but he is doing a good job and should get back to issues only his Department can handle, such as China’s fresh threats to Taiwan. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Retired generals and admirals should keep their cool and expect “incoming” fire when they join in political debate. Military veterans deserve our thanks and respect for their service. But even high-ranking former officers aren’t infallible. When they enter the political dialogue, their views and their records are fair game. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REBECCA GRANT

 For the past week, all of us have seen chaos engulf our beloved country. The violence and the destruction have been so overwhelming, so shocking, and awful and vivid on the screen, that it's been hard to think clearly about what's going on. Most of us haven't been able to step back far enough to ask even the obvious questions. The most obvious, of course, is what is this really about? What do the mobs want? MINNEAPOLIS CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS AIM TO 'DISMANTLE' POLICE DEPARTMENT, 'RETHINK' PUBLIC SAFETY Well, thugs looting the Apple Store can't answer that question. They have no idea. They just want free iPads. But what about Apple itself and the rest of corporate America, which is enthusiastically supporting the rioters? What about members of Congress, the media figures, the celebrities, the tech titans, all of whom are cheering this on. What do they want out of it? Well, they haven't said. That's the central mystery. Now suddenly, it is obvious. It should have been obvious on the first day. This is about Donald Trump. Of course, it is. We just couldn't see it. For normal people, Donald Trump is the president. You may like him, you may not like him, but either way, there will be another president at some point, and we will move on as we always have. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But for Donald Trump's enemies, there is nothing else. Everything is about Trump. Everything. Donald Trump defines their friendships, their careers, their marriages. Donald Trump affects how they raise their children. Trump occupies the very center of their lives. As long as Donald Trump remains in the White House. They feel powerless and diminished and panicked. So they cannot be happy. In everything they do, their overriding goal is to remove Donald Trump from office. And that's exactly what they're trying to do now. That's what these riots are about. The most privileged in our society are using the most desperate in our society to seize power from everyone else. Got that? That's the nub of it. The most privileged are using the most desperate to seize power from the rest of us. They are not seeking racial justice. If they were seeking racial justice, they wouldn't be denouncing their fellow Americans for their race, which they are. It has nothing to do with it. What they are seeking is total control of the country. And it goes without saying that none of this has anything to do with George Floyd. Shame on those who pretended that it did -- those who fell for the lie and those who knew better but played along because they are cowards. There are many of those. You know who they are, and someday we will look back on all of them with contempt. Meanwhile, the many people promoting this chaos remain clear-eyed. They are not lying to themselves. They never do. They know exactly what's going on, and they know what they hope to achieve by it. With every night of rioting, they grow bolder. Now, they are openly defending violence on television. Bakari Sellers, CNN political commentator: People worry about the protesters and the looters. And it is just people who are frustrated. Don Lemon, CNN anchor: They are frustrated, and they are angry, and they are out there. And they're upset. You shouldn't be taking televisions, but I can't tell people how to react to this. Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y.: I'm proud of the protests, and I think it is part of the tradition of New York. The violence is bad, reprehensible, and it should be condemned, but it is not the overwhelming picture in New York. Nikole Hannah-Jones, The New York Times: Destroying property which can be replaced is not violence. Chris Cuomo, CNN anchor Too many see the protests as the problem. Please, show me where it says that protests are supposed to be polite and peaceful. You're crushed by this. You can't believe what's happening to your country. But for the people you just saw, the real problem is that the rioting in some rare places is being stopped by police, and their aim is to fix that. They would like to eliminate all law enforcement for good. In everything they do, their overriding goal is to remove Donald Trump from office. And that's exactly what they're trying to do now. That's what these riots are about. The most privileged in our society are using the most desperate in our society to seize power from everyone else. On Thursday, Democrats in Dallas took down the statue of a Texas Ranger from the terminal at Love Field that has stood in the airport for more than 50 years. The Texas Rangers are cops, and cops must be removed, even when they're made of bronze. Meanwhile, the Lego toy company has ceased marketing sets that contain plastic police officers. Apparently, they're too dangerous for our children. And so on -- so much of this is going on right now. If it all seems like yet another episode of the silly and fleeting hysteria that sometimes grips our culture out of nowhere, usually in lulls in the news cycle, you should know that it's not that. This is entirely real. It is being pushed by serious people, and they are deadly serious about it. On Wednesday night, for example, Brian Fallon, who was the press secretary of the Hillary Clinton for President campaign in the last election cycle tweeted, "Defund the police." Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib agrees. Expect more members of Congress to agree soon. In some places, they're not talking, they're acting. Steve Fletcher represents the Third Ward in Minneapolis. He's on the City Council there. By this week, his city had been completely scorched by riots. At least 66 businesses were utterly destroyed by fire, 300 more had been vandalized or looted. Fletcher didn't even mention that. Instead, he attacked the city's police department for trying to contain the violence: "Several of us on the Council are working on finding out what it would take to disband the Minneapolis Police Department.". How would Americans feel if they actually defunded the police? Well, terrified mostly. That's how we would feel. Things would fall apart instantly. You'd think people in the city would be shocked by that. But at least on the City Council, everyone else nodded their approval. In the Ninth Ward, Councilwoman Alondra Cano tweeted this on Wednesday: "The Minneapolis Police Department is not reformable. Change is coming." According to City Councilman Fletcher, all nine members of the City Council are now considered getting rid of the Minneapolis Police Department. Hard to believe, but it's not just there. In the city of Los Angeles, Mayor Eric Garcetti looks out across the worst rioting in the nation's second-largest city in a generation, in almost 30 years. His conclusion? We need far fewer police. It could have been better if they hadn't been there. Garcetti has announced he is going to cut funding for law enforcement. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti: I want you to know we will not be increasing our police budget. How can we at this moment? Our city through our city administrative officer identified $250 million in cuts, so we could invest in jobs, in health, in education, and in healing And that those dollars need to be focused on our black community here in Los Angeles, as well as communities of color and women and people who have been left behind for too long. And will this involve cuts? Yes. Of course. To every department, including the police department. When Democrats across the country start saying the same thing at the same time, you can be certain there's a reason for it. And in this case, they clearly mean it. According to the president of the L.A. Police Commission, city officials may cut $150 million from the LAPD. That would be more than 10 percent of the entire police budget, in the wake of rioting. In New York, 48 separate Democratic candidates -- and they were including in that the Manhattan district attorney -- signed a letter demanding a $1 billion cut to the budget of the NYPD. Why are they doing this? There are reasons, not the ones they tell you. They tell you it's about racism. They tell you that cops are racist and must be reined in. Most Americans don't agree with that. That's not the experience they have. In fact, police departments are one of the most trusted institutions in the country. According to Gallup polling last year, 53 percent of Americans said they had a great deal or quite a lot of confidence in the police. That was far more confidence than they had in almost any other institution -- banks, religious leaders, the health care system, television, news, public schools, corporate America, newspapers -- name one. All of those were stuck below 40 percent. How many Americans trusted Congress? Eleven percent. And in fact, most African Americans still support the police. A 2016 Pew poll found that 55 percent of African-Americans had confidence in the police within their own communities. In other words, cops they actually knew and dealt with. They have confidence. A study by the Bureau of Justice Statistics from 2011 found that among those who called the police for help, more than 90 percent of African-Americans felt the police behaved properly. So, what would happen if we got rid of the police? Of all law enforcement? How would Americans feel if they actually defunded the police? Well, terrified mostly. That's how we would feel. Things would fall apart instantly. It would take hours. Don't believe it? Spend an afternoon in a place with no law enforcement and see what you think. Talk to anyone who was in Baghdad at the height of the Iraq War. Ask anyone who stayed in New Orleans for Katrina. Their memories will be fresh. They'll never forget what they saw. Here's the key. Eliminating the police does not mean eliminating authority. There is always authority. There are no vacuums in nature. The only question is whether or not the authority is legitimate -- whether or not the authority is accountable. Whether or not you can do anything if the authority abuses its power. In the absence of law enforcement, the answer is no. It means thugs are in charge. The most violent people have the most power. They can do whatever they want to you. That's the reality. Everyone obeys the violent people, or they get hurt. The mob literally rules. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP That probably sounds like a nightmare to you, because it is. But the people pushing this idea don't see it as scary because they don't fear the mob, because they control the mob. That's the key. And they see violence as an instrument of their political power. With mobs in the streets that they control, they will finally get what they want -- Donald Trump out of office and a hammerlock on the country. That's what's happening. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on June 4, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 Editor’s note: This is adapted from an excerpt of Alex Berenson’s booklet “Unreported Truths about COVID-19 and Lockdowns” posted on his website alexberenson.com. Amazon initially refused to sell the booklet but then reversed its decision.  Maybe the most important questions of all about the COVID-19 pandemic are: How lethal is the virus SARS-COV-2? Whom does it kill? Are the death counts accurate – and, if not, are they overstated or understated? Estimates for the lethality of the coronavirus have varied widely since January. Early Chinese data suggested the virus might have an “infection fatality rate” as high as 1.4 to 2 percent. A death rate in that range could mean the coronavirus might kill more than 6 million Americans, although even under the worst-case scenarios some people would not be exposed, and others might have natural immunity that would prevent them from being infected at all. ALEX BERENSON'S CORONAVIRUS BOOKLET HITS AMAZON AFTER ELON MUSK, OTHERS CALL OUT ONLINE RETAILER FOR 'CENSORSHIP' As we have learned more about the virus, estimates of its lethality have fallen. Calculating fatality rates is complex, because despite all of our testing for COVID-19, we still don’t know how many people have been infected. Some people who are infected may have no or mild symptoms. Even those with more severe symptoms may resist going to the hospital, then recover on their own. We have a clear view of the top of the iceberg – the serious infections that require hospitalization – but at least in the early stages of the epidemic we have to guess at the mild, hidden infections. But to calculate the true fatality rate, we need to know the true infection rate. If 10,000 people die out of 100,000 infections, that means the virus kills 10 percent of all the people it infects – making it very, very dangerous. But if 10,000 people die from 10 million infections, the death rate is actually 0.1 percent – similar to the flu. Unfortunately, figuring out the real infection rate is very difficult. Probably the best way is through antibody tests, which measure how many people have already been infected and recovered – even if they never were hospitalized or even had symptoms. Studies in which many people in a city, state, or even country are tested at random to see if they are currently infected can also help. Believe it or not, so can tests of municipal sewage. For now, the crucial point is this: randomized antibody tests from all over the world have repeatedly shown many more people have been infected with coronavirus than is revealed by tests for active infection. Many people who are infected with SARS-COV-2 don’t even know it. So the hidden part of the iceberg is huge. And in turn, scientists have repeatedly reduced their estimates for how dangerous the coronavirus might be. The most important estimate came on May 20, when the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported its best estimate was that the virus would kill 0.26 percent of people it infected, or about 1 in 400 people. (The virus would kill 0.4 percent of those who developed symptoms. But about one out of three people would have no symptoms at all, the CDC said.) Similarly, a German study in April reported a fatality rate of 0.37 percent. A large study in April in Los Angeles predicted a death rate in the range of 0.15 to 0.3 percent. Some estimates have been even lower. Others have been somewhat higher – especially in regions that experienced periods of severe stress on their health care systems. In New York City, for example, the death rates appear somewhat higher, possibly above 0.5 percent – though New York may be an outlier, both because it has counted deaths aggressively (more on this later) and because its hospitals seem to have used ventilators particularly aggressively. Thus the CDC’s estimate for deaths is probably the best place to begin. Using that figure along with several other papers and studies suggests the coronavirus has an infection fatality rate in the range of 0.15 percent to 0.4 percent. In other words, SARS-COV-2 likely kills between 1 in 250 and 1 in 650 of the people whom it infects. Again, though, not everyone who is exposed will become infected. Some people do not contract the virus, perhaps because their T-cells – which help the immune system destroy invading viruses and bacteria – have already been primed by exposure to other coronaviruses. Several other coronaviruses exist; the most common versions usually cause minor colds in the people they infect. An early May paper in the journal Cell suggests that as many as 60 percent of people may have some preexisting immune response, though not all will necessarily be immune. The experience of outbreaks on large ships such as aircraft carriers and cruise liners also shows that some people do not become infected. The best estimates are that the virus probably can infect somewhere between 50 to 70 percent of people. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER For example, on one French aircraft carrier, 60 percent of sailors were infected (none died and only two out of 1,074 infected sailors required intensive care). Thus – in a worst-case scenario – if we took no steps to mitigate its spread or protect vulnerable people, a completely unchecked coronavirus might kill between 0.075 and 0.28 percent of the United States population – between 1 in 360 and 1 in 1,300 Americans. This is higher than the seasonal flu in most years. Influenza is usually said to have a fatality rate among symptomatic cases of 1 in 1,000 and an overall fatality rate of around 1 in 2,000. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP However, influenza mutates rapidly, and its dangerousness varies year by year. The coronavirus appears far less dangerous than the Spanish flu a century ago, which was commonly said to have killed 1 in 50 of the people it infected. The current coronavirus pandemic appears more comparable in terms of overall mortality to the influenza epidemics of 1957 and 1968, or the British flu epidemics of the late 1990s. Of course, the United States and United Kingdom did not only not shut down for any of those epidemics, they received little attention outside the health care system. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ALEX BERENSON

 The New York Times, which haughtily claims it publishes “All the News That’s Fit to Print,” caved in to far-left political correctness Thursday. The paper decided it was wrong to publish an op-ed by Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., that called for the military to be sent to U.S. cities to help local law enforcement deal with “rioters and looters.” In the op-ed, Cotton made a point of saying his comments were not directed against “law-abiding protesters” responding to “the wrongful death of George Floyd,” a black man who died when a white Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes as Floyd lay handcuffed on the ground May 25. That officer and three others have been fired and criminally charged in Floyd’s death. The death has sparked rioting in many cities.  The Times published an article online Thursday night saying the Cotton op-ed “fell short of the newspaper’s standards.” And it quoted its own spokeswoman, Eileen Murphy as stating: “We’ve examined the piece and the process leading up to its publication. This review made clear that a rushed editorial process led to the publication of an Op-Ed that did not meet our standards. As a result, we’re planning to examine both short-term and long-term changes, to include expanding our fact-checking operation and reducing the number of Op-Eds we publish.” NY TIMES ISSUES 'MEA CULPA,' SAYS TOM COTTON OP-ED ON GEORGE FLOYD RIOTS 'RUSHED,' FAILED TO MEET STANDARDS The stunning reversal by the newspaper of its decision to publish the Cotton op-ed was yet more evidence of the collapse of journalism at The New York Times. Times staffers let out a scream heard across social media when their employer had the nerve to publish the view of a Republican senator that they disagreed with. The Washington Post called it a “staff uproar” and Vanity Fair went with the headline “Times Employees Rebel.” Both CNN and The Daily Beast turned to the word “revolt.” The Daily Beast explained the reaction with the headline: “New York Times Staffers in Open Revolt Over Tom Cotton’s ‘Send in the Troops’ Column.” I would rephrase that to say the refusal to allow a free exchange of ideas in the newspaper was revolting. Will the Times now change its motto from “All the News That’s Fit to Print” to “All the News that Fits Our Far-Left Agenda?” Dozens of Times staffers vented their liberal spleens on Twitter when their newspaper dared allow Cotton to express his views in his well-reasoned op-ed. How do we know? Naturally, the Times wrote about how angry its self-important and aggrieved liberals were. They “responded to the Op-Ed on Twitter by tweeting the sentence (or variations on it): ‘Running this puts Black @NYTimes staff in danger.’” That wasn’t enough. The paper’s Hollywood reporter, Brooks Barnes, called the op-ed “fascist garbage” that “should have been rejected.” Nikole Hannah-Jones claimed that “I’ll probably get in trouble for this.” Hannah-Jones, a Pulitzer Prize-winning New York Times Magazine writer, tweeted: “As a black woman, as a journalist, as an American, I am deeply ashamed that we ran this.” Hannah-Jones won that Pulitzer for her much-criticized faux history “1619 Project,” so she’s probably used to being ashamed of what the paper publishes. Now she’ll probably get commended for his criticism of her own employer before the Times flip-flopped. Of course, the paper’s leftist union, The NewsGuild of New York, chimed in with predictably radical rhetoric. It wrote that Cotton’s “message undermines the journalistic work of our members, puts our Black staff members in danger, promotes hate, and is likely to encourage further violence. Invariably, invoking state violence disproportionately hurts Black and brown people.” So much for the old-fashioned view that more speech is better speech. Instead, some of the most pampered voices in journalism are demanding a safe space. There were a few Times voices defending the idea of a free exchange of ideas – before the paper came out against such a free exchange. These included Publisher A.G. Sulzberger, who said the newspaper wanted to give “readers a diversity of perspectives.”  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Editorial Page Editor James Bennet said “many readers find Senator Cotton's argument painful, even dangerous,” but still argued for it to be published. But that was before The Times made it clear that it no longer supported Bennet’s decision. In fact, before his employer abandoned all pretense of supporting the airing of divergent viewpoints, Bennet took the right position when he wrote on the newspaper’s website earlier Thursday: “We published Cotton’s argument in part because we’ve committed to Times readers to provide a debate on important questions like this. It would undermine the integrity and independence of The New York Times if we only published views that editors like me agreed with, and it would betray what I think of as our fundamental purpose – not to tell you what to think, but to help you think for yourself.” I couldn’t agree more with Bennet’s earlier view. And now The New York Times has, by his own account, “undermined the integrity and independence” of the newspaper. While Cotton didn’t get the last word, he blasted the “woke-progressive mob” for trying to silence opinions the left doesn’t like. He won the battle for a brief time, but now the woke progressives at the paper have won the war. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Whenever Times staffers freak out because their paper actually covered how the rest of America thinks on an issue, they make it less likely that will happen again. Now the thought police have won a victory that many journalists are cheering. And the New York Times has made it quite clear that the views of those who don’t embrace far-left orthodoxy are unfit to print.   CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAN GAINOR

 As New York City burned, Gov. Andy Cuomo said this Tuesday on Twitter: “There are those who want to intentionally blur the lines between peaceful, legitimate protesters and looters. The president is among them. They want you to watch the videos of the looting – not the video of Mr. Floyd being murdered. Don't fall for it." So, a governor whose citizens and taxpayers are under attack, claims the biggest problem is witnessing the attack. The mayhem. The looting. Attacks on cops. Because that "blurs the lines between peaceful protests and looters." GUTFELD ON THE MURDER OF MR. DORN I supposed he would prefer him joking around with his brother Chris on CNN again and again. So, who is blurring the lines between protesters and looters?  It’s not me.  It’s people like him.  Because every time you mention the rioters, they accuse you of smearing protesters.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We do understand the difference. Does he? Do you remember when you condemned actions of jihadists, and suddenly they accused you of Islamophobia? That when you criticized beheadings that was the same as calling all Muslims "extremists?" That idiotic response revealed who does the blurring. And it’s that blurring that hurts the protest movement. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But by exposing the violent mob, you protect the future of legitimate protest. Not doing it, forever links it to destruction and death, while saying or implying that black grievance only matters if it's expressed violently. That’s nuts. If that's what you're saying, Andy, you're the one sowing discord. You're the one who left us hanging – sacrificing citizens to the mob – just so we don't blur any of your precious lines. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on June 4, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

 Prosecutors in Minnesota have filed an amended complaint against Derek Chauvin for the killing of George Floyd, adding a second-degree “felony murder” charge. This dangerously flawed theory could be used to portray any police restraint of a resistant suspect as criminal assault. ANDREW McCARTHY: 'INSTITUTIONAL RACISM' AMONG POLICE? LET'S LOOK AT THE NUMBERS The amended complaint against Chauvin also re-alleges the two homicide charges originally filed last week: third-degree “depraved indifference” murder and second-degree manslaughter, both of which better fit the facts of the case while posing no risk of criminalizing the legitimate use of force by good cops. Separately, the other three fired Minneapolis police officers involved in the killing have been charged, after a week of demands by the Floyd family, as well as intense anti-police rhetoric (and worse) by Black Lives Matter activists and protesters. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Tou Thao, J. Alexander Kueng, and Thomas Lane are charged with aiding and abetting both second-degree murder (the new charge against Chauvin) and manslaughter. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Weirdly, under the circumstances, the three are not charged with the “depraved indifference” murder count; nor are they accused of committing manslaughter as principals — they are charged only as aiders and abettors, a theory that does not jibe with a negligence charge such as second-degree manslaughter (which is negligent homicide under Minnesota law). CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 A deadly pandemic. A reactionary lockdown. An ensuing economic collapse. And then a senseless murder caught on video. Can 2020 gut-punch us anymore? Yes, violent and destructive riots in cities across the country and then a debate about using our military to stop them. Enter retired Marine Gen. James “Mad Dog” Mattis, the Trump administration’s first defense secretary, breaking his silence and self-imposed ethics of never speaking against a sitting president by writing a vicious op-ed rebuking President Trump’s threat to invoke the Insurrection Act if city and state leaders don’t get the unrest under control. ANDREW McCARTHY: 'INSTITUTIONAL RACISM' AMONG POLICE? LET'S LOOK AT THE NUMBERS Ironically, I’ve actually been punched in the gut by Mattis. I was stationed at Eglin Air Force Base in 2008 attending the Defense Department’s Explosive Ordnance Disposal school. Mattis, the supreme allied commander of NATO forces and commanding general of Joint Forces, accepted our invitation to speak at our annual memorial where we honor the bomb techs who’d fallen in the line of duty that year. I was tasked with helping coordinate his visit. True to form, Mattis arrived precisely at 10 p.m. and debarked his C-130 in his full service A uniform. He walked past the Air Force colonels saluting him — he’d requested they not be there — and went straight to the airman “on guard” at the extended wing of the plane. With the engines running I couldn’t hear him, but from the look of it he checked the rifle the airman was holding and gave him an approving slap on the arm. Mattis immediately turned and walked straight down the plane to me. He stopped in front of me, quickly looked me over, gut-punched me and shook my hand adding, “Well done, Marine, I was that hard when I was your age, too.” The general made his reputation on two things: the skill to surprise an enemy and his peers with swift and decisive action, and the audacity to speak his mind in nonconformist soundbites. He’s the general known for saying, “Be polite, be professional and have a plan to kill everyone you meet.” They each play, and have played, a pivotal role in voicing loudly the belief that Americans are proud, capable and special, in the world and on the battlefield. I appreciate each of them for it.   This outspokenness is what he has most in common with President Trump. Mattis had the tactical skill to win a battle, a region or even a moment in time, but his entire era of leadership in the Middle East conflict didn't win the war. In his world, and in his mind, you do things a certain way, a proven way, even when politics advise against it. He’s also the general who said, “If in order to kill an enemy you have to kill an innocent, don’t take the shot. Don’t create more enemies than you take out by some immoral act.” Trump, on the other hand, is less calculated and more reactive to populist sentiment and current events. Neither is necessarily right or wrong, but they were certain to clash. I admire James Mattis in a way I’ll never look at President Trump. In a foxhole, or by my hospital bed, I want the General. But it takes more than principled leadership and proven strategy to win over a country right now. It takes a bombastic personality, over-generalizations and pointed innuendo. That’s why I voted for Trump. He plays a role. In doing so, he backs up policies and fights political fights a well-balanced tactician wouldn’t dare engage in. For that reason, Trump is an effective disruptor, and for those same reasons, Mattis would never condone his tactics. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It’ll be easy for Trump loyalists and fed-up Americans to “clap back” at Mattis. Let me be the first to tell you, he’s not listening to insults and he won’t respond in kind. I doubt he’ll respond at all. In his mind, he is no cultural icon, no legend and no hero. He’s simply a Marine, loyal to a nation, not a politician or party. Mattis has a set of ideals and he’s adhering to them — in my opinion, with this op-ed, to a fault. His words accomplish, with equal injury, the division he’s condemning. Though a stalwart general, he’s failed to see the simplest of truths on the battlefield of rhetoric: any stance you take will be used against you in the court of public opinion. For those of you struggling to balance your appreciation for a man who, while in uniform was a generation’s plainspoken voice on war, with your adoration for a POTUS seeming to do the same on politics, don’t. They each play, and have played, a pivotal role in voicing loudly the belief that Americans are proud, capable and special, in the world and on the battlefield. I appreciate each of them for it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I hate seeing Trump tweet about irrelevant things and spew personal insults. Likewise, I hate seeing Mattis take to politics. So, what’s the lesson for those of us who admire them both? It’s simple: Know what YOU believe, and WHY you believe it. Don’t let any one person overshadow it or represent it for you. After all, they’re just people. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JOHNNY ‘JOEY’ JONES

 Remember COVID-19? Owners of small businesses that have yet to open but are in danger of being smashed by rioters sure do. TUCKER CARLSON: IS AMERICA BEING TORN APART BY A TOTAL, COMPLETE -- BUT PROVABLE -- LIE? As Mayor Bill de Blasio and Gov. Andrew Cuomo take turns making vague comments about the continued destruction, many small-business owners caught in limbo are asking: Why are crowds OK for protest but not anything else? Our fearful leaders have no answer. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER New York City is still a full five days away from entering Phase 1. This will open up only some industries, like construction and manufacturing and retail on a pickup basis only. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Many business owners are wondering if they’ll have a business left to open when their turn finally comes. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KAROL MARKOWICZ

 Protests have a purpose. People protest when they feel like they’re not being heard. For the last week, we’ve seen countless protests across our country, including several in my home state of South Dakota, because of what happened to George Floyd while in the custody of the Minneapolis police. Personally, I couldn’t even make it through the video of his death because it was so gut-wrenching. There is no one that thinks that what happened to George Floyd was OK. The protests in South Dakota have served their purpose. ANDREW McCARTHY: 'INSTITUTIONAL RACISM' AMONG POLICE? LET'S LOOK AT THE NUMBERS The question before us now is: What do we want policing to look like going forward? That’s at all levels – city, county and state. There’s no governor in America that has trusted their people to make the right choices more than I have these last several months. And there’s no governor in America more willing to work with her people to find solutions to our problems – be that policing or otherwise. It’s time to problem-solve. Policing is largely a state and local issue – the vast majority of police officers are local, not federal, and the laws they enforce are local, not federal. If we want to change the nature of policing, we must take the lead on that ourselves. In America, the street doesn’t settle or resolve this policing question, or any other public policy question. Rather, it’s the hard work of study, review, debate, negotiation and accommodation. Then, we decide what is the best action. One-liners on social media aren’t the answer. People need to ask themselves: What are the facts? What are the consequences? What can history teach us? Our American political system is deliberative, so we must take the time to do the hard work of looking at these things from all angles. Free speech is one of our most fundamental rights. I see legitimate protests raising important concerns, and I hear those concerns. One thing I have noticed about public discourse in America today is the immediacy of it all. Social media and the Internet have made it easy to communicate quickly – instantly, in fact. That’s a great tool, but it has also made it easy to communicate thoughtlessly. In the race to be heard, too many of us have given up trying to make an argument. Instead, we compete to see who can shout the loudest. America is a place where all voices can be heard. Free speech is one of our most fundamental rights. I see legitimate protests raising important concerns, and I hear those concerns. But I also see violent actors who are trying to do an end-run around public discourse. They want to intimidate and silence opposing views. They want to short-cut public debate through fear. They want to make people scared. This is un-American. The biggest lesson I’ve learned when tackling public policy issues is that there’s no institution more important than the family. We are blessed with great families in South Dakota and in America. Whatever your family looks like, make sure you’re a strong family. I say that because what’s been taking place across our country shows that some of our families need a lot more attention. Parents need to know if their kids are out throwing rocks at cops. Brothers and sisters need to know if their siblings are looting and vandalizing businesses. Grandparents need to know if their grandkids are intentionally trying to destroy our way of life. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Violence is never the answer. Violence will not be tolerated by me, and it should not be tolerated by you. We have an opportunity to be better. But that requires us to be bold, to respect one another, listen to each other, and work together on our path forward. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 On Tuesday, Joe Biden gave a speech on the death of George Floyd that prompted many to sing his praises. But I couldn’t stop thinking about his record. To be fair, I can admit that Biden did say a lot of the right things. He was right, for example, to condemn “systemic racism” and to call for “real police reform.” What I can’t understand, though, is how he was able to do so without once acknowledging the role that he himself has played in making the criminal justice system something that so desperately does need reform in the first place, and how some simple words have seemed to — in a shocking number of minds — virtually erased his history on these issues. CURTIS HILL: MURDER CHARGES IN GEORGE FLOYD DEATH ARE A GOOD STEP BUT MORE NEEDED TO FIX BROKEN RACE RELATIONS The fact is, Joe Biden has a terrible record on criminal justice. For example, Biden helped to write the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 — the very law that played a major role in contributing to the mass incarceration (which, by the way, had a disparate impact on black men) we saw in the 1990s. Although he has since, of course, walked back his former tough-on-crime-approach, (saying "I haven't always been right. I know we haven't always gotten things right, but I've always tried,” at the National Action Network's Martin Luther King Jr. breakfast in January of 2019), it’s worth noting that he defended the law as recently as 2016. Worse, his dismal history on these issues extends far beyond a single law. Biden also co-sponsored the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, which instituted requirements for mandatory minimum sentences for drug offenders as well as the sentencing disparity between crack and powder cocaine, which resulted in disproportionately longer sentences for minority offenders than it did for white offenders, for doing pretty much exactly the same thing. I do, of course, understand that people can change their minds on issues, and if Biden really, truly has changed his mind on this one, then that’s something that I cheer. At the same time, though, I can’t help but feel strange listening to someone rail against problems that he not only hadn’t railed on before, but also actually tangibly helped to create. If you are mad about the current state of affairs, then good. I am too! But please, for the love of logic, do some objective research. My intention is not to place the blame squarely on Biden, or even on the Democratic Party. That 1994 crime bill, after all, was a bipartisan effort. What’s more, you won’t find me saying that the current administration is without its own mistakes. For example, although President Trump and his administration have made major strides in reforming the criminal justice system, I was among the many Americans who were absolutely horrified at security forces’ use of “pepper balls” and “smoke canisters” to clear peaceful protesters so that Trump could secure a photo op. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Rather, my point is that I am upset to see people playing politics with this issue at all. For many Americans, “incarceration” is not just a word — it’s years of your life that you’ve lost. It’s the description of being torn apart from your career, from your family and from society. It is bigger than politics. If you are mad about the current state of affairs, then good. I am too! But please, for the love of logic, do some objective research. You can, for example, have loved Biden’s Tuesday speech, but you shouldn’t also forget how Biden once complained that George H.W. Bush wasn’t putting enough “violent thugs” in prison, or how he once bragged that, although some Democrats were too soft on criminal justice, he preferred to describe his own views on it as, simply, “Lock the S.O.B.s up.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This issue is, quite simply, far too important to avoid having open-minded, truth-and-solutions-seeking, honest discussions about. The problems people are now protesting are not, after all, new. They are systemic, and both parties have played a role in creating that system. Uncomfortable or not, the only way to solve this mess is to make sure that we fully understand it — which we cannot do without fully acknowledging every part of us getting here. Oh, and if you refuse to examine all aspects of an issue because some of them may be politically inconvenient? Well, it’s your life — but please know that means you care far more about your politics than you do about actually solving the problem. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BYKAT TIMPF

 For many of us, this has been one of the saddest, most painful weeks in memory. Depressing doesn't even begin to describe it. We have watched as mobs of violent cretins have burned our cities, defaced our monuments, beaten old women in the street, shot police officers and stolen everything in sight -- stealing everything. BAIL REFORM LAWS LET ALLEGED CRIMINALS BACK ON THE STREETS WITHIN HOURS, THREATENING PUBLIC SECURITY How many innocent Americans have these people hurt? How many have they murdered? We don't know that number. But it's the country itself that so many of us worry about at this point. After we've watched what's happened over the last week, how do we put the society back together? Can we? We don't know that, either. If you're grieving for America right now, you are not alone. Millions feel the same way you do. So many of our leaders, by contrast, are not grieving. They seem exhilarated. They feel nothing as our nation descends into anarchy. They see chaos, instead, as an opportunity, a chance to solidify their control, to increase their market share to win elections. They have no interest in talking about the details of what is actually happening out there on our streets. In fact, they're hiding those details. They're demanding that you forget what you saw. Don't forget it. Remember all of it -- every bit -- because it's proof of who they are. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER What they're defending and encouraging has nothing to do with civil rights. It is violence, and the criminals you see on the screen are not protesters. The people cheering them on from their TV studios have no patience for real protests or real protesters. Just in April, Democrats in New Jersey arrested a woman for trying to plan a rally, a protest at the state capitol. The New York Times said nothing when they did that because they approve. That's how they really feel about any political expression they can't control -- they crush it. What they support is more power for themselves and they're willing to use gangs of thugs to get it. Here is one of their protesters chanting "no justice, no peace" as a man tortures a dog. NBC News wouldn't show you that video ever. Neither would CNN under any circumstances. These are the worst people in America, and our leaders have let them do whatever they want. So, of course, they want more. Their latest demand is that we eliminate the police entirely. No more law enforcement in this country. That would mean more power for the mob. They could do anything. It would mean never-ending terror for you and for your family. That's why they want it. Unidentified male: I am now calling on all and our city council members and all of our elected officials to defund the police. Crowd: Defund the police. Unidentified male: Defund the police. Crowd: Defund the police. "Defund the police." No sane person would dare to have said something like that in public just a week and a half ago. Now, a member of Congress has endorsed the idea -- Rashida Tlaib. So, what would happen to our country if we eliminated law enforcement? Eric Garcetti is the mayor of Los Angeles, the second biggest city in America. His city would devolve into a murderous hellscape within hours if the police left. But Garcetti, who is in charge of the city, won't push back against this idea. Instead, he kneeled in subservience before the people demanding it. Jake Tapper, CNN anchor: LA Mayor Eric Garcetti joined protesters moments ago, what did he have to say? Stephanie Elam, CNN correspondent: Yes, he came out this morning, Jake, and he took the time to come out and come out among the protesters. He knelt while he was out there, saying -- and showing -- his solidarity for the movement, for the protesters here today. And I can tell you that today, this daytime protest has been very peaceful, very calm. Lots of chanting, singing. He kneeled. Our leaders are kneeling before the mob, the atavistic ritual of self-abasement of defeat. Suddenly, many are performing this ritual, including police around the country. The mob wants victory. But more than that, it wants the total humiliation of its enemies. Unidentified male: I work for Black Lives Matter. I'm sorry that I scared you. But since I work for that company, my CEO has told me to come out today and to bring you on your knees because you have white privilege. So if they see that a white person is getting on their knees that show solidarity for the situation. The situation and could you just please apologize for -- you know for your white privilege. Just apologize. Unidentified female: I have -- I am trying to think of the right words to say. What's a good thing to say? Unidentified male: It's big. Unidentified female: That comes from -- Unidentified male: It's so -- it's large in this country. Unidentified female: I am terribly sorry. Why do we kneel? We kneel because we've lost. We kneel before our victors because they have won. We put down our resistance. We beg for their mercy. But mobs rarely forgive. "We're on your side!" we shout. We're in solidarity, spare us. But they never do. "We're on your side" as the rock comes through the window. You think the mob cares? No. What's happening to this country? Why are Americans surrendering to violent mobs? Well, because they've been told they have to. Everything we're now watching -- the looting, the arson, the killing -- has a purpose. The purpose we're told again and again is to end racist police violence against African-Americans. We are told that that is the single greatest scourge in this country. Demonstrators say repeatedly, "Stop killing us." Stop killing us -- it's chilling. And if you believe it, and you're a decent person, you will be moved by it -- because it's awful. No American should ever be mistreated by those in authority, much less killed. The abuse of power is always and everywhere a sin, and it's increasingly common here. We should always work to end it. So many of our leaders, by contrast, are not grieving. They seem exhilarated. They feel nothing as our nation descends into anarchy. They see chaos, instead, as an opportunity In this case, the death of a man at the hands of police in Minneapolis turned out to be a metaphor for abuse of power. That death has led to demands that we fire the nearly 700,000 police officers who work in the United States and that we free the million and a half criminals who are now behind bars. In America, Joe Biden told us recently: "Just the color of your skin puts your life at risk." Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey strongly agreed with that. "We have so many people in our country," Booker said Tuesday, "African-American men mostly unarmed, being murdered by police officers and no way of holding them accountable." So many people murdered by police officers, unarmed, says Cory Booker. You're hearing a lot of people in authority tell you that, every day, every hour. One group of pro athletes just announced that, "It seems like every week, a new tragedy unfolds before our very eyes where people are being killed by police violence. Each time we tweet, we pray, we mourn, only to repeat the cycle a few days later." In the words of Ben Crump, who is the lawyer representing George Floyd's family in Minneapolis, what we're witnessing here in America is "genocide." Genocide? If you believe we were seeing genocide, then you might understand the riots now in progress. There's nothing worse than genocide. But is it happening? Is any of this true? We should find out. Facts matter. What exactly are the numbers? We found the numbers and we're going to go through them with you in some detail because it's worth it. Since 2015, The Washington Post has maintained a comprehensive database of fatal police shootings in this country. Last year, The Post logged a total of 1,004 killings. Of the 802 shootings in which the race of the police officer and the suspect was noted, 371 of those killed were white, 236 were black. The vast majority of those killed were not, in fact, unarmed; the vast majority were armed. And African-American suspects were significantly more likely to have a deadly weapon than white suspects, yet more white suspects were killed. This is not genocide. It's not even close to genocide. It is laughable to suggest it is. Overall, there were a total of precisely 10 cases in the United States last year, according to The Washington Post, in which unarmed African- Americans were fatally shot by the police. There were nine men and one woman. Now, as we said, a lot is at stake. The country is at stake. So we want to take the time now to go through these case by case, into the specifics. The first was a man called Channara Pheap. He was killed by a Knoxville police officer called Dylan Williams. According to Williams, Pheap attacked him, choked him and then used a taser on him -- the suspect on the police officer before the officer shot him. Five eyewitnesses corroborated the officer's claim, and the officer was not charged. The second case concerns a man called Marcus McVeigh. He was by any description a career criminal from San Angelo, Texas. He had been convicted of aggravated assault, assault on a public servant and organized criminal activity. At the time he was killed, he was wanted on drug dealing charges. The Texas State trooper pulled him over. McVeigh fled in his car, then he fled on foot into the woods. There he fought with the trooper and was shot and killed. The officer was not charged in that case. Marzua Scott assaulted a shop employee. When a female police officer arrived and ordered the suspect toward her car, he instead charged her and knocked her to the ground. At that point, she shot and killed him. The entire incident was caught on body camera. The officer was not charged. Ryan Twyman was being approached by two LA County deputies when he backed into one of them with his vehicle. The deputy was caught in the car door. He and his partner opened fire. The deputies were not charged in that case. Melvin Watkins of East Baton Rouge, La. shot by a deputy after he allegedly drove his car toward the deputy at high speed. The deputy was not charged. Isaiah Lewis, meanwhile, wasn't just unarmed, he was completely naked. Williams broke into a house and then attacked a police officer. The police tased Williams, but he kept coming at them and attacking. The officer shot him. They were not charged. Atatiana Jefferson was shot by a Fort Worth deputy called Aaron Dean. A neighbor had called a non-emergency number after seeing Jefferson's door open, thinking something might be wrong. Police arrived. Jefferson saw them approach from a window and was holding a gun at the time. According to body camera footage, the officer shot Jefferson within seconds. That officer has been charged with homicide. Is our nation being ripped apart by a total and complete lie, a provable lie? A lie used by cynical media manipulators and unscrupulous politicians who understand that racial strife -- race hatred -- is their path to power, even if it destroys the country. Christopher Whitfield was shot and killed in a place called Ethel, La. He had robbed a gas station. Deputy Glenn Sims said his gun discharged accidentally while grappling with Whitfield. Sims, who is black himself, was not charged in that killing. Kevin Mason was shot by police during a multi-hour standoff. Well, Mason turned out not to have a gun. Mason claimed to have a gun, claimed to be armed and vowed to kill police with it. They believed him. Mason had been in a shootout with police years before. And finally, the tenth case concerns Gregory Griffin. He was shot during a car chase. An officer called Giovanni Crespo claimed he saw someone pointing a gun at him. Later, a gun was in fact found inside the vehicle, and yet Officer Crespo was charged anyway with aggravated manslaughter. Those are the facts. That is the entire list from 2019, last year -- 10 deaths. In five deaths, an officer was attacked just before the shooting occurred. That is not disputed. One allegedly was an accident. That leaves a total of four deaths during a pursuit or in a standoff. So out of four, in two of those cases -- and fully half -- the officer was criminally charged. Is it possible that more of these officers should have been charged? Of course, it's possible. Justice is not always served, that's for sure. But either way, this is a very small number in a country of 325 million people. This is not genocide. It's not even close to genocide. It is laughable to suggest it is. In fact, the number of police killings is dropping. In 2015, during Barack Obama's presidency, 38 unarmed black Americans and 32 whites were slain by police. Overall totals have fallen since then, and they have fallen far more dramatically for African-American men. Last year was the safest year for unarmed suspects since The Washington Post begin tracking police shootings. It was the safest year for both white and black suspects. At the same time, this country remains a dangerous place for police officers. Forty-eight of them were murdered in 2019 according to FBI data. That's more than the number of unarmed suspects killed of all races. One final number for you, because it matters: In 2018, 7,407 African-Americans were murdered in the United States. If 2019 continues on a similar trajectory, -- and we hope it doesn't, but if it does -- that would mean that for every unarmed African-American shot to death in the United States by police, more than 700 were murdered by someone else, usually by someone they know. Again, those are the facts. They are not in dispute. Are African-Americans being "hunted" as Joy Reid recklessly claimed on MSNBC recently? Or something else happening? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Is our nation being ripped apart by a total and complete lie, a provable lie? A lie used by cynical media manipulators and unscrupulous politicians who understand that racial strife -- race hatred -- is their path to power, even if it destroys the country. You have the facts now and you can decide what's really going on. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on June 3, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 About twice as many white people as black people are killed by police. In fact, in about 75 percent of police shootings, the decedent is not black. Of course, that is not what you would grasp from consuming media. CURTIS HILL: MURDER CHARGES IN GEORGE FLOYD DEATH ARE A GOOD STEP BUT MORE NEEDED TO FIX BROKEN RACE RELATIONS Take the website statista.com, specifically its breathless focus on “Hate crime in the United States” — counterfactually insinuating that any shooting involving a black victim must be a “hate crime.” Here’s their big headline from Tuesday: “Black Americans 2.5X More Likely Than Whites to Be Killed By Police.” It is fiction. It is sheer demagoguery, peddled as American cities are besieged by rioters in the wake of George Floyd’s killing by Minneapolis police. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The falsity of the claim is demonstrated even by statista.com itself. Just three days ago, the site posted another series of bar graphs, showing that, in fact, whites are nearly twice as likely as blacks to be shot to death by police. Here are the numbers: Year                White  Black 2017                457      223 2018                399      209 2019                370      235 2020 (so far)   42       31 CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The rest of the bar graphs break out the numbers of Hispanic decedents (slightly lower than black, significantly lower than white), as well as those whose heritage is described as “other” and unknown. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 “These are the times that try men’s souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of their country, but he that stands by it now, deserves the love and thanks of man and woman.”  -- Thomas Paine (1737-1809) Colonial America was filled with summer soldiers and sunshine patriots who wanted triumph over tyranny but were afraid to fight for it. Of course, enough did fight. They won the Revolutionary War and they enacted a Constitution intended to prevent both anarchy and tyranny. Today, we have both. REP. ANDY BIGGS: END RIOTS, RESTORE FREEDOM – TOO MANY AIDING BAD BEHAVIOR America is under attack by three deadly viruses. COVID-19 has killed more than 107,000 Americans since March. Yet, it pales in comparison to the virus it provoked -- hubris. And that, in turn, provoked the virus that has bedeviled America since the 17th century -- racism. Right now, the largest U.S. cities in at least 28 states are under curfew and many are patrolled by National Guard troops as the cities have been beset by violence. We all watched the gut-wrenching video of a white Minneapolis police officer torturing and murdering a handcuffed black man on a public street. Late Wednesday the officer was charged with the more severe crime of second-degree murder and three other officers who were at the scene but did not interfere in the killing were charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder. If convicted, all could face sentences of up to 50 years in prison. Were the killer not wearing a police uniform, he’d have been charged with first-degree murder. First-degree murder requires proof of intent to kill plus planning or premeditation. Yet, that premeditation can arise during the commission of the crime itself. For example, when the time consumed by the commission of the murder is far longer than was necessary to consummate it. In my view, the premeditation occurred in the killer’s mind as he continued the slow choking -- planning its continuance and its consummation, even rejecting the plea of a fellow officer to let go of the victim. Hence, by choking George Floyd for eight and a half minutes, former officer Derek Chauvin planned to kill and carried out his plan. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The killing was an act of racism or hubris or both. Racism is hatred of another because of skin color. It is legally prohibited to all governments. You can choose a friend based on skin color, but you cannot lawfully perform a single government act based on it. Hubris was the Greek goddess of unpunished arrogant behavior. Hubris rejects the applicability of laws to oneself because of a false belief in one’s invincibility. At its essence, hubris is the lust to dominate. We saw this, too, in Floyd’s murderer. We have also seen hubris in the slow death of personal liberty this spring -- as all 50 governors and the mayors of many of the same cities now beset by rioters have crafted standards of behavior never legislated into law, and used police to enforce those standards as if they were law. Believing they will suffer no consequences for their destruction of constitutionally guaranteed liberties and economic prosperity, these governors have become infected with hubris. Government racism and hubris has led to violence in our streets. Yet, protests, that were once the manifestation of natural grief and lawfully protected assembly for the redress of known government failures and excesses, have been captured by those with sinister motives. Some of these fomenters of violence -- white and black -- seek to restructure our culture through violence. That violence will destroy what little freedom remains. What is it about those in government who believe they are above the law and are invincible -- whether cops using deadly force unlawfully or governors commanding cops unlawfully to enforce their whims? Add to this the lives, liberties and property lost by the hubris of governors shutting down businesses and putting 40 million folks out of work -- and you have the perfect storm that is trying our souls today. Do we have the moral leadership to address this deadly mess? Is the president’s harsh rhetoric -- “looting brings shooting”; “we will unleash vicious dogs”; “get control of the battle space” -- making things better or worse? Was it just for him to break his own curfew and use tear gas to move peaceful protesters, who were lawfully present, out of a park near the White House so he could walk through it to a nearby church? Should the president be a tough guy or a peacemaker? Do violent words and deeds beget violence? Can the same governors who unconstitutionally shut down society now employ lawful force against rioters who want to destroy and remake society? Their police can’t protect private property and can barely protect private citizens -- which is why we have a Second Amendment. Now you know why we need large magazines and much ammo. Why can New Jersey Governor Phil Murphy -- the prince of hubris -- permit 2,500 people in Newark to demonstrate over Floyd’s death but deny 25 people in the small town of Newton the right to demonstrate against his lockdowns? Because -- in his own words -- he agrees with the Newark demonstrators and has no use for the Bill of Rights. We have no use for him. All political dissent, even civil disobedience, is legitimate when it is peaceful. But violence is not legitimate unless in self-defense or toppling a tyrant. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The police have a duty to neutralize violence. That means for them proceeding into the face of known danger  -- not watching their buddy murder someone or deserting their own police stations, as Chauvin’s colleagues did. The late historian Chalmers Johnson observed that if we fail to eliminate racism and hubris in the government, we will pay dearly. He argued metaphorically that Nemesis -- the Greek goddess of retribution -- awaits her time with us. Perhaps she is here already. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO

 Our current lockdown strategy may or may not defeat the coronavirus. But the Chinese clearly see it as a big win for them. China already feels it’s stolen a march on us by getting its economy back up and running as early as March. The truth is, the longer America’s lockdown drags on, the better it gets for China. Our blue-state governors and the Trump-hating media have propelled the perception that we are socially and economically paralyzed by COVID-19. That has clearly emboldened Beijing to aggressively push its agenda for becoming the new superpower Colossus bestriding the world. One obvious sign of this has been Beijing’s renewal of its effort to bring Hong Kong to heel with the security law that prompted demonstrations in the streets and international outrage just a year ago. President Xi Jinping and his Communist cohorts are counting on our distraction with the COVID pandemic to prevent us from lending effective support for the protesters fighting Beijing’s ever-increasing iron grip. HELEN RALEIGH: WELCOME HONG KONG POLITICAL REFUGEES – 3 REASONS US SHOULD ACT NOW Beijing has also been stepping up pressure on nearby Taiwan, with bombers buzzing the median line between the two countries in the Taiwan Straits, while its catspaw the WHO has blocked Taiwan’s effort to share its successful anti-COVID best practices with the rest of the world. In the South China Sea, we’ve seen a bold increase in Chinese intimidation tactics against the other countries who have claims to that strategically important seaway. A Chinese military vessel recently rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing boat, while other Chinese ships have harassed our destroyers USS Barry and Bunker Hill. The fact that the USS Theodore Roosevelt had to cut short its presence there due to the coronavirus outbreak has also played into Beijing’s hands (although Pentagon officials say the aircraft carrier will return to the South China Sea very soon). Meanwhile, Huawei, China’s stalking horse for control of the future of 5G wireless technology, has launched a charm offensive in the wake of the COVID-19, by associating itself with efforts to ship medical supplies to countries stricken by the deadly virus — the virus China let spread beyond its borders without warning, killing more than 100,000 Americans. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER What’s going on here? Clearly China is taking advantage of America’s COVID distraction and lockdown, especially as it unfolds in economically significant states like California, New York, New Jersey and Illinois. Their governors’ determination to drag out the lockdown and the loss of jobs and economic opportunity as long as possible, is only grist for Beijing’s effort to portray America as a declining power. The protracted week of riots and looting has played directly into China’s hands, as well.  It helps China to portray America as a country in decline, and to fan anti-American feeling.  The Global Times asked on Twitter if American police are “Peacekeepers or mass murderers?”  The state-controlled news Xinhua republished a New York Times article supporting the rioters—while the government in Beijing is using the disorder here to rationalize its crackdown on Hong Kong’s democracy movement. Between lockdown and riots, the liberal media and social media haven’t helped. For 10 straight weeks, they have pushed the narrative that America is on the brink of societal and economic chaos; that we are trapped with an unemployment rate higher than during the Great Depression;  and that lockdown is the only alternative to massive illness and death — even that we have to brace ourselves for a “second wave” this autumn. Chinese state media organ The Global Times has even circulated a story that Harvard researchers claim the lockdown needs to continue until 2022. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP From Hong Kong to the WHO and the South China Sea, Chinese leaders clearly feel like winners in the geopolitical competition with the United States. They would love to see the world perceive the COVID-19 crisis as a grim benchmark in America’s eclipse as a superpower. Whether they are right or not, depends on how quickly we get our economy back on its feet — and how robustly we respond to Beijing’s macroaggressions around the world. Right now, getting America back to work isn’t just good economics; it’s going to be vital to the survival of freedom around the world. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ARTHUR HERMAN

 The terrifying death of George Floyd while in the custody of Minneapolis police last week has caused mass protests around the country as people express their outrage. The hideous images captured on video for all to see will have a lasting impact on America, I pray for the better. The country is unified – regardless of skin color or political party – around the truth that Floyd’s killing and others like it are totally unacceptable in our society and we must all work together to end racially charged violence against African-Americans. Peaceful protests are constitutionally protected and must be respected. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was correct when he taught us that nonviolent gatherings send a powerful message that change is possible. The American people are in agreement that the senseless killing of Floyd, who’s been described by his brother as a gentle giant, must be protested loudly, clearly – and peacefully.  REP. ANDY BIGGS: END RIOTS, RESTORE FREEDOM – TOO MANY AIDING BAD BEHAVIOR  However, violent anarchists and America haters have upended the peaceful protests to wreak havoc on our cities from coast to coast and desecrate the memory of George Floyd. They call themselves Antifa, short for “anti-fascists,” but nothing could be further from the truth. They are misusing Floyd’s tragic death to further their goals of destruction and division in America.   As we’re all finding out, if you don’t comply with the demands of these anarchists, they’ll beat you up and burn your neighborhood to the ground. Antifa doesn’t care about Floyd; they only care about chaos, destruction and overthrowing our constitutional republic in favor of a system that only allows for the deranged freedom of expression that Antifa agrees with. In short, Antifa extremists come out of the shadows to turn peaceful protests into riots. This week President Trump showed true leadership by announcing that he was designating Antifa a terror organization.  The vast majority of Americans want this violence to stop and believe we are a compassionate nation that believes deeply in treating others how we wish to be treated, regardless of the color of our skin.   The American people deserve the facts about this terror group and the government must deliver. The peaceful message coming from Floyd’s family in the midst of their tragedy can have a calming effect on Americans and should be used as a road map forward. We can all best respect Floyd’s legacy by working harder as a people to end racism in America once and for all. It must be a priority inside police stations as well as at family dinner tables. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER There’s bipartisan agreement that there’s no place in our society for Antifa and the violence they specialize in bringing to the neighborhoods where our children live. In addition to the president’s strong actions, in 2017, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., spoke out against the “violent actions of people calling themselves Antifa.” And last year former Vice President Joe Biden condemned Antifa’s assault on a journalist by saying, “freedom of expression is fundamental to who we are as Americans, and that Andy Ngo’s attackers should be identified and investigated.” In these times of rigid partisanship, when both political parties agree on something it’s time to take bold action. The American people deserve the facts about this terror group and the government must deliver. What is its leadership structure? How do they communicate with one another to implement their violent operations? Where do they get their tools and equipment? And perhaps most importantly, who is funding their violence? Congress needs to conduct a thorough investigation, accompanied by public hearings, to shine a light on how these extremists conduct their business of terror.  Call FBI Director Christopher Wray and Acting Homeland Security Secretary Chad Wolf to testify immediately about what their agencies know about Antifa. The FBI and Homeland Security Department should also prioritize shutting these rioters down so they can’t communicate or receive the funds necessary to conduct their violent operations.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It will take time for our country to heal in the wake of Floyd’s death. It will require that those responsible be brought to justice and that we all dedicate ourselves to improving as a nation.  The video of George Floyd’s life being taken away from him in the middle of the street is never going away and we must never forget it. Maybe it can help us summon “the better angels of our nature,” as Abraham Lincoln said. We can start by agreeing that what happened to Floyd should be robustly and peacefully protested and Antifa’s violence must be condemned and investigated. Those are ideals to unite around. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE

 As violent protests sweep the nation and fury fills city streets in the wake of the murder of George Floyd, the 2020 presidential election is shaping up to be eerily similar to the 1968 campaign. In 1968, the country was grieving from the assassinations of civil rights leader Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., and Sen. Robert F. Kennedy, who was on the path to claiming the Democratic Party’s presidential nomination. The period preceding the 1968 election was a time of great civil unrest. There were riots across the country following Dr. King’s assassination, and the August 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago became a venue for protests against the Vietnam War — led by left-wing activist groups like Students for a Democratic Society — and culminated in a televised riot where police clashed with protesters. LIZ PEEK: GEORGE FLOYD RIOTING – BIDEN DOESN'T GET IT. IT'S THE SAFETY, STUPID As a result of that year’s civil unrest, which was also accompanied by inner Democratic Party division between the moderates and far left, Democrats embraced a more liberal foreign policy perspective while focusing mainly on social and racial justice issues, largely at the expense of economic issues. Taken together, the party’s leftward movement and the accompanying civil unrest, which was associated with the far left, helped Richard Nixon’s “Southern Strategy” prevail in the 1968 election and in 1972, when he won by a 49-state landslide. Nixon’s approach appealed to the silent majority with a promise to restore “law and order,” while the Democratic Party was viewed as too far left. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Fast forward to 2020. The year began with a presidential impeachment, followed by a pandemic that has taken over 100,000 American lives and cratered the economy, and now is undergoing widespread civil unrest and violence that many are attributing to radical left-wing groups. In the midst of these tragic riots and uncertain times, a similar hidden political opportunity exists for Trump as Nixon. On Monday, Trump described himself as the president of “law and order,” and said he was mobilizing the U.S. military to end “riots and lawlessness,” while calling the violent protests “acts of domestic terror.” Further, it is clear that Trump is taking a page out of Nixon's book to deflect attention from our economic woes and the tragedy of the pandemic, while shifting blame to Democratic states, governors and mayors for not controlling the riots and unrest. On Monday, Trump told governors on a call that they were “weak” if they did not use force against the protesters. “If you don’t dominate, you’re wasting your time,” Trump said. While the latest ABC News poll shows Biden with a 10-point lead over Trump nationally, the current unrest poses a hidden risk for Democrats of undermining their chances at the White House, especially if they fall into the trap that they did in 1968 and 1972 of not speaking out harshly enough against the disobedience, moving too far left and failing to deliver a unified economic message. Further, any attempt by Democrats to attack Trump for the human toll of his failed response to COVID-19 will ring hollow, so long as our cities are burning. The political risk to Democrats is becoming associated with the riots that have erupted in the wake of these tragedies and moving too far left in response, which would result in the party losing the White House and risking their House majority.  Make no mistake, there is no clear-minded American who was not horrified and heartbroken by the murders of George Floyd in Minnesota and Ahmaud Arbery in Georgia. However, the political risk to Democrats is becoming associated with the riots that have erupted in the wake of these tragedies and moving too far left in response, which would result in the party losing the White House and risking their House majority. In order to mitigate this risk, I propose the party follow a three-point plan. First, Democrats must emphasize unity, which involves both parties working together, not polarization and division. Second, Democrats must put forth legislation that is focused on underserved communities of color, which should be accomplished through a bold fourth stimulus bill that will get the economy moving by emphasizing business assistance and job creation. Yet, Senate Republicans have deemed the Heroes Act — a $3 trillion stimulus package that passed the House — as “dead on arrival,” given the cost and the fact that it contains what Republicans are calling a “liberal wish list.” Thus, Democrats should work to revise their fourth stimulus bill to be more moderate in cost and specifically focused on helping underserved communities and businesses. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Third, while Democrats can and should stand up for peaceful protests, they must draw a clear line at violence and civil disobedience, as well as looting, which we are seeing night after night. Further, Democrats must emphasize that violent protesters should and will be punished, and the party needs to mediate far-left voices that say otherwise. With this three-point plan, Democrats can avoid a defeat similar to 1968 and 1972. However, if Democrats move too far left while allowing riots and violence to define their party, Trump and the Republicans will, like Nixon, emerge victorious. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DOUG SCHOEN

 The filing of charges Wednesday against four fired Minneapolis police officers indicates the wheels of justice are turning quickly to hold accountable the individuals accused of responsibility for the death of George Floyd, a black man who was handcuffed on the ground and not resisting arrest. The charges are good news for Floyd’s family and good news for our nation, though tragically nothing can bring Floyd back to life or ease the pain of his loved ones and millions of people who never knew him but have been deeply affected by his death. Americans of good faith all welcome clear signals that police brutality is being taken seriously and addressed in a productive way. ROB SMITH: GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS AND AMERICA'S LOST BLACK BOYS AND YOUNG MEN The announcement that former officer Derek Chauvin has been charged with second-degree murder (up from an original charge of third-degree murder) and that charges of aiding and abetting second-degree murder have been filed against fired officers Thomas Lane, J. Alexander Kueng and Tou Thao sends such a signal. All four officers could face maximum sentences of 50 years in prison if convicted. But don’t hold your breath that these new developments in the Floyd murder case will quickly fix our broken race relations in the United States. The torturous death of Floyd has exposed a festering wound that has been lingering for some time. We must resist the temptation to put a disproportionate emphasis on a positive development in a single case. In terms of quelling the violent riots, we must remember that the perpetrators of the shameful crimes across U.S. cities in recent days were almost certainly not motivated by any sincere quest for justice in Floyd’s death. The reasons for the behavior of these lawbreakers – and their disregard for life and property – stem from far less noble impulses. Beyond that, however, the challenges of race relations on our continent have been 400 years in the making, and only through achieving long-term, consistent patterns of equal justice and opportunity can we make continued progress. On a positive note, our nation’s journey toward ensuring civil rights for all has trended in the right direction for a long time. Not long ago, many found it unimaginable that Americans would ever choose a person of color for president. And yet, in two consecutive elections we witnessed the election of a black president in a nation where three-quarters of the population is white. That can’t happen if America is a racist nation. We need to keep maturing morally and spiritually in the ways that we regard our neighbors of every racial and ethnic background. I believe that, to an overwhelming extent, most police actions involving the use of force are justified by the circumstances encountered by officers As long as there exists violent crime, however, we had best be prepared for difficult discussions anytime our police officers use lethal force – especially when that lethal force is directed against a black person. Before I became Indiana’s attorney general, I served as a county prosecutor for more than a decade. I know from experience that these incidents always prove challenging to communities. Unlike what we have seen in Minnesota, such incidents most often involve shootings. I believe that, to an overwhelming extent, most police actions involving the use of force are justified by the circumstances encountered by officers. Usually, investigations reveal that officers acted to protect themselves or others from legitimate threats to their lives. In a free society that promotes justice and accountability, police are necessary. We train our police in the reasonable use of force. We provide each officer with a badge and a gun and expect them to keep us safe even if it costs them their lives. And sometimes it does. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER When officers must use lethal force, we presume they are justified because that is the job we have asked them to do. At the same time, we always must conduct thorough investigations to confirm proper policies were followed. And whenever investigations prove officers were not justified, then they must face consequences – including arrest and prosecution when warranted. The reason that many black people harbor suspicions regarding law enforcement actions is that black lives historically have not always seemed to matter. Going back to colonial times in the 1600s, America has a long legacy of racial injustice – from the horrors of slavery to the harsh discrimination that persisted over the years that followed, including mob lynchings and other unspeakable crimes that the justice system too often ignored. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The dehumanizing segregation of Jim Crow defined the lives of black people even in the 20th century. Fairness and justice were all but absent, and the distrust that exists between blacks and “the system” in America will still take a while to overcome. Going forward, let us hope that we all can stand together as unhyphenated Americans and muster the courage to face our demons at this moment in time. The horrific death of George Floyd should never be forgotten as we continue working toward that more perfect union. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CURTIS HILL

The White House was non-committal about Joe Biden's vow to set up a police oversight board if elected; Doug McKelway reports. George Floyd’s murder is a wakeup call to America. And now young black men are screaming the loudest that police misconduct must come to an end. The decision Wednesday to upgrade charges against fired Minneapolis policeman Derek Chauvin to second-degree murder and to charge three other officers in the murder of Floyd was a positive step forward, but much more needs to be done. Chauvin is now charged with second-degree murder, while the three other officers are charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder. All four officers could face a maximum sentence of 50 years in prison if convicted. DEROY MURDOCK: TRUMP SHOULD DELIVER OVAL OFFICE ADDRESS ON RIOTING TEARING AMERICA APART My heart breaks for the family of George Floyd. And the family of Tamir Rice. And the family of Eric Garner. And the families for all of the other unarmed black men and women whose lives have been taken by police officers. My heart also breaks for the families of the dozens of people shot and killed in Chicago and other cities every weekend in America. It also breaks for the millions of African-American babies killed every year at the hands of Planned Parenthood. And it breaks for black police officers whose lives were lost in the riots, like retired St. Louis Police Capt. David Dorn. His black life mattered, too. My heart also breaks for the lost angry, and aimless young black men who commit violent crimes. And for the lives they’ve claimed, the bones they’ve broken, and the businesses and livelihoods they’ve destroyed. The rioting, looting and violence that have convulsed cities across America over the past few days are the culmination of years of failures on all sides of the political aisle to address the issues that have now broken America in ways that seemed impossible just months ago.  Black people killed or injured by other black people are no better off than black people victimized by police officers. A black business owner whose store is destroyed by a black mob is no better off than a black business owner whose store is destroyed by the Ku Klux Klan. The images of the looting, rioting, and awful violence that have permeated our airwaves and filled our social media feeds since Floyd was killed have sickened me as well. This is simply not sustainable as a country. Contrary to popular belief, there was no talk of “both sides” when it comes to conservative and liberal perspectives on Floyd’s murder. There was no “on the one hand” and “on the other hand.” Both sides seem to agree that Floyd’s senseless killing was a gross miscarriage of justice and that the officers involved should be punished. For a brief moment after the shocking video of Floyd’s murder came to light, law-and-order conservatives and Black Lives Matter leftists agreed on something, and it looked as if some sort of reconciliation was on the horizon. Then all hell broke loose. The rioting, looting and violence that have convulsed cities across America over the past few days are the culmination of years of failures on all sides of the political aisle to address the issues that have now broken America in ways that seemed impossible just months ago. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Conservatives declare themselves the law-and-order party while turning a blind eye to the ways in which the American criminal justice system is set up to disproportionately imprison young black men. Liberals wave the specter of “white racism” as a catch-all response for the ills of the African-American community. To them racism is the only explanation that has caused so many lost young black men to lash out in society in the ways we’ve seen on our screens. The explanation of liberals is never fatherlessness. It is never the toxicity of black-oriented pop culture. It is never the near-complete destruction of the African-American family. It is only racism. Always, racism. As I put it in my forthcoming book – “Always a Soldier: Service, Sacrifice, and Coming Out as America’s Favorite Black, Gay Republican” –  “our very modern social media and entertainment culture has managed to enslave the minds of young black people all over again. Liberal gatekeepers in our entertainment and journalism fields stoke the omnipresence of white racism to keep them from achieving their fullest potential. Ultra-wealthy and successful rappers and actors feed blacks a near-constant buffet of oppression to stay relevant and line their own pockets. The constant onslaught of the message of black victimhood in the social media era keeps young blacks locked in constant struggle with their ever-present white oppressors.” Young black people are angry, hurt and afraid. They’re kept that way by a chattering class who was just weeks ago advocating for extended COVID-19 lockdowns and is now crowdfunding to bail out rioters. We have seen this country descend into record levels of unemployment due to the coronavirus lockdown. We will only be able to douse the fire when we show up for these young black men, speak to them and convince them that the only change that will truly save them will start from within. Mental health issues are skyrocketing. A therapist I spoke with says his practice is at capacity with people trying to deal with post-lockdown depression. To dismiss the effects of the months of lockdown on what is happening right now would be foolish. The young black people who are now terrorizing American cities (with more than a little help from Antifa and members of other races) are lashing out because of fear and anger, but also because every societal safeguard against the kind of sustained violence we’re now seeing was taken away during the lockdown. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Face masks are now normalized. Parks and outdoor recreational activities were closed. Almost 40 million people in our country have lost their jobs, throwing many into dire financial straits. Millions of children and young people are out of school.  To me, the defining image of this moment in history is not any of the violence, the looting, or the overall insanity. It is a short video of a black teenager so overwhelmed with emotion at a protest that he sobs as a white police officer comforts him. As I said on Twitter, multiply the pain that young man is feeling right now times one million, and that is why America is burning. We will only be able to douse the fire when we show up for these young black men, speak to them and convince them that the only change that will truly save them will start from within. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It will start when they take control of their lives. It will start when they realize how much success they can have in America. It will start when they make genuine moves to break the cycle of poverty that causes so much of their anger, pain and frustration. America will continue to burn in ways visible and invisible because until we find a way to reach them, America’s lost black boys and young men are the embers that will spark the flames. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ROB SMITH

 David Dorn spent his last moments on Earth bleeding to death on a sidewalk in front of a looted shop early Tuesday. He was a retired police captain in St. Louis and he was protecting a store. Dorn was 77. His death was shown on Facebook Live. He was a black man. A family man. A good man.  Black lives matter. But not to looters, rioters and agitators. Shall we blame this on systemic racism? Who shot David Dorn? Who knows? A stranger? Maybe Seth Rogan or Patton Oswalt already bailed him out. ST. LOUIS POLICE CAPTAIN KILLED BY LOOTERS AT PAWN SHOP: REPORT Dorn’s son, Brian Powell said of his father’s death: “It was senseless – over TVs, over stuff that’s replaceable. They’re forgetting the real message for the protest and the positiveness that's supposed to come out of it and we get this negative light that’s shown on a situation that really needed light to be brought to it.” Dorn’s daughter-in-law, Vanessa Powell, said: “I just hope that the person that did this that they come forth or whatever because this is just so senseless, and I’m just I’m tired of it, I’m tired.” The fact is, fealty to the mob begets only more of the mob. Redefining bloodlust as justified leads to death. And not just David Dorn's, but a country's too. A day ago was Blackout Tuesday, when virtue-signalers set their Instagrams to all black to support the protests going on around the country. What an analogy for the media. The media blacks the violence to hide their culpability. Which protects incompetent leaders, criminals and an army of cowardly journalists. Their job: keep the chaos on endless repeat. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Maybe David Dorn's death can change things. Maybe we can protest loudly in his name and loudly demand action. It’s time, because there's no Superman coming to save the day for us. There's no one but us. And, to quote a CNN anchor, who says protests need to be peaceful? On CNN, Chris Cuomo said: “Please, show me where it says protesters are supposed to be polite and peaceful. Because I can show you that outraged citizens are the ones who have America what she is and led to any major milestones. Be honest, this is not a tranquil time.”  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP No thanks to Chris Cuomo. As cities are ravaged, he says protests don't have to be peaceful. Chris, I invite you to meet me in my neighborhood to see what outrage created – the ravaged stores, the dead-eyed looks from people trying to salvage what's left of their lives. If only they could work in media, and see the silver lining in their ruin. This is not a tranquil time. Thanks for the honesty, Chris. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five,” on June 3, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD 

 This column originally appeared in the Washington Times. Courtesy of our educational infrastructure having been transformed into leftist indoctrination centers, the result is politicians who care only about ideology where citizens are collateral damage in their march toward a leftist utopia. Our media is populated with news-actors who are similarly bound to their teachers’ idols of social justice, political correctness and identity politics. All of our institutions are suffering from the twin masters of identity politics and woke philosophy. In New York City during the riots, two individuals were arrested for attempting to bomb a marked New York Police Department cruiser with a Molotov cocktail. Upon arrest, police found additional material in the car to make more Molotov cocktails, and the booking complaint alleges they intended to hand out the bombs to other rioters. BEN SHAPIRO: GEORGE FLOYD'S DEATH, RIOTS AND THE LIBERAL MEDIA'S NONSENSICAL, DANGEROUS GAME The kicker? Both of the suspects are lawyers. One, Colinford Mattis, a 32-year-old man had been working with a corporate law firm in New York City, and is a graduate of Princeton University. The other, Urooj Rahman, a 31-year old woman, is a graduate of Fordham Law School and was admitted to the bar in 2019. On her Facebook page, she fashions herself a “human rights lawyer.” His background as an “anti-poverty intern” for a mayor of San Francisco was listed on LinkedIn, as well as being president of the Princeton Black Student Union. With such promising backgrounds and illustrious educations, we must ask, what went wrong? Education went wrong, which is a dangerous realization, considering its importance not just as a conveyer of information, but as an important and formidable influence on character and values. With the breakdown of the American family, for many, the leftist indoctrination at the academy is the only instruction on life and principles to which they’ve been exposed. On Twitter, the Federalist’s Molly Hemingway noted, “Battle lines are more clearly being drawn these days, between those who clearly believe America is irredeemably evil and must be violently overthrown and those who believe America remains greatest country on earth, based on rule of law, individual liberty, inalienable rights. Decades of public education have given former group a *huge* advantage, reinforced by media that awards itself prizes to indoctrinate message. Seriousness of that side now being impossible to ignore, however, finally forces rule of law side to realize fight must be engaged.” 
      Colinford Mattis and Urooj Rahman
       As leftists consumed public education, they accepted open-minded young people into their realm and are now vomiting them back up as heartless anarchists. The issue is not just at Ivy League institutions, it is a systemwide problem. Case in point is brought to us by the University of Alabama Birmingham (UAB). In the midst of violent rioting in dozens of cities across the United States, and on the same night rioters set fire to Washington, D.C.’s historic St. John’s Episcopal Church, Sarah Parcak, a faculty member of UAB went to Twitter encouraging people to topple a local monument she deemed a racist insult. “Ms. Parcak began coaching rioters about how to tear down monuments as networks covered the unrest in Washington on Sunday night. ‘PSA for ANYONE who might be interested in how to pull down an obelisk* safely from an Egyptologist who never ever in a million years thought this advice might come in handy,’ Ms. Parcak tweeted. She went on to fire off more than a dozen tweets demonstrating how protesters could topple obelisks …,” The Washington Times reported. As leftists consumed public education, they accepted open-minded young people into their realm and are now vomiting them back up as heartless anarchists. On Parcak’s bizarre tweet frenzy encouraging mayhem, Mark Bauerlein, the editor of First Things Magazine, a journal on religion and public life, said, “The crucial point in this maniacal tweet is that this professor has been honored by TED, the Smithsonian, and the Guggenheim,” and asked, “Many advocates of disorder now occupy elite institutions that have in the past been the guarantors of order. Who let them in?” CLICK HERE FOR THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Kyle Shideler, the director/senior analyst for homeland security and counterterrorism at the Center for Security Policy, has the most direct answer: “They took over the academy and all credentialing. The middle and lower-middle-class families in this country paid millions to let the Weather Underground raise their kids in hopes they would climb the social ladder,” as he responded on social media. A Fox News producer inquired with UAB if it had any comment about a faculty member encouraging the destruction of property and mayhem on a night when the nation was aflame in violence. UAB responded, “These are not the opinions of the university. Our 45,000+ students, faculty and staff often use social media to express thoughts that do not necessarily reflect the voice of the university. If a public comment by a member of the campus community needs to be addressed by Student Affairs or Human Resources, it would be. However, personnel and student conduct matters are addressed privately between the individual and the institution.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Whoever Mattis’ and Rahman’s professors were, they weren’t out fixing up Molotov cocktails Sunday night, but for some reason their young charges allegedly were. And Parcak was no doubt comfortable in a chair during the 10 p.m. hour on a Sunday as she was tweet-inciting others to put themselves and their futures at great risk. Why put yourself on the line when others who look up to you are too naive to know you’re stuffing them into a cannon? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TAMMY BRUCE

 There is a big debate about designating Antifa a terrorist group and what if any steps the federal government can take to stop the rioting. But we all know who the real culprits are for turning America’s streets into a war zone: progressives and liberals. They have filled the mind of America’s youth with ideological nitroglycerine that is now exploding in our streets, while also setting the conditions that make it almost impossible to stop it. The terrible events that have unfolded in the wake of the death of George Floyd represent the systematic failure of five decades of progressivism and liberalism. The end of the progressive dream has now brought us all to the brink in three ways. DEROY MURDOCK: TRUMP SHOULD DELIVER OVAL OFFICE ADDRESS ON RIOTING TEARING AMERICA APART First, we have too many progressive mayors and governors who can’t and won’t protect their own citizens and their property and businesses — or in the case of Mayor Bill De Blasio whose own children join in the rioting. This compounds their failed COVID-19 lockdown, aka the Great Confinement, which only precipitated a severe economic contraction — a contraction the riots now threaten to plunge into economic collapse. Second, since the 1960s, progressives have foisted on us a series of social policies that they promised would give us utopia but which have turned into a perpetual nightmare for America’s inner-city residents and poorest and most vulnerable. From welfare and community policing to abortion rights and racial preferences, these policies were supposed to bring a new America based on racial harmony and equality. When that failed, progressives blamed capitalism and white privilege instead of their own incompetence and malfeasance. These progressive social experiments have been especially bad for black America. Ironically, it turns out Donald Trump has been the best friend African-Americans have had in a generation. His policies pushed black unemployment to historic lows, and even set black wages on a track to rise faster than white wages — that is, until the lockdown and riots hit. Progressives may look at the broken glass, burning businesses and desecrated churches with a desperate satisfaction. They think this will finally spell the end of Trump.  The third failure has been the constant vilification of our police and law enforcement, to the point that they became targets for assassination. Worse, progressive policies have neutered urban police departments to the point they have been rendered impotent just when they are most needed. For four decades, from "Serpico" to "Law and Order," progressives in Hollywood and the liberal media have portrayed cops as corrupt, racist and sexist brutal thugs. So the public sees incidents like the death of George Floyd as characteristic of police tactics instead of an aberration. No society can survive when its defenders are attacked as the villains and its violent enemies are treated as heroes and victims. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER All these failures have come to a head in the past week. Progressives may look at the broken glass, burning businesses and desecrated churches with a desperate satisfaction. They think this will finally spell the end of Trump. History shows they’re wrong. The radicals and progressives who sparked the riots in 1968 also thought runaway violence would topple the establishment and sweep them into power. Instead, America defended itself from anarchy by giving its vote to the declared law and order candidates in the 1968 presidential election. Together Richard Nixon and George Wallace took a total of 57 percent of the popular vote. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP America doesn’t commit suicide so easily, then or now. Our progressive politicians and ideologues have sowed the seeds of what’s happening in our streets. If they aren’t willing to help solve the problem, then they must reap the whirlwind. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BEN SHAPIRO

 Joe Biden launched his campaign by declaring the 2020 election would be “a battle for the soul of our nation.” As bad slogans go, I gave it at a NINE on a scale of, “One to I’m With Her.” It was a straw man argument meant to characterize his opponent as a comic book villain hell-bent on destroying the nation. Hardly the stuff that woos voters who prefer substance over an imaginary job as a Marvel Avenger. But if Biden had a bad slogan then, it’s a worse slogan now when the country is literally on fire and much of the destruction has been caused by far-left groups like Antifa. LIZ PEEK: GEORGE FLOYD RIOTING – BIDEN DOESN'T GET IT. IT'S THE SAFETY, STUPID Does anyone really think the “Soul of Our Nation” belongs anywhere near a group who claims to be fighting racism by burning down minority-owned businesses? The same organized protesters who’ve looted stores, beaten owners, torched a police station, and countless police cars to go with it? St. John’s Church was founded in 1816 and played host to every president since James Madison before it was set on fire Sunday night. If you think the soul of our nation should reside with that mindset, I don’t want a hit of your smoking because chances are it’s way too strong for me. To be clear, I’m not accusing Democratic leadership of endorsing violence, nor am I saying that every Republican voter is a choir boy. But when members of the Biden campaign are bailing out protesters arrested in the Minneapolis riots, it’s hardly a show of support for the fireman who invested his life savings to open a bar only to watch it get burnt to the ground by those same “protesters.” Nor is it an economic pick me up for dozens of local businesses who were already reeling from the distress brought on by the coronavirus lockdowns. The thing that makes this moment so frustrating is that the whole country agreed on the need to bring justice for George Floyd’s death. There was no additional video context needed and zero room for debate. We were all on board with peaceful protests although I should point out that if you’re peacefully holding up a sign that says “Defund the Police,” you’re also doing so idiotically. Yes, we’re all heartbroken by what happened to George Floyd, no, we’re not all dumb enough to think we can have a society without police. Nor are we okay with seeing them attacked and killed the way we have. President Trump vowed to restore order during Monday’s address in the Rose Garden and floated the idea of invoking the 200-year-old Insurrection Act, which would allow him to mobilize the military to combat the violence. You can argue with the idea of using troops but you cannot argue with the need to maintain the rule of law after a week in which the images beamed into our living rooms have often looked less like a protest and more like a full-on societal collapse. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER For his part, Joe Biden trashed the move during Tuesday’s speech in Philadelphia and urged Congress to get to work right away on excising systemic racism. Which begs the question: if America has been plagued by decades of systemic bias, what was he doing during his 40 years in government, eight of which were spent as Vice President under our nation’s first black president? Talk about finding Jesus a little late in the service. We live in the greatest country in the world. Yet Democrats love to depict it as a giant racist hellhole, which completely ignores the enormous amount of racial progress we’ve made in the past 50 years. We’re clearly not perfect, far from It. But we’re never going to get there if we can’t even acknowledge the people who sacrificed so much to get us here. I won’t ask the Democratic Party why they continue to put the need to score political points ahead of the need to have an honest conversation. Nor will I ask why all of this chaos seems to be happening exclusively in Democratically-run cities like Chicago, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, New York, and Minneapolis, which has been plagued by poor relations between police and black citizens for 50 years, the vast majority of which occurred under Democratic rule. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP What I will ask you, my fellow voter, is this: If the 2020 election is truly a referendum on whether or not the Democrats get to “own our soul,” shouldn’t we at least solicit a bid from the devil? Surely he’s offering a better deal than this. CLICK HERE TO GET MORE FROM JIMMY FAILLA

 In the wake of riots that have spread across America, leaving shattered businesses and wounded communities in their wake, it feels as though our nation is collapsing around us. That's bizarre, considering that virtually all Americans agree with the following two propositions: first, that it is evil for a police officer to place his knee on the neck of a prone suspect struggling to breathe for eight long minutes. Second, that breaking store windows; stealing televisions and shoes; beating business owners; attacking police officers is wrong. DEROY MURDOCK: TRUMP SHOULD DELIVER OVAL OFFICE ADDRESS ON RIOTING TEARING AMERICA APART That seeming unanimity should mean unity in the face of police brutality and rioting and looting. It doesn't. It doesn't because members of our political class have decided that instead of rallying against obvious evil, Americans must be categorized as enlightened or benighted based on their answer to one question: Was America and is America rooted in racism and bigotry? If you answer in the negative, you are complicit in racism and bigotry, say our media, academic leaders and high-ranking members of the Democratic Party. If you answer in the affirmative, you may be categorized among the woke, the aware, the sensitive and the decent. This is a nonsensical and dangerous game. But it's a game pressed forward by the most powerful messaging institutions in our society: our media, who award Pulitzer Prizes to faux history like The 1619 Project, which argues that every American institution has been fatally corrupted by America's original sin, slavery, and that every inequality of today can find its root in inequities of the past; our celebrities, who proudly proclaim that rights to free speech, property ownership and due process are merely facades for the continuing and malign maintenance of structural inequalities; and too many of our politicians, who casually attribute every instance of police brutality to deep-seated American racism. Members of our political class have decided that instead of rallying against obvious evil, Americans must be categorized as enlightened or benighted based on their answer to one question: Was America and is America rooted in racism and bigotry? These are lies. America's history is replete with racism and oppression, but that's because America didn't hold true to her founding ideals; America's philosophy is good and true, and her flaws are thanks to her failures to follow that philosophy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER It is a lie to attack Americans' fundamental rights as outgrowths of persecution. And it's a damnable calumny to liken the treatment of black Americans in 2020 to the treatment of black Americans in 1960, let alone 1860. Yet we are told by our institutional elites that to point out these lies is to refuse responsibility, to provide cover for racism. Declaring America's most fundamental structures corrupt and cancer-ridden is deeply dangerous. Once a structure has been condemned, its foundations declared unstable, it can only be destroyed. There is no way to argue that fealty to a particular political program inside that supposedly corrupt structure can fix the problem. Former President Barack Obama, who declares that discrimination exists in "almost every institution of our lives," and that "the legacy of slavery, Jim Crow ... that's still part of our DNA that's passed on," says that voting for local officials is the solution to police brutality and individual instances of racism. Somehow, so long as we vote for the same Democratic politicians who have governed nearly every major American city for decades, America's founding sins can be extirpated. Is anyone expected to believe this? Our elites cannot set fire to the fundamentals of America and then hope to contain that fire to occasional trips to the voting booth. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So Americans are left with a choice. We can either think of one another with charity and accuracy, acknowledging the sins of America's past while recognizing that America remains a beacon of freedom and decency. Or we can continue to follow the path of those who would tear us apart. To follow the latter course isn't sensitive or moral. It places the very existence of our common republic at risk. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BEN SHAPIRO

 Peaceful protests in the wake of the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis have been highjacked by people with malevolent intentions. Protests are acceptable, violent attacks on people and property are not. Like me, you may be wondering why so many people are justifying rioting and looting by mobs of Marxists and anarchists intent on burning America. Many media outlets and political leaders are conflating criminally violent behavior with constitutionally protected expression. When people around the country grew increasingly frustrated with the tyrannical lockdowns imposed on America by peacefully gathering throughout the country, Leftist politicians and journalists were highly critical. They castigated people who felt victimized by government action. TOM HOMAN: MESSAGE TO ALL THE GOOD COPS OUT THERE – AMERICANS STAND WITH YOU But those who carried signs protesting the lockdowns and spoke out to try and influence their political leaders, did so in peaceful and lawful ways. Did you see any of them bashing windows of stores with bats, brutally beating people or lighting buildings on fire? No. What you might have noticed was the mainstream media failing to address the issues claimed by the COVID protesters but attacking them for not universally wearing facemasks or adequately socially distancing, or for even having the temerity to protest at all. The tragic death of George Floyd sparked concerns about race throughout the country. Many were moved to speak out and march in sympathetic protest. Those who were protesting had a legitimate cause and were exercising rights to assemble and to speak. Unfortunately, the focus of America is no longer on how to correct very real problems in our country; our focus is on whether we will continue as ”one nation under God.” Leftists and anarchists, such as Antifa, have highjacked the protests and incited rioting, wreaking murderous havoc around the country. These evil people seek the destruction of America. The crazy criminals who are attacking order, police and Americans are motivated by a philosophy that the world would be better off without the United States. The thin blue line tries to protect every person’s rights. They need to show force. They need to make arrests. They need the support of the National Guard. They need the support of political leaders.   These people are a small number of the violent mobs. They effectively use social media and Alinsky-like tactics. Saul Alinsky once said, “Pick the target, freeze it, personalize it and polarize it. Cut off the support network and isolate the target from sympathy. Go after people and not institutions. (This is cruel, but very effective. Direct, personalized criticism and ridicule works.)” At the same time, you have these Alinsky anarchists targeting police and business owners, you also have those who are simply criminals. They view these attacks on Americans as an opportunity to steal private property and greedily enrich themselves. A recent interview of a Southern California looter captured by police included an admission by the criminal that he wasn’t there to protest; he had come only to get money and stuff. We have also seen organizations put together to systematically rob stores. Then you have those who are racing out simply to be one of the “mob.” Mob activity is almost always out of control. It is people who are not restraining their emotions and allowing their adrenaline to take over. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Outrageous acts by so-called “leaders” in this country added fuel to the fire over the last week. For example, there was a directive to abandon the Minneapolis police precinct. This was the match that lit the fire of national rioting. It emboldened those with malevolent intentions to burn down that police station and carry their violence to the streets. That failure of leadership allowed meaningful protests to be rerouted to the national anarchy we see today. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Why are our political leaders acting like we have never seen this type of activity before? We need to regain control of our freedoms. The thin blue line tries to protect every person’s rights. They need to show force. They need to make arrests. They need the support of the National Guard. They need the support of political leaders. Once we have restored order, then peaceful protests and discussions can proceed. All Americans deserve to have their rights protected. But those who seek to destroy human lives and property, or loot Americans, must be caught, arrested and prosecuted. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. ANDY BIGGS

 Like the rest of the nation, I was deeply disturbed by the video that captured George Floyd’s final moments. It was a terrible thing that happened. Those responsible will be held accountable based on the facts presented through a criminal justice system that is one of the best in the world. Like the rest of the nation, I have been watching television and seeing what this country is going through since that day in Minneapolis. Many people in America are making their voices heard by peaceful protests and demanding attention and change. That is just one of the things that make this country one of the greatest in the world.   However, when peaceful protests turn violent the message is lost. When protesters turn into criminals or are overshadowed by the rampant criminal activity of rioters, it is just plain wrong. LIZ PEEK: GEORGE FLOYD RIOTING – BIDEN DOESN'T GET IT. IT'S THE SAFETY, STUPID I know protesters well. When I was with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), there were many protests in front of our building in Washington, D.C.  I was third in command at one point and professionally insulted when the director issued a shelter-in-place order. I could not believe that federal law enforcement officers were expected to hide inside the building during a legal protest. What were we afraid of? In my first week as acting ICE director, appointed by President Trump, I changed that policy. I didn’t want our law enforcement officers to fear any peaceful protest. We will not hide and we will not be victimized by such demonstrations. It is America in action. I once had about 80 protesters at my home on a Sunday morning, yelling and chanting what a terrible person I was and calling for ICE and Customs and Border Protection to be abolished. I was being called a Nazi, a racist and a bigot.  Of course, I was offended because I am not any of these things, but I knew they had the right to their opinion and a right to protest. I also thought they were directing their protest at the wrong person and institutions. If they didn’t like the fact that CBP and ICE were enforcing the laws enacted by Congress, they should have been on Capitol Hill urging their elected representatives to change the laws. I have had similar feelings over the past week. Americans have the right to protest but the hate they are showing to the law enforcement officers monitoring the protests is uncalled for. Spitting on them, calling them names, shoving them, or worse, is not peaceful protest and detracts from any meaning the protest may have had. These officers were not involved in the incident in Minneapolis. They are standing there trying to keep the peace and do their jobs. They see you trying to defend our communities, our lives and our property, and they stand shoulder to shoulder with you in spirit.    Those who are using this tragedy to riot are not protesters, they are criminals. They are assaulting people, destroying property, stealing merchandise by looting and ruining the lives of innocent business owners who are trying to recover and survive after COVID-19 lockdowns pretty much devastated their businesses. There is absolutely NO JUSTIFICATION for rioting and these criminals need to be held accountable. They need to be arrested and charged. There should be zero tolerance for rioting. I agree with President Trump that we must restore law and order now with all legal means available. To the police officers around the country who are being attacked, I say, America stands with you. There may be thousands of rioters out there but there are millions of Americans who are disgusted by that behavior. They see you trying to defend our communities, our lives and our property, and they stand shoulder to shoulder with you in spirit. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In the last week, one federal guard has been killed in Oakland, and another critically injured. A police officer was shot in the head in Las Vegas. Numerous other police officers have been injured, as well as many Secret Service agents. Law enforcement must be allowed to take back the streets. Too many politicians are tying the hands of law enforcement, and not providing the resources these patriots need to do the job they have sworn to do. Some remained silent during the rioting and only spoke out when the president walked across the street from the White House to a church, which had been burned by rioters. Where is their leadership on this issue? They seem to want chaos because they think it hurts our president. I have said it many times and I will continue to say it: They hate this president more than they love this country. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP A poem written years ago by an unknown author reminds us who the vast majority of men and women law enforcement really are. This is part of it: While you sleep, they’re out there. 
When you are sitting down to Thanksgiving dinner or celebrating Christmas, they’re out there. 
When it’s their children’s birthday, they’re out there.  
While you are asleep with your spouse or significant other, their spouse sleeps alone.   
At your job you strive to succeed, at their job they strive to survive.  
When you are scared you call them.   
When they are scared, they carry on.   
When most people put on a suit or dress to go to work, they put on a Kevlar vest and a gun.  
When you tell your families “See you tonight” as you leave for work, you mean it.  
When they say it, we pray they will.   CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TOM HOMAN

 First they smashed the windows of police cars, and our elected leaders said nothing. It's a political protest, they told us. We stand with the protesters. Before long it grew. Mobs of menacing young men formed in the streets. They were clearly intent on violence, but no one in authority dared criticize them. DE BLASIO CALLS ON CUOMO TO APOLOGIZE TO NYPD AS PETTY FEUD CONTINUES DESPITE RIOTS We understand their frustration, our leaders told us. America is a sinful country. Their grievances are legitimate. And so the mobs grew larger, and they grew emboldened. Last Thursday, they came right to the front door of a police precinct in Minneapolis. The cops inside fled under orders from their mayor. The mob burned the building. But before they did, they looted the evidence room, and that ensured that many violent crimes will never be solved. They did this in the name of justice. Still, our leaders did nothing. Most of them never even mentioned it, like it never happened. Instead, they issued yet more statements in solidarity with the mob. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Politicians, celebrities, corporate leaders, clergy, news anchors, professional athletes -- almost every person in this country that we were raised from childhood to look up to, to respect, to listen to -- all of them sided with the people burning police stations. The mob saw this and grew stronger. On Monday night, they began shooting cops. For 38 years, David Dorn was a police officer in the City of St. Louis. No one ever accused Dorn of racism. He was black. He is dead now. He was murdered Monday night by the mob. His killing was streamed live on Facebook, and then the violence accelerated from there. In St. Louis alone, four other active duty police officers were shot Monday night. In Las Vegas, an officer took a bullet in the head. He is still in critical condition. Once the sun went down, cops all around this country found themselves under attack. How many more nights like this can we take? How many more nights like this before no one in America will serve as a police officer? It's not worth it. The people in charge hate you. The job doesn't pay enough. At that point, who will enforce the laws? Who will be in charge? Well, violent young men with guns will be in charge. They will make the rules, including the rules in your neighborhood. They will do what they want. You will do what they say. No one will stop them. You will not want to live here when that happens. Chaos is the worst thing always, and wise leaders understand that. It's obvious. But it's not obvious to Joe Biden. Biden gave a speech in Philadelphia Tuesday and was very different from the Biden of old. For years, Biden styled himself a patriot, a champion of ordinary people, but no longer. In Tuesday's speech, Biden said nothing to defend police officers being murdered. Instead, he attacked them as instruments of "systemic racism." Joe Biden, presumptive Democratic presidential nominee: The moment has come for our nation to deal with systemic racism, to deal with the growing economic inequity that exists in our nation, to deal with the denial of the promise of this nation made to so many. Our country is crying out for leadership, leadership that can unite us, leadership that brings us together. Leadership that can recognize pain and deep grief of communities that have had a knee on their neck for a long time. "The moment has come," says Joe Biden. This is the moment. So the question is, how did murdering David Dorn advance the cause of racial justice exactly? No one explains; Biden didn't. Meanwhile, Biden's staff continues to send money to the rioters. Other Democrats followed in perfect sync. How many more nights like this can we take? How many more nights like this before no one in America will serve as a police officer? It's not worth it. The people in charge hate you. The job doesn't pay enough. In the city of Seattle, Councilwoman Tammy Morales all but endorsed the destruction of her own city. Tammy Morales, Seattle councilwoman: What I don't want to hear is for our constituents to be told to be civil, not to be reactionary, to be told that looting doesn't solve anything. And you know, it does make me wonder and ask the question why looting bothers people so much more than knowing that across the country, black men and women are dying every day, and far too often at the hands of those who are sworn to protect and serve. Looting does solve things, says Tammy Morales. How dare you criticize it? Prosecutors exist to push back against violations of the law. But across the country, many prosecutors seem on board with Tammy Morales and Joe Biden. In the city of Dallas, a local report says the District Attorney John Creuzot is refusing to process rioters. That means they will automatically be freed to riot again. In Massachusetts, the state attorney general, Maura Healey, applauded the riots and did it explicitly. She described the killing and looting underway as "a once in a lifetime opportunity. Yes, America is burning, but that's how forests grow." This is the only revolution in history that's being waged not on behalf of the working class, but against them. That's a verbatim quote from the chief law enforcement officer of Massachusetts. Maura Healey is happy to see American society become mulch. It makes good fertilizer. The press isn't simply covering the riots, meanwhile, but assisting the riots. At The New York Times, the most recent Pulitzer Prize winner, 2020 winner Nikole Hannah Jones, said that words you thought you knew the meaning of now have completely different meanings. Violence, for example, when she supports it, isn't really violence. Nikole Hannah-Jones, The New York Times: Violence is when an agent of the state kneels on a man's neck until all of the life is leached out of his body. Destroying property which can be replaced is not violence and to put those things -- to use the exact same language to describe those two things, I think, really -- it's not moral. Violence is not violence if I approve of it. The person you were just listening to won the Pulitzer Prize. There's something wrong with our system if that's the person who gets the biggest merit badge. BuzzFeed, meanwhile, published a guide for rioters. It included helpful tips like this: Wear nondescript clothing, cover up tattoos, don't take photographs. CNN didn't criticize it. Needless to say, they're on board. Jim Acosta, CNN chief White House correspondent: It's so remarkable to see military-style vehicles rolling through the White House complex, you know, I mean? It's just not something that you normally see in the United States of America. It's something that you see in more authoritarian countries. Don Lemon, CNN anchor: Open your eyes, America. Open your eyes. We are teetering on a dictatorship. We are -- this is chaos. Has the president -- I am listening -- is the president declaring war on Americans? I hope that they stand up and fight for their rights. Now the entire country, according to his orders, we're living under a militarized country. He is playing a very dangerous game because this will backfire. Uh-huh.  It's dangerous when we try and stop looting and burning and killing, says Don Lemon. I hope they stand up and fight, he says from the safety of his television studio. But what exactly are they fighting for? They certainly are fighting. But why? Don't ask Don Lemon. He doesn't know -- not a reader. Something about Trump probably. What does Black Lives Matter say? Much of the rioting is being committed in their name. Go to their website if you have a minute. Here's a post from three days ago: "Defund the police." That's the position of Black Lives Matter, the most popular group in America among corporate leaders. Defund the police. No more cops. That's what they're fighting for. That seems like a fringe position, but in the Democratic Party, it isn't anymore. Congresswoman Rashida Tlaib has endorsed it as a sitting member. So has Jane Fonda, and so have many other celebrities. They said so in a recent open letter. Then three days ago, The New York Times published a piece making the same demand: "No more money for the police." No police. That's right, the article calls for the elimination of all cops and all prisons in the United States. So, if we did that, who would keep order? Well, The New York Times has an answer to that: "Rapid response, social workers would keep the peace." Alternative emergency response programs -- that's their plan. If you live in a gated community, it might sound like a good idea. You've got your own police force. You have no plans to replace them with rapid response social workers. So, you're set, no matter what happens. There aren't going to be any rapes on your street. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But what about everyone else? What's going to happen to them? Don Lemon and Rashida Tlaib don't care at all. Your neighborhood is not their problem. They're in it for the revolution, and make no mistake, it is a revolution from above, aimed downward. This is the only revolution in history that's being waged not on behalf of the working class, but against them. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on June 2, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 Former Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein will find few allies when he testifies before the Senate Judiciary Committee Wednesday regarding the origins of the investigation of alleged collusion between the Trump campaign and Russia in the 2016 presidential election. Republicans will blame Rosenstein for Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) abuses and an aggressive investigation by Special Counsel Robert Mueller that yielded nothing of substance concerning President Trump or his campaign. Democrats will attack Rosenstein for his role in concluding that President Trump did not commit obstruction of justice and ending their dream of an indictment. ROD ROSENSTEIN TESTIFYING ON CAPITOL HILL WEDNESDAY ABOUT RUSSIA PROBE: WHAT TO KNOW Neither of these two views captures the complex reality of Rosenstein’s tenure. In reality, Rosenstein’s decisions helped preserve the integrity of the Justice Department while protecting President Trump from FBI leadership gone rogue and Democrats hell-bent on removing the president from office. Upon Rosenstein’s confirmation in April 2017, the Justice Department was at the center of a storm unprecedented in its history. Since Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself the previous month from the Russia collusion investigation, upon confirmation Rosenstein became acting attorney general for a federal investigation that received enormous news coverage. At that point, the investigation itself was being conducted by the FBI under the leadership of Director James Comey, who repeatedly kept Obama administration Attorney General Loretta Lynch and Acting Attorney General Sally Yates in the dark about his machinations. To make matters worse, the Justice Department was largely devoid of political appointees in the early days of the Trump administration. Interviews with potential new U.S. attorneys had not begun and the assistant attorney general for the National Security Division was a year away from confirmation. This latter point is key. The lack of a Senate-confirmed assistant attorney general for the National Security Division meant that Rosenstein was approving FISA applications in addition to his job of managing the Justice Department. As does everyone in senior management positions, Rosenstein relied on supposedly competent and trustworthy people to brief him – and that is likely one of the reasons why he agreed to approve the extension of the FISA warrant on Trump campaign foreign policy adviser Carter Page. It didn’t take Rosenstein long to learn that Comey’s insubordinate behavior would not be limited to Lynch and Yates. When Comey testified in front of the Senate Judiciary Committee on May 3, 2017, senior staff at the Justice Department were floored by his unwillingness to admit that his decisions in 2016 were misguided. The next week Comey was fired, and Rosenstein’s views were clearly laid out in a memo to Attorney General Sessions. Things did not improve with Acting FBI Director Andrew McCabe. Following the termination of Comey, McCabe opened an investigation into Trump without Rosenstein’s input. In fact, it appeared that McCabe and others at the FBI were of the opinion that Rosenstein was complicit in obstruction of justice. With the Russia investigation now spiraling out of control, Rosenstein had to make a decision. He could shut down an investigation that, at that point, he had no basis to think might not be fully on the level. Had he done that, when Democrats took control of the House in 2018 they would have had all the ammunition to cook up the kind of impeachment that would actually have had a chance for bipartisan support and possible removal of the president. Another option was to let McCabe and friends use the power of the FBI to get a president removed. That was a non-starter. The third option would have been to assign a U.S. attorney to supervise the investigation, but with no Trump-nominated U.S. attorneys on board, Rosenstein clearly wasn’t comfortable with this option, nor should he have been. Therefore, Rosenstein appointed Robert Mueller as special counsel to take over the investigation, which was completed far quicker than other high-profile independent investigations. This was probably Rosenstein’s best option, yet it was obviously not without its own problems. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As we learned later, Peter Strzok, Lisa Page, and Andrew Weissman should not have been on the Mueller team. Aggressive tactics to flip the likes of National Security Adviser Michael Flynn and Trump campaign foreign policy adviser George Papadopoulos – though standard fare for prosecutors in all manner of cases – upended lives to investigate a president who turned out to be innocent. And of course, President Trump had to deal with close to two years of leaks, fake news and Democrats salivating for his removal. Rosenstein’s legacy is far more complex than what his detractors will claim. His motivation was to preserve the integrity of the Justice Department, part of which included protecting the president by taking the investigation out of the hands of a severely compromised Andrew McCabe. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This also had the effect of House Democrats putting all their faith in the Mueller investigation, which completely backfired and ended their drive to remove President Trump from office over their collusion fantasies. While Trump was impeached by the House, he was acquitted in his trial in the Senate. Faced with limited options and the world watching, Rosenstein made the best decisions he could. Those decisions may not have made Republicans or Democrats happy, but that was never his job. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY IAN PRIOR

 With the invisible threat of a virus and the all-too-visible scar of urban riots, there is little bandwidth among the commentariat to report on the precarious state of a key part of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA). This is understandable, but unfortunate. Long after we have a coronavirus vaccine and our cities are once again at peace, the potential for the misuse of this law could still shadow the freedoms of every American. Why does FISA have the potential to unravel? It primarily stems from over six months of continued revelations about misconduct by the FBI, Justice Department and associated political actors. ROD ROSENSTEIN TESTIFYING ON CAPITOL HILL WEDNESDAY ABOUT RUSSIA PROBE: WHAT TO KNOW Justice Department Inspector General Michael Horowitz’s report detailed the FBI’s errors of omission and commission (including a doctored document in sworn testimony to the FISA Court denying my assistance to the CIA). Horowitz next documented that 29 FISA applications out of a sample of 29 were flawed. Finally, came the revelations that the FBI invented a criminal predicate to lure National Security Adviser Michael Flynn into a meaningless legal trap. In doing so, the FBI greatly exceeded its authority while second-guessing President Trump about the fitness of Flynn to serve in his position. Former Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein, who helped lead the charge on much of what has happened during these fateful years that followed, will testify Wednesday before the Senate Judiciary Committee, chaired by Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. No doubt Graham will have many questions for Rosenstein. Many other Americans, including me, have countless questions as well. What was Rosenstein thinking when he approved the fourth and final of my FISA warrants, after so many of the lies that precipitated this fiasco had already been debunked? How did that application manage to elide all the exculpatory evidence the FBI held about me and other supporters of President Trump? Did the bureau lie to Rosenstein as well, or was he somehow complicit? When Rosenstein faces tough questioning in the committee room, he will have to think quickly on his feet as many members of the Senate express their outrage and concern. Thanks to Rosenstein, I know what that feels like. I have little doubt, however, that Rosenstein – accomplished lawyer that he is – will manage to once again say a lot and nothing at the same time. I expect no bombshell revelations. These continued realities underscore the wisdom of President Trump’s recent tweet that stopped the reauthorization of a major FISA provision cold. Section 215, known as the business record provision, allows the FBI to snoop without a warrant on any information we give to businesses – from video on a doorbell camera, to your search history and web-browsing data. In recent months, an odd-fellows coalition of progressives and conservatives rebelled against this state of affairs. When the leadership of both houses of Congress initially tried to tamp down debate, it sparked a revolt by these reformers. Conservative and liberal stalwarts – Republican Sen. Mike Lee of Utah and Democratic Sen. Patrick Leahy of Vermont – enlisted a legal expert in privacy law with a high-level security clearance to examine applications to surveil political campaigns, officeholders, religious and media organizations. That measure passed 77 to 19 in the Senate. The House was on the verge of passing another measure, favored by a similar left-right coalition, to protect Americans’ online search histories and web browsing data when President Trump upended the whole thing with a tweet that promised to veto this reauthorization altogether. The president’s calculation seems to be precisely the crowbar needed here, rather than a scalpel. Those who support the U.S. Constitution and the civil liberties of all Americans are right to demand that Washington should wait until there is a full accounting of the abuse of FISA from 2016 to 2017 before even considering the reauthorization of any part of FISA. With a large number of progressive critics of the surveillance state finding common ground with both the White House and many Republicans, there is an appetite now to allow FISA authorities to continue to expire. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Building upon the brave moves by former acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell, a few guardians of civil liberties within the federal bureaucracy have begun taking further important steps to declassify a range of essential documents. After countless decades of limited accountability, these important measures have sparked a new movement toward unprecedented levels of transparency in the national security state. The reformers’ strategic goal is clear. Before any FISA authority can be reauthorized, we must document how the law was used to foment a soft coup against an American president, radically disrupting the smooth transition of power for the first time in our nation’s history. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Having signed that final false warrant against me in June 2017, Rosenstein has a chance to serve his country by finally coming clean. Over the coming months, federal prosecutor John Durham and other authorities in the Justice Department can follow up with the ongoing investigations. By answering many unanswered questions about this FBI and DOJ abuse, this will mark an essential next step towards bringing any perpetrators to justice. Only then can we think about restoring confidence in a broken system, rebuilding FISA from the ground up, including with sensible provisions like those back by Sens. Lee and Leahy and the online privacy reforms.

 President Trump has promised to quell the violent attack on our country, and said: “Where there is no safety, there is no future.” He is correct. Never before in our country’s history have our elected officials – officials who have taken an oath to uphold our laws and pledged to keep us safe – stood aside and let rioters destroy our communities. It is unconscionable, it is reckless and it will be very, very costly to repair. In a “virtual roundtable” with several Democrat mayors of cities under siege, Joe Biden said he believed the terrible death of George Floyd, captured on a video seen by millions, was a turning point for the nation. “The blinders have been taken off”, the presumptive Democrat nominee said, “People are ready for real institutional change.” BISHOP T.D. JAKES: RACE AND POLICING – CHURCH LEADERS MUST DRIVE NATIONAL CONVERSATION, ACTION PLAN The former vice president, somewhat scrambled by his habitual word salad, appeared to suggest that tackling “systemic racism” would require that, among other things, minority communities be given better access to capital with which to start businesses; further on in his comments he stressed the importance of small businesses. Yes, investment in minority communities is essential to their prosperity; it is also impossible without firm law enforcement. History tells us so. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That’s why the tragedy is not that luxury stores on Rodeo Drive or Madison Avenue are being vandalized and Louis Vuitton handbags carried off by greedy criminals, though those acts are despicable. The tragedy is that poor black neighborhoods, already ravaged by COVID-19, have been ransacked, destroying stores, livelihoods and dreams. The former can and will be rebuilt; the latter may never recover. A look back at Ferguson, Mo., where riots broke out in 2014 because of the fatal cop shooting of Michael Brown, suggests just how tough rebuilding can be. The Wall Street Journal reported last summer on the fifth anniversary of those protests that unemployment in the St. Louis suburb was 5.5 percent compared to 3.3 percent in St. Louis County, while the poverty rate was 23 percent, compared to 10 percent in the region. Crime in the city is higher than in most neighboring towns and worse than in 90 percent of other U.S. cities.  Small-business revenue in the community, five years out, was down by roughly 50 percent. And that is in spite of considerable new investment in Ferguson. A devastated block of West Florissant Avenue, where the unarmed teen was shot, now hosts a new $12 million Boys and Girls Club, and the Urban League built a job training center on another burned-out block. But the bulk of new investment has gone into wealthier white neighborhoods. The Washington Post reported in 2018, “Of the more than $36 million in bricks-and-mortar development that poured into the city after 2014, only $2.4 million … has directly benefited this isolated [poor] pocket of Ferguson …” Nobody will invest in neighborhoods, or cities for that matter, unless local authorities can guarantee protection from the kind of wanton destruction we have seen in recent days. And people will not move into those areas unless they feel safe.  The Post claimed this was the result of a “corporate mindset willing to take on only so much risk.” Yes, investors will not build in a community still viewed as unsafe. The Watts area of Los Angeles has a similar history. The 1965 riots that took place in that California neighborhood over six days claimed 34 lives, injured over 1,000 people and destroyed $40 million in property. The mostly black community is now mostly Hispanic, but the stats some 50 years later, stayed depressingly constant. According to the Los Angeles Daily News, writing in 2015, “The median household income is about $28,700 versus $56,266 for L.A. County households … Less than half of Watts residents over 25 graduated from high school versus 76 percent in L.A. County. And while nearly 60 percent of the neighborhood’s population is eligible to be in the labor force, only half that is participating in it ...” Like Ferguson, Watts saw a sizable inflow of capital and building after the riots devastated the city. Numerous organizations, including Bank of America and Charles Drew University, invested in Watts, but “urban renewal did not materialize,” as one local authority noted. Ongoing gang and street violence have stifled progress. Nobody will invest in neighborhoods, or cities for that matter, unless local authorities can guarantee protection from the kind of wanton destruction we have seen in recent days. And people will not move into those areas unless they feel safe. The task ahead is momentous. Poor and rich neighborhoods across the country have been destroyed; the damage will cost billions of dollars to repair. This wreckage comes on top of the calamity of COVID-19, which had already pummeled economic activity and crushed job growth. Our cities, just recently thought to hold the future, could be in trouble. Many have started to question the assumption that young people will inevitably choose urban living. That trend had been underway, denoted by data points like fewer college graduates learning to drive and sinking suburban real estate prices. But now, young people are witnessing the downside of city living: because of the coronavirus, cities appear less healthy and the George Floyd riots have made them appear less safe. Mayors will inevitably raise taxes to plug deficits and to begin the clean-up, boosting the already high cost of living. These are dangerous trends, which could bring cities to their knees overnight. The hardship will not be evenly distributed. Most likely, the prosperous sections of Manhattan and Beverly Hills will be cleaned up within months. But minority communities in Minneapolis or Los Angeles may never fully recover, and especially if the Democrat leaders in those cities continue to dumb down law enforcement and refuse to guarantee safety. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Joe Biden never mentioned how he would restore order. He cannot. He desperately needs the support of African-American voters, and is tainted by his association with the 1994 Crime Bill, which many see as having resulted in the mass incarceration of blacks. If elected, Biden would not help create the environment where small firms can flourish and opportunity can grow. Joe Biden would be exactly the wrong person at the helm. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LIZ PEEK

 President Trump should wield one of the biggest wrenches in his toolbox and do so with all deliberate speed. He should address his fellow Americans from the Oval Office on the burning and looting that are tearing this republic to pieces. The president spoke Monday evening from the Rose Garden. “The biggest victims of the rioting are peace-loving citizens in our poorest communities, and as their president, I will fight to keep them safe,” Trump said. “I will fight to protect you. I am your president of law and order, and an ally of all peaceful protesters.” His welcome comments offered much of the strength that has been scarce in this emergency. But he should speak in greater depth and for more than seven minutes from the pilot’s seat of the presidency: the commander-in-chief’s chair behind the Resolute Desk in the cockpit that is the Oval Office. HANNITY CALLS OUT CUOMO, DE BLASIO OVER RIOTS: 'YOUR POLICE ARE UNDER ATTACK IN YOUR STATE AND YOUR CITY' The president should ask the major broadcast networks and the major news channels for time to speak before the East Coast goes dark. Dusk unleashes the thieves and thugs who have converted legitimate protests into a devastating free-for-all. If these major media organizations – many of which earlier accused the president of staying silent throughout this crisis – air his remarks, he can rally the entire American people, who seek his guidance. Conversely, if liberal media outlets silence the president as he works to unify this country, they will deserve scorn for censoring America’s leader exactly when his leadership is most needed. Trump’s remarks Monday centered on his potential deployment of the U.S. military to help squelch the mayhem taking place across the country under the Insurrection Act of 1807. As Washington Post columnist Marc Thiessen exquisitely detailed on Fox News’ “America’s Newsroom” Tuesday, 11 presidents have harnessed this power, including Republican Ulysses S. Grant to suppress the KKK, and Democrats FDR, JFK and LBJ to quell riots in, respectively, Detroit; Oxford, Miss.; and Washington. Beyond that realm, the president should echo his beautiful and appropriate words from Cape Canaveral on Saturday, after SpaceX’s successful, private, manned rocket launch. Trump’s moving remarks remain disturbingly underreported by journalists who accuse him of not speaking up and then ignore him when he talks. Here is a portion of the president’s observations Saturday: “The death of George Floyd on the streets of Minneapolis was a grave tragedy. It should never have happened. It has filled Americans all over the country with horror, anger and grief. “Yesterday, I spoke to George’s family and expressed the sorrow of our entire nation for their loss. I stand before you as a friend and ally to every American seeking justice and peace. And I stand before you in firm opposition to anyone exploiting this tragedy to loot, rob, attack and menace. Healing, not hatred; justice, not chaos are the mission at hand. “The police officers involved in this incident have been fired from their jobs. One officer has already been arrested and charged with murder. State and federal authorities are carrying out an investigation to see what further charges may be warranted, including against, sadly, the other three. “In addition, my administration has opened a civil rights investigation, and I have asked the attorney general and the Justice Department to expedite it. “I understand the pain that people are feeling. We support the right of peaceful protesters, and we hear their pleas. But what we are now seeing on the streets of our cities has nothing to do with justice or with peace. “The memory of George Floyd is being dishonored by rioters, looters and anarchists. The violence and vandalism is being led by Antifa and other radical left-wing groups who are terrorizing the innocent, destroying jobs, hurting businesses and burning down buildings. “The main victims of this horrible, horrible situation are the citizens who live in these once lovely communities. The mobs are devastating the life’s work of good people and destroying their dreams. Right now, America needs creation, not destruction; cooperation, not contempt; security, not anarchy. “And there will be no anarchy. Civilization must be cherished, defended, and protected. The voices of law-abiding citizens must be heard, and heard very loudly. “We cannot and must not allow a small group of criminals and vandals to wreck our cities and lay waste to our communities. We must defend the rights of every citizen to live without violence, prejudice or fear. “It does not serve the interests of justice or any citizen of any race, color, or creed for the government to give into anarchy, abandon police precincts, or allow communities to be burned to the ground. It won’t happen. “Those making excuses or justifications for violence are not helping the downtrodden, but delivering new anguish and new pain.” President Trump also should honor Americans for their exemplary responses to this catastrophe. He should highlight the scrubs-clad nurse in Brooklyn who stood between cops and protesters and pleaded for peace. Trump should celebrate the Minneapolis residents who swept up the rubble of their ruined city – Step One in rebuilding. The president should spotlight the more than 36,000 individuals who, as of early Wednesday morning, donated nearly $1.1 million to Korboi Balla via GoFundMe. This black Minneapolis firefighter, husband and father of four plowed his life savings into Scores Sports Bar. Rather than enjoy its grand opening on Monday, looters on Friday broke in, stole everything, and then turned the unborn establishment into ashes. Balla sought $100,000. He now has almost 11 times that to resurrect his American Dream, thanks to the love, good wishes and generosity of total strangers. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER President Trump also should present evidence of Antifa’s role in this bedlam. He should expose this hideous drama’s villains. Trump should cleave these domestic terrorists from George Floyd, whose lifeless body they defile as a human shield to perpetrate their nihilistic, far-left evil. The president should remind Americans of the relevant actions by the Justice Department and FBI to reduce police brutality and promote respectful policing. He should ask Americans to nominate outstanding cops and police departments for a new Presidential Medal of Law and Justice. Likewise, Trump should make the rogue cops who tarnish their badges infamous. The president should discuss Opportunity Zones, school choice, his stalwart support for Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and the all-time-low black unemployment on his watch before the coronavirus pandemic. He should state that black progress, along with the overall post-COVID-19 recovery, is an objective that all Americans proudly should share. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Trump’s Cape Canaveral speech was splendid. But Americans need to hear the president of the United States address his people from the glory of the Oval Office – pronto. All upside. No downside. What the hell does President Trump have to lose? CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DEROY MURDOCK

 New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio are among President Trump’s harshest critics. But their long-running feud with each other erupted with volcanic force Tuesday over the rioting that is tearing apart the city. Elected officials need to work together to quell the violence and looting that have broken out around the nation in response to the horrific killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis May 25. But Cuomo and de Blasio seem unable to stop quarreling with each other long enough to concentrate on protecting the residents of America’s most populous city. Cuomo – with justification – on Tuesday blasted de Blasio‘s ineffective response to securing Gotham. Yet at the same time, Cuomo declined an earnest offer by President Trump to provide federal assistance to deal with rioting sparked by the killing of Floyd, a black man who died as white police officer Derek Chauvin knelt on top of him for over eight minutes, ignoring Floyd’s desperate cries that he couldn’t breathe. NYPD COMMISSIONER BLASTS CUOMO'S 'DISGRACEFUL COMMENT' ABOUT RIOTS, SAYS POLICE NEED 'FEWER PRESS CONFERENCES' Chauvin has been arrested and charged with manslaughter and third-degree murder. Peaceful demonstrations against police killings of unarmed black Americans have been held in many cities around the nation since Floyd’s death, but many have devolved into rioting after dark, including in New York City. "The NYPD and the mayor did not do their job last night," Cuomo said Tuesday. "You have 38,000 NYPD people, it is the largest police department in the United States of America," Cuomo said. "Use 38,000 people and protect property. Use the police, protect property and people. Look at the videos, it was a disgrace." New York City Police Commissioner Dermot Shea – a member of the de Blasio administration – attacked Cuomo’s comments later in the day in an interview with Neil Cavuto of Fox News. "Any comments placing the blame for where we are, on the situation, on the backs of the men and women of this police department that are putting their lives on the line, Neil, I think is disgraceful and [they] should be ashamed of themselves," Shea told "Your World.” "There is politics and there is what is right and that is a disgraceful comment."  Then Cuomo senior adviser Richard Azzopardi responded with a statement that said: "The Governor has always said he has respect and confidence in the NYPD and he knows they can handle this situation because he has seen them do it in the past. It's not the men and women of the NYPD – he questions the management and deployment of the NYPD and believes the Mayor should put more NYPD officers on the streets to do their job.” At this point, no one cares whether de Blasio or Cuomo comes out looking better and having a better shot a running for president in four or eight years In his comments earlier in the day, Cuomo discussed his “option is to displace the mayor ... bring in the National Guard" and essentially "take over." However, he said, "I don't think we're at that point." The governor also said: “You know how you stopped looting and rioting in the past? Do that again.” Actually, it was only Rudy Giuliani, who was mayor of New York City from 1994 to 2001, who knew how to control riots. He made it clear that he would not tolerate lawbreaking and violence. Other mayors have failed to do what Giuliani did. I know through personal experience. My father was a hardworking owner of a small appliance store in Brooklyn. His store – his life’s work – was torched to the ground in the blackout of 1977. It was the first and only time I ever saw my father cry. His life was never the same and he died a few years later from what I believe was the stress of the traumatic destruction of his livelihood. The 1977 rioting wasn’t a reaction to police brutality or any other ideological motivation. It was greed, pure and simple. The lights went out in a massive blackout and it was an opportunity for the criminal element to start looting to get free stuff.  The looters pounced. The cops watched. The same thing has happened in numerous cities throughout the nation since Floyd was killed.  In one disgraceful situation in Minneapolis, the police – under orders of the mayor – actually abandoned their precinct to the mob, thereby sending a message that law enforcement simply could not provide an adequate level of safety to the public. The chaos in New York state is not confined to New York City. It was exemplified by a woman in Rochester trying to prevent looters from ransacking the store located below her apartment. She was severely beaten with two-by-fours and metal clubs by eight looters. Her husband was beaten when he tried to come to her aid, armed with only a golf club. If Cuomo can’t stop violent attacks in Rochester, and if de Blasio can’t stop police getting hit in the head with bricks in New York City, then why not seek the help of the federal government? There is no justification for refusing President Trump’s offer of federal assistance. Wouldn’t it be marvelous if these two feuding Democrats teamed together to reach out to a Republican president and in unison to helped put down the anarchy taking over New York City? Tensions between Cuomo and de Blasio have been simmering since de Blasio took office in 2014. They’ve fought over issues dealing with schools, the minimum wage, repairing the city’s subway system, and most recently responding to the coronavirus pandemic. Both Democrats are eager to promote themselves. De Blasio made a short-lived run for the 2020 Democratic presidential nomination that never got any traction, and Cuomo is seen by many as a possible presidential contender in the future. Some Republicans might want to just sit back and eat popcorn as these two Democratic behemoths destroy each other. But as we’ve seen over the last few months as they’ve quarreled over the right response to the coronavirus pandemic, their battle with each other can have enormous consequences. Now the riots in New York City are making it more important than ever for Cuomo and de Blasio to stop fighting with each and work together to protect the safety of the people they were elected to serve.  No one is amused by this feud any longer. One day the mayor is rhetorically backing the police and the next day he is disciplining them for understandably using their tasers or pulling out their guns as they get attacked with bricks that could prove fatal. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The governor criticizes the mayor for allowing things to get out of hand without providing any leadership on his end. But would Cuomo really support Giuliani‘s style of overwhelming force to subdue anarchists? Hard to believe when he just criticized the cops’ defensive actions as “exacerbating the anger” of the protesters. Cuomo’s only answer was to shoo away an offer by President Trump to provide additional security. This wasn’t “New York tough” – a phrase Cuomo loves to use. It ought to be called “New York dumb.”  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At this point, no one cares whether de Blasio or Cuomo comes out looking better and having a better shot a running for president in four or eight years. We’re just tired of them playing politics. New Yorkers simply want Cuomo and de Blasio to do their jobs and work together to stop the destruction of our city and the violence that’s been perpetrated against police and business owners throughout the state. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY STEVE LEVY

 There was another night of looting Monday. But what’s the media’s priority? Criticizing President Trump, of course. CNN anchors and reporters had plenty to say about the president. Anderson Cooper said of Trump: “He calls them [rioters] thugs? Who is the thug here? Hiding in a bunker, hiding behind a suit?” Don Lemon said: “We are teetering on a dictatorship. Is the president declaring war on Americans? What is happening here?” NYPD COMMISSIONER BLASTS CUOMO'S 'DISGRACEFUL COMMENT' ABOUT RIOTS, SAYS POLICE NEED 'FEWER PRESS CONFERENCES'  Chris Cuomo said: “The president had been saying incendiary things, certainly if you've been listening with any kind of open-mindedness, certainly not helpful things.” And CNN White House reporter Jim Acosta said of the president: “He's all but calling on authorities to crack skulls at these protests. It's not something you normally see in the United States of America. It’s something you see in more authoritarian countries.” Amazing. Meanwhile, the headline on an editorial in The New York Times reads: "America's Protests Won't Stop Until Police Brutality Does." Meaning, they hope this could go on forever. One of The New York Times scribes chides New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio for being too pro-police. Meanwhile, New York City burns. Stores are looted. Cops are beaten and people are beaten too. The New York media, by sticking to their narrative that we deserve punishment, reject protecting our citizens. They mock the need for military intervention. People have families, relatives and spouses who work at night. When our leaders believe this mayhem is inevitable, even necessary, then who protects us now? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Still, others blame President Trump. Now, I watched the streets of my home destroyed. It wasn't done by Trump. It was criminals who knew the "light touch" of impotent leaders allows for ruin. And how is it Trump’s fault that a cop killed a defenseless man in a liberal town helmed by liberal politicians? It’s not, but the media says the opposite. Its why, when you say that everyone is in agreement over the death of George Floyd – including Trump – they say that’s not enough. Which tells you, again, that they want no end to the violence. They want to burn it all down. "They" being radicals on the street, in faculty lounges, in government. And the minority shopkeepers are paying the price. The minority owners of restaurants are paying the price. Minorities, in general, always pay the price. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The only ones not paying any price are the media. They wax poetic. And they rake it in. They hope if they feed the crocodile enough, as the late British Prime Minister Winston Churchill said, it will eat them last. It will. And then get food poisoning. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on June 2, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

 Six nights of violent riots and looting in America's major cities, following the horrific death of George Floyd last week, have gripped the nation. The liberal news media wants to ignore the depth of the violence and the forces causing the violence. They want to simply rerun their permanent refrain that this is all about racism (see the Washington Post story that “Racial inequality in Minneapolis is Among the Worst in the Nation” as an example). The news media will resist deeply the idea that Antifa is a factor and that the violence is designed to hurt America. JIM HANSON: TRUMP'S ANTIFA DECLARATION – THIS IS HOW IT HELPS US FIGHT BACK The depth of hostility to President Trump was never clearer than in the hostile media coverage of Monday’s Rose Garden speech and the subsequent visit to St. John’s Episcopal Church. Here was the president of the United States speaking after six nights of riots, which had spread across the country and were becoming increasingly violent. In any past crisis that I am aware of, the news media would have covered the speech and allowed the American people to judge its meaning. CNN, the ultimate anti-Trump network, set a new standard for hostile coverage by running a split-screen showing the Secret Service clearing Lafayette Square ahead of the president. What we are witnessing is part of a continuing war against America. Whatever the president was trying to accomplish in what was a serious, powerful speech announcing a substantial increase in response to the attacks on America, CNN guaranteed that its viewers would be more unnerved by the action in the park rather than reassured by the tough decisions the president was making. Then, the president’s visit to the historic 1816 church, which had been partly set on fire by looters the night before and has been visited by every president since Madison, became another media controversy. The war between the media and President Trump is weakening America almost as much as the war of Antifa and its allies against America. For America to succeed, we must win this argument. What we are witnessing is part of a continuing war against America. First, demonstrators have every right to peacefully protest Floyd's death. His death was horrifying, and the policemen involved will have to stand trial for his death. However, people engaged in violence are not demonstrators – and given the scale of their violence and destruction, they are not just angry people expressing their frustration. The scale of violence and the number of cities being attacked is a war against America. If we saw this level of violence by an attack from ISIS or Al Qaeda, we would understand that we are engaged in an act of war. This is an act of civil war, and the enemies of American civilization have to be defeated decisively and permanently. Furthermore, every American of every political belief must be protected by the government against this kind of violence and destruction. We need a decisive engagement to enforce safety on the streets, and then we need a deep commitment to track down the funders, organizers, and activists who fomented violence against America. Every person will have to choose between defending America and defending those who would destroy America. Author and legal expert Andrew McCarthy captured it well when he wrote: “Anti-America must be made to understand that America has had enough.” McCarthy noted that the federal government has had the power to step in against insurrection and sedition since, “the Insurrection Act of 1807, which empowers the president ‘to suppress, in any State, any insurrection, domestic violence, unlawful combination, or conspiracy.’” That Insurrection Act was strengthened during the Civil War and again after 9/11. Mark Halperin captured the depth of this war against America today when he wrote in his newsletter: “America’s Second Civil War started way before the death of George Floyd, way before the start of the pandemic, and way before the election of Donald Trump. “About the biggest mistake we can make is to think that what is happening now represents the outbreak of America’s Second Civil War. This is in fact simply the bloodiest battle to date in a long-running, existential conflict.” Halperin is right about the present but wrong about its size compared to past attacks on America. The battles from 1967-1972 were much bigger and more savage than anything we have seen so far. In an 18-month period from 1971 to 1972, there were an estimated 2,500 bombings, according to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The anti-Americans of that era were only defeated by the systematic application of the FBI and other organizations dedicated to defending civilization against its enemies. Now we face a similar challenge in a somewhat different form. Here are some questions and suggestions for dealing with the current generation of violent anti-Americans. 1. What are all the organizations involved in advocating violence? Antifa is the top of a network of activist groups engaged in sedition, but there are a lot of other seemingly random groups. 2. Who is funding all this activity? Antifa has a real network. We know the Soviets funded the peace movement in the 1980s and the terrorist groups in Western Europe in the 1970s and 1980s. What online efforts and other activities are our foreign opponents using to help spread and sustain the internal war against America? What about those on the left who believe Antifa is innocent? Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison’s son, who is a Minneapolis city councilman, just endorsed Antifa in response to President Trump declaring it a terrorist organization. He said white supremacists were causing all the trouble – that charge must be totally explored. 3. Given the sheer volume of video and other photographs, it should be possible to hunt down a wide number of people who committed acts of violence. They should be arrested and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. 4. During a period of mass violence, there should be no bail allowed for those arrested for participating in the violence. The first goal is to dry up the number of people who are committed to violence. Arresting and releasing them actually increases the confidence of the violent offenders, because it leads them to believe they can get away with it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER 5. Every decision must have a public information component at its core. It is impossible to understand how Minneapolis could have allowed a police station to be abandoned. How did officials not understand it would be a signal to the anti-Americans that they were winning and the defenders of civilization were losing their nerve. 6. Since the government failed to protect the innocent and their property, there should be an immediate announcement that damage from the terrorists will be treated as a national emergency comparable to a hurricane, earthquake, forest fire, or flood. The Federal Emergency Management Agency should immediately move to help reopen stores, rebuild homes, and reestablish community buildings. With many small businesses already weakened by the COVID-driven shutdown, they simply don’t have the resources to rebuild. If entire neighborhoods collapse with no stores and no jobs, then the anti-Americans will have planted the seeds for even more disillusioned people to join their movement. 7. When faced with a threatened anti-American mob with a high potential for violence and property destruction, the streets should be flooded with the forces of civilization. If on the first night, the city of Minneapolis and the state of Minnesota had fielded the 13,000-member National Guard there would have been no violence. When you don’t know how effective, prepared, or numerous your enemy may be, you take your best guess about how much force you will need – and then multiply by three to five, so you can overwhelm the opposition. 8. Massive strength leads to the smallest loss of life and the least property damage. It also discourages others from joining the violent faction. It is astonishing that people have been violent with impunity in New York City, Washington, D.C., Atlanta, and elsewhere without being met with overwhelming force. If the city can’t cope, the state has to step in. If the state can’t cope, the federal government has to step in. Every day this violence continues further weakens America at home and around the world. 9. Modern technologies must be brought to bear. Because these are acts of violence against our civilization and are being classed as terrorism, there ought to be an ability to track cell phones belonging to radical elements and see how many of them have crossed state lines and moved from violent outburst to violent outburst. Much more must be done to communicate the scale of the violence that is occurring. Local media is vivid but national media simply isn’t capable of gathering and organizing the information. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP An important step is to have a briefing in which the secretary of homeland security or someone comparable simply outlines city-by-city how much damage the anti-American effort has caused in less than a week. This is only part of what it’s going to take to stop the destruction. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

 A bevy of bloggers on the right have highlighted one of the most dramatic examples of comparative coronavirus bias: those reckless Southern Republican governors in Georgia or Florida, who allegedly love commerce more than human lives, versus New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, our apparent national lodestar of competence. The Republicans get the heat; Cuomo gets press conferences broadcast live across the country as celebrities confess their Cuomo crushes. The Republicans are "dangerous," and Cuomo gets to joke around with his brother, the CNN host. This tilt is not only in the "objective" press but also in the prestige brands in opinion journalism. Take The Atlantic, which made a dramatic turn by endorsing Hillary Clinton in 2016. In a big NPR story, this was celebrated as rare and historic. Their loathing of Donald Trump never fades. VAN GORDON SAUTER, EX-CBS NEWS PRESIDENT: 'LIBERAL LEANING' MEDIA PASSES ITS TIPPING POINT The Atlantic drew major heat for an April 29 article written by Amanda Mull that trashed Gov. Brian Kemp, titled "Georgia's Experiment in Human Sacrifice: The state is about to find out how many people need to lose their lives to shore up the economy." This article was also celebrated with a story on NPR. Mull took credit for the headline and insisted it was accurate. "I think that working-class Georgians, a group that is largely people of color, are being sacrificed to the state's economy, largely," she says. But Georgia's reopening made The Atlantic look foolish. Coronavirus cases and deaths didn't surge. They declined. Mull wrote another article, headlined "The Horror of the Coronavirus Data Lag: Some reopening states are already claiming victory over the coronavirus. But the real consequences won't be clear for weeks," in which she insisted it was too early for apologies. Keep hope alive, Amanda. Just look at the numbers. As of May 26, Georgia's death count was 1,853. By contrast, New York's was 29,241. So is it science or politics that causes Brooklyn-based Amanda Mull and all her New York media brethren to kvetch at Kemp and coddle Cuomo? Facts aren't first? Now try to find an example of The Atlantic holding Cuomo accountable for anything. Molly Jong-Fast wrote an article headlined "The New New York Will Be Better." There's no hot talk of "Experiments in Human Sacrifice," just more trashing of Republicans. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER "As anyone who listens to Gov. Andrew Cuomo's daily updates knows, the state's finances are in bad shape, and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell seems disinclined to help," Jong-Fast declared. "It's possible that the deadbeat federal government will not support the Wuhan of America and that New York will have to endure rounds and rounds of devastating budget cuts, of the kind we haven't seen in decades." The Atlantic political writer Russell Berman had the longest take on Cuomo, but the headline was "How New York Explains the Other 49 States." Cuomo was evaluated for managing the tricky upstate-versus-downstate politics but was in no way held accountable for governing the "Wuhan of America." Ed Yong's story "America's Patchwork Pandemic Is Fraying Even Further" barely mentions Cuomo. There's this half a sentence, which appears deep into the article: "Gov. Andrew Cuomo, for example, is turning 24 churches in low-income areas into testing centers ..." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP CNN's Brian Stelter put Yong on his show, "Reliable Sources." Did Stelter ask about the "Patchwork Pandemic" piece? No. He asked, "As a science writer, you know, you're studying this every day. Where are you on the optimism/pessimism scale?" Conservatives should be robustly pessimistic that our elite media will ever assume a dispassionate, nonpartisan approach that holds both Democrats and Republicans accountable in the public debate. These political referees are always rigging the game. CLICK HERE FOR MORE BY TIM GRAHAM

 Since the revolution in policing that began in the early 1990s, we have had a generation of peace and prosperity. Without the rule of law — i.e., without order, without the presumption that the laws will be enforced — that kind of societal flourishing is not possible. We are seeing now what happens when the rule of law breaks down. It is frightening, but it is hardly unprecedented, even in modern history. BISHOP T.D. JAKES: RACE AND POLICING – CHURCH LEADERS MUST DRIVE NATIONAL CONVERSATION, ACTION PLAN Bryan Burrough’s spellbinding history "Days of Rage: America’s Radical Underground, the FBI, and the Forgotten Age of Revolutionary Violence," which I reviewed for National Review about five years ago, reminds us that in 1972 alone, there were 1,900 bombings in the United States, carried out, for the most part, by domestic terrorist groups and enraged individual American citizens. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Regrettably, the radical “small-c communists” were not ultimately regarded as the sociopaths that they were. They eroded public support for our war effort in Vietnam, wrote the history in which they were lionized as social-justice icons against racist America, and triumphantly marched into academe, where they have taught and influenced the sociopaths who are making mayhem today. Throughout our 30 years of domestic tranquility, which seems to be in its twilight, we have had debates that are relevant to the rioting and looting now underway in American cities. Specifically, we have argued over the War on Terror, so-called. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It wasn’t really a war. That is, the nation was not on a wartime footing. Our enemies did not present as traditional armed forces, but melded into the civilian populations that they attacked. While there were domestic attacks, the most catastrophic one on 9/11, the courts always remained open and functioning. There was no cessation of domestic law enforcement. Yet it wasn’t truly peacetime, either. Our enemies were projecting force on the scale of a nation-state and were backed by hostile foreign regimes. Congress authorized combat operations, and our military was dispatched. The laws of war were invoked to justify detaining enemy combatants and even trying them by military commission — though few such trials actually took place. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 The death of George Floyd, his plea for help, for air, and for his mother will be etched in the consciousness of an entire generation of Americans. As the viral footage of George Floyd’s death surfaced, it seemed, for a brief moment in time, America’s indignation was united over the unjust death of another black man. Tragically, as anger boiled into action, our nation witnessed peaceful protests grow into violent riots that were hijacked by anarchists and have cost our nation more innocent lives, billions in damages, and wounds of divisions that will not be easily healed. BISHOP T.D. JAKES: RACE AND POLICING – CHURCH LEADERS MUST DRIVE NATIONAL CONVERSATION, ACTION PLAN But beyond the smoke and ash, lies hope, and it is in this trying time we as Americans must unite to seek justice and find actionable solutions that no longer pit race against race, or prejudice against prejudice, but seek to uphold the principles of our great nation. To start, Congress can pass the Walter Scott Act, a bill Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C., previously introduced to honor a black South Carolina man shot in the back during a daytime traffic stop for a non-functioning brake light. This bill would require states that receive federal funds for law enforcement to document when an officer is involved in a use of force situation that results in a civilian casualty. Additionally, in a recent conversation with President Trump, Scott urged the president to establish a Federal Race and Justice Commission to address the root causes of, and find solutions to, unjustified police violence against black and brown folks. George Floyd was the unheard voice, his cry for help was ignored, his plea for breath was silenced under the pressure of a knee.  Such a commission would include voices from law enforcement (almost all of which are committed to protecting all citizens), the black and brown communities, civil rights groups, state and local government, and the faith community. President Trump’s involvement here is critical. He is respected by law enforcement and was the key to securing law enforcement support for the First Step Act. This is President Trump’s moment for leadership and he will be the difference-maker. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As someone who worked on Capitol Hill and is seeking to become a policymaker, I believe the immediate adoption of these two straightforward, concrete policies will send a clear message to a frustrated, nearly fed-up black America. “We hear you!” The Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr has been often cited over the past four days as saying “a riot is the language of the unheard,” but there is more to his message. Dr. King emphasized that “we must always work with an effective, powerful weapon and method that brings about tangible results. But it is not enough for me to stand before you tonight and condemn riots. It would be morally irresponsible for me to do that without, at the same time, condemning the contingent, intolerable conditions that exist in our society.” The looting, the riots, the chants cursing the police, this will not bring positive change and it fails to honor George Floyd. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP George Floyd was the unheard voice, his cry for help was ignored, his plea for breath was silenced under the pressure of a knee. We, as united Americans, should cry over the death of George Floyd – we should decry the riots without exception, and we should move to bring about actionable change that will ensure justice for all. George Floyd’s voice should be unheard no more. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SHAY HAWKINS

 When Alveda King reminded me that Martin Luther King Jr. and his fellow leaders brought their Bibles when they marched for our civil rights in the ’60s, the light turned on. The root cause of our current issues in America is much bigger than the evils of police brutality; we have allowed a widespread progressive culture to take hold that has abandoned the fear of God. That culture caused Minnesota leaders to ignore the actions of a rogue cop for over a decade. That, in turn, led to a police officer's actions, caught on video, which resulted in the death of an innocent man in broad daylight. BISHOP T.D. JAKES: RACE AND POLICING – CHURCH LEADERS MUST DRIVE NATIONAL CONVERSATION, ACTION PLAN Now, this same evil is causing some of America’s most admirable influencers to support and justify looting and rioting. It’s shameful. It’s shocking to me that our nation is on fire, and people are demanding change to police culture while ignoring the incompetence of the elected officials who oversee them. We are watching cities run by progressive mayors and state officials who have blatantly refused to enforce common-sense laws when it comes to police officers. It should infuriate all of America that Minnesota’s progressive state and local officials – including Sen. Amy Klobuchar, Attorney General Keith Ellison and Mayor Jacob Frey – allowed Derek Cauvin to remain on the police force after 17 complaints were filed against him. No job in America would allow an employee to remain on duty under such circumstances, let alone in a job as important as policing a diverse community. Progressives are quick to call conservatives racist but they have allowed this very racism to exist in the communities they’ve been elected to serve. The reality is that progressives prefer personality over policy, and support leaders who say the right words while pushing oppressive and ungodly policies. Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey allowed a historic American city to burn and let a police station be overtaken by rioters. Gov. Tim Waltz said the majority of the offenders came from out of state but police reports show that a majority of those arrested were actually residents of Minnesota. This misguided governance is the result of a new age of leaders in many American inner cities who do not display a fear of God. It has become culturally acceptable to embrace and promote policies that condemn godly principles. This causes confusion among citizens and results in leaders who are not bold enough to make tough decisions out of fear of angering their ungodly base of voters. This is much different from when MLK marched for civil rights with his Bible. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In recent days we have seen youngsters posing in front of a burning building or inflamed police vehicle for a selfie. We've watched precious historic churches being vandalized and set on fire. These violent acts let you know that we have embraced a culture that has completely lost its fear of God. Terrorizing the same communities you claim to be standing up for is pure evil. Justifying it as a payback for past sins is an insult to the word of God and further delays our nation's much-needed focus on reconciliation. Look no further than the progressive leaders and influencers who are now donating money to an organization that is helping Minneapolis protesters get out of jail. Sadly, according to reports, this includes many staff members of former Vice President Joe Biden's campaign, as well as well-known entertainers, musicians and athletes. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The reality is that progressives prefer personality over policy, and support leaders who say the right words while pushing oppressive and ungodly policies. This incubates the culture that feeds the souls of our youth. They continuously fight to remove the presence of God from our public schools, never asking for more spirituality. They support policies that discourage fatherhood, never entitlement programs that reward it. They never mention spiritual reconciliation, instead focusing on dividing people based on identity. They push for bigger government, but there is never a bigger focus on serving God. I pray we can wake up as a nation and identify our real enemy. Hopefully, these protests ignite a movement to focus on feeding our spirits through reconciliation in order to heal our land. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JACK BREWER

 In recent days, all America has watched in horror as violent rioters have assaulted bystanders, smashed store windows and set vehicles ablaze in their sick quest to destroy all sense of peace and safety in our nation’s cities. These criminals have killed several of our fellow citizens and injured scores of others. When you look in their faces and listen to their verbal tirades, you detect a cocky and cruel disregard for human life among these marauding miscreants. You might recall seeing that same smirking snarl somewhere else — in the expression of former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin, who has been charged with third-degree murder and second-degree manslaughter in the death of George Floyd. That’s because the menaces terrorizing our cities right now share much in common with the bad cops they claim to despise. EX-CINCINNATI MAYOR KEN BLACKWELL: LEADERS IN OUR CITIES HAVE A DUTY TO DO THIS Peaceful protesters and even those practicing nonviolent civil disobedience can lay rightful claim to standing in the time-honored tradition of change agents working to make American society better. But that’s not the case for the out-of-control mobs rampaging through our streets, looting, pillaging and injuring their neighbors. By their blatant disregard for life and property, they have cast aside any right to be taken seriously. And if these rioters don’t quickly and willingly come down off their moral high horses — and cease and desist their illegal activities as their crimes are investigated and prosecuted — then we as a nation must use all appropriate force at our disposal to yank them from their proverbial saddles. Once we re-establish law and order in our cities, then we can tend to the rightful business of addressing the legitimate issues that have prompted the much-justified concerns of not only peaceful protesters but indeed of all Americans of goodwill. We still need to move beyond the most troubling aspects of our history and embrace a new and brighter future.   Black Americans have many legitimate grievances. After all these years, overcoming the legacy of slavery and discrimination remains a great challenge for America. We still need to move beyond the most troubling aspects of our history and embrace a new and brighter future. “We may have all come on different ships, but we're in the same boat now," said the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Rather than living as part of “the black community” or “the white community,” we need someday — if race relations are ever to reach the place we want them to be — to all truly feel part of the same American community, where there is the same justice, the same opportunity and the same rights for all. Very soon, we need to hold a deeper discussion about these aspirations and the obstacles lying in our path. That’s why I am working to organize a “Forum on Race and Justice” here in Indiana and reaching out to partners nationwide to help coordinate an even broader conversation. For now, though, first things first. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We must take back our streets from the opportunistic predators hell-bent on diverting our attention from the kind of constructive dialogue that could lead to real progress. Just as we cannot let bad cops define law enforcement, neither can we let violent rioters define the crusade for racial justice. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CURTIS HILL

 Lately, it seems, each week produces a new account of a black person being slaughtered by police officers or individuals with ties to law enforcement. In March, it was Breonna Taylor, a hardworking Louisville EMT who was shot dead in her own apartment by police officers who said they were looking for two people suspected of selling drugs – neither of whom lived in her apartment. The previous month it was jogger Ahmaud Arbery, an unarmed black man gunned down on a street in Brunswick, Ga., after being chased down by a father and son who claimed they suspected him in a rash of break-ins in the neighborhood. Prosecutors practically sat on the case until a video of Ahmaud’s extra-judicial execution surfaced online. JASON NICHOLS: GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS – A LONG TIME COMING. WHY THEY WON'T END SOON And just a few days ago we watched the horrifying video online of a white Minneapolis police officer with his knee on the neck of a moaning, handcuffed black man by the name of George Floyd.  Floyd’s pleas that he couldn’t breathe and appeals to the officer from bystanders, who pointed out that Floyd’s nose was bleeding and his breathing impaired, went unheeded. Minutes later, Floyd, a 46-year-old man who was had been detained on a nonviolent charge, was dead. The use of a knee to subdue Mr. Floyd was not consistent with police protocol, nor were any commonly taught de-escalation procedures used. But for this video, these officers likely would have gotten away with murder. Thank God for this bystander who shot the footage of the killing. It would be nice if the voices that ask us not to rush to judgment whenever we call out racial bias in law enforcement would apply that same barometer each time police rush to execute an unarmed black man. I applaud the swiftness with which Minneapolis officials moved to fire the four police officers involved in this inhumane act which they then tried to cover up (The police report bore no resemblance whatsoever to what actually happened on the street.)  And I am delighted that the prosecutor has moved quickly to charge one officer with third-degree murder and manslaughter. It’s time for a national conversation on policing and race. Now. It is a national conversation that needs to be followed by an action plan and buy-in from an array of parties, including clergy, community leaders, police unions, the U.S. Justice Department, the White House, Congress, state legislatures and municipal and county officials. Such a plan must address issues like the absence of national standardized hiring and training practices for police officers and the implementation of more de-escalation training. It must lay out a process for expeditiously ridding police departments of troublesome officers. Americans – and Christians in particular – have a moral imperative to tackle this problem.  “Learn to do good: seek justice, correct oppression,” the prophet wrote in the first chapter of Isaiah.   The plan must provide for accountability and transparency in the policing of police departments and set forth stringent penalties that include cutting or eliminating the funding of troubled departments. Those in power cannot afford to do nothing for those without power. In the days since Floyd’s senseless killing, unrest has raged on the streets of Minneapolis. Thursday night, rioters set fire to a police station. There’s chatter about some criminal gangs wanting to avenge Floyd’s death by killing police officers. That’s wrong. I support peaceful protests. Doing otherwise will distract from the goal of badly needed police reform. But doing nothing will destroy our society. The unrest in Minneapolis offers a glimpse into what the future looks like if we do nothing. You can’t sustain law and order in a society in which there is all out enmity between law enforcement and a significant segment of the population. Mutual antipathy between police and the black community further exacerbates racial tensions in the community at large. It generates outrage not only domestically but also internationally, making a mockery of our professed commitment to stated ideals of liberty and justice. Further, it gives comfort to our enemies abroad who are eagerly awaiting opportunities to exploit our nation’s biggest Achilles heel: racial strife. But self-interest aside, Americans – and Christians in particular – have a moral imperative to tackle this problem. “Learn to do good: seek justice, correct oppression,” the prophet wrote in the first chapter of Isaiah. And as the Rev. Martin Luther King, Jr. aptly put it, “The ultimate tragedy is not the oppression and cruelty by the bad people but the silence over that by the good people.” You cannot be a Christian and stay silent. So I am calling on the nation’s Christian leaders – Catholic, Protestant, Orthodox, black, white, Latino, Asian-American and Native American – to come together and lean on policymakers to effect real change in policing in America. For much of American history, African-American clergy have taken the lead in bringing this nation closer to its ideals of equality, but we need more clergy from all races to raise their voices loud. Many are listening and now I am asking them all to take action. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Being a Christian means speaking out against injustice – even if you are not directly affected by it. Christian leaders need to work toward demonstrating to the public at large that they recognize that all humans are precious in God’s sight. Staying silent would only continue this week’s tragedy. We must turn this week’s events into a triumph on effecting real change in America. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 The nation went up in flames this weekend. No one in charge stood up to save America. Our leaders dithered. They cowered. They openly sided with the destroyers. In many cases, they egged them on. Later, they will deny doing any of this. They are denying it now. But you know the truth because you saw it happen. This is how nations collapse. When no one in authority keeps the order, and when someone in our professional class encourage violence, American citizens are forced to defend themselves. They have no choice. No one else is going to defend them -- they know that now. GEORGE FLOYD UNREST: CITIES FACE NEW LOOTING AMID STRONGER NATIONAL GUARD RESPONSE, CURFEWS It's possible that more people will be hurt in coming days -- that would be a tragedy. But in an environment like this, more violence could very well lead to a cascade of new tragedies, to something far bigger and more destructive than anything we have seen so far. So, this isn't over. It might simply be the beginning. We pray it isn't. It's hard to think clearly about anything that's going on right now. The chaos, the destruction, the relentless lying from above -- it's all too much. Americans are bewildered, and they are afraid. But most of all, they are filled with rage, angrier than they have ever been. The worst people in our society have taken control. They did nothing to build this country. Now, they are tearing it down. They are rushing us toward mass suicide. So, how do we respond? We must protect ourselves and our families. Once again, we have no choice, but to do that. But we cannot allow ourselves to become like they are. We are not animals, we are Americans. In the face of such indecency, we must resolve to be decent. We believe this country has a future. We intend for our children to live and thrive here. That is what we are defending. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER All our leaders do is set us against each other. They stage a never-ending national cockfight for their profit and amusement. But we're not going to play along. We will love our neighbors relentlessly in spite of all of it, not because they look like us or share our political views. But we love them because they are human beings, and they are Americans. Those are the bonds that tie us together -- the bonds our leaders seek to destroy. We can't let them. We should start by being unsparingly honest about what is happening right now. Truth is our defense, and it's our country's last hope. We plan to use this hour to create a record of this moment right now, to show you what's really going on in your country. We feel an obligation to do that before the facts are spun into propaganda by the liars or the images are pulled off the internet forever, as many of them inevitably will be. All our leaders do is set us against each other. They stage a never-ending national cockfight for their profit and amusement. But we're not going to play along. We're going to begin with where my family lives and has lived for 35 years, in the northwest quadrant of Washington, D.C. This is called Mac Market. It's on MacArthur Boulevard, which is named after General MacArthur during the war. It's our neighborhood store; it's walking distance from my house. People meet there every morning for coffee. Kids come after school for candy. It's as close to a community gathering spot as we have. The market is run by the Kim family. The Kims are immigrants from Korea. They are revered in our neighborhood for their decency and their hard work. When they lost their son several years ago, the neighbors grieved for them. The Kims are not political. They've never hurt anyone. They only make things better. But last night, the mob came for their store. At 1 a.m. Monday morning, Mr. Kim was kneeling alone on the sidewalk trying to salvage what he has spent his life building. Scenes like this played out in hundreds of neighborhoods across this country, maybe yours. Here are a few. In Columbia, S.C., a man called the police when things began to fall apart. Rioters saw him call. They surrounded that man, and they beat him. Onlookers laughed as he was pummeled. This is a national emergency. It's a profound national emergency. But you would never know that from listening to our elected leaders. Almost all of them pretend this is not really happening or if it is happening, it is just part of America's long tradition of vigorous political discourse. In Rochester, N.Y., a group of eight men smashed the windows of a jewelry store. The couple who lived above the shop emerged to confront them. Both of them were viciously beaten with a ladder and a two-by-four. In Dallas, a man armed with what appeared to be a sword did his best to defend a business from looters. The mob bashed him in the head with a rock and a skateboard. It's hard to watch. In San Jose, riders with crowbar stormed the highway and attacked vehicles, trying to pull drivers from their cars. In Birmingham, Ala., a local reporter called Stephen Quinn was beaten, and then he was robbed on live television as he tried to cover the looting. In Portland, Ore., a man was beaten apparently for daring to carry an American flag in public. He never released the flag, by the way. How many of these people died? How many were murdered by the rioters? We don't know yet. At the least, some are likely disabled for life. They were beaten that badly. And then there was the mass stealing. It seemed to be everywhere over the weekend. In Buckhead, an upscale part of Atlanta, rioters stole a Tesla from a dealership and drove it through an indoor mall just to underscore how completely out of control things were. In Portland, Oregon, mobs looted Louis Vuitton, Apple and Chase Bank among many others. They often set fires as they left. In Chicago, protesters fought systemic racism by running through a Nike store stealing shoes. And in Washington, D.C., a federal city surrounded by military bases and protected at all times by the single highest concentration of law enforcement in the world, criminals operated with apparent impunity in the streets. They looted Georgetown. They smashed the windows in federal buildings. They desecrated virtually every war memorial in the city a week after Memorial Day. You've got to wonder how many of them have ever even heard of George Floyd. And if they have heard of him, what difference would it make? Violence and looting are not forms of political expression. And then, as you likely know, Sunday night they set fire to St. John's Episcopal Church, a 200-year-old building that has welcomed every American president since James Madison. It is right across the street from the White House. For people stuck inside anywhere during this insanity -- the sick, the elderly, the powerless -- the experience was terrifying. Listen to this woman from Minneapolis. Reporter: How was last night? Unidentified woman: Scary. They went straight to Office Max, the Dollar Store and every store over here that I go to. I have nowhere to go now. I have no way to get there because the buses aren't running. So, that's what's happening in America right now. We didn't play all of the tape we have. There's a lot of it. Some of the tape is too shocking, and honestly, it's too incendiary. We understand that television is an emotional medium, and we don't want to make things worse. We're not going to, but you get the point. The point is, this is a national emergency. It's a profound national emergency. But you would never know that from listening to our elected leaders. Almost all of them pretend this is not really happening or if it is happening, it is just part of America's long tradition of vigorous political discourse. Politicians on both sides tell us that this is all about the death of a man in police custody in Minneapolis last week. The people burning down our country are "protesters". They're engaged in a legitimate "protest." Okay, what exactly are those protesters' demands? What are they asking for? If Congress agreed to enact their program, what would the program be? Not a single person even hints the answer because there is not an answer. No one has bothered to pull the guys beating up old ladies on the street or looting Gucci, but you've got to wonder how many of them have ever even heard of George Floyd. And if they have heard of him, what difference would it make? Violence and looting are not forms of political expression. If you were killed tomorrow, how many buildings would you want burned to the ground in your memory? How many old women smashed in the face on the street in your name? None, we hope, because you're not a vicious psychopath, like the people you've just watched. In fact, what we're watching is not a political protest. It's the opposite of a political protest. It is an attack on the idea of politics. The rioters you have seen are trying to topple our political system. That system is how we resolve our differences without using violence. But these people want a new system, one that is governed by force. Do what we say or we will hurt you. You know this. You can see it for yourself on television; you have. But our leaders continue to lie. They tell us that's not true. This isn't happening. It's just a protest. When the violence began, what we needed more than anything was clarity in the middle of this ...  Instead, almost all of our so-called conservative leaders joined the left's chorus, as if on cue. Some Democrats have openly embraced what is happening. Really they don't have much of a choice. These are their voters cleaning out the Rolex store. These riots effectively are the largest Joe Biden for President rally on record. In gratitude for that, more than a dozen Joe Biden for President campaign staffers donated money to the rioters in Minneapolis, and then they bragged about it on Twitter. No Democratic leader can directly criticize what is happening right now. And in fact, some have joined in. Over the weekend, the Democratic Party of Fairfax, Virginia, which is an important Democratic organization, released the following statement on Twitter: "Riots are an integral part of this country's march towards progress." Progress. Burning buildings, teargas, dead bodies, the screaming injured, criminal anarchy -- to the Democratic Party of Fairfax, that is called progress. Celebrity after celebrity has weighed in to agree on social media. From his fortified compound, basketball star LeBron James has used his accounts to encourage more rioting. Bernie Sanders surrogate Shaun King has done the same. So has Black Lives Matter leader, DeRay Mckesson. Colin Kaepernick openly calls for violence. Here's a quote: "The cries for peace will rain down and when they do, they will land on deaf ears," he says approvingly. Imagine shouting fire in a crowded theater, a theater with 325 million people in it called our country. That's what they've been doing and have been doing for days. When the violence began, what we needed more than anything was clarity in the middle of this. It's hard to see when the tear gas starts. Someone in America needed to tell the truth to the country. Instead, almost all of our so-called conservative leaders joined the left's chorus, as if on cue. On Friday, as American cities were being destroyed by mobs, the vice president United States refused to say anything specific about the riots we were watching on television. Instead, Mike Pence scolded America for its racism. Carly Fiorina, once a leading Republican presidential candidate tweeted that -- and we're quoting, "It's white America that now must see the truth, speak the truth and act on the truth." Meanwhile, Kay Coles James, who is the president of the Heritage Foundation -- that's the largest conservative think tank in the country. You may have sent them money, hopefully for the last time. Kay Coles James wrote a long scream denouncing America as an irredeemably racist nation: "How many times will protests have to occur?" Got that? "Have to occur." Like the rest of us caused this by our sinfulness. The message from our leaders on the right, as on the left, was unambiguous: Don't complain. You deserve what's happening to you. No one jumped in more forcefully or seemed angrier in America than former South Carolina Governor Nikki Haley. "Tonight I turned on the news and I am heartbroken," Haley wrote. "It's important to understand that the death of George Ford was personal and painful for many. In order to heal, it needs to be personal and painful for everyone." Imagine shouting fire in a crowded theater, a theater with 325 million people in it called our country. That's what they've been doing and have been doing for days. But wait a second, you may be wondering, how am I "personally responsible" for the behavior of a Minneapolis police officer? I've never even been to Minneapolis, you may think to yourself. And why is some politician telling me I'm required to be upset about it? Those are all good questions. Nikki Haley did not answer those questions explaining. It is not her strong suit -- that would require thinking. What Nikki Haley does best is moral blackmail. During the 2016 campaign, she compared Donald Trump to the racist mass murderer, Dylann Roof. How is Donald Trump similar to a serial killer? Nikki Haley never explained that. She wasn't trying to educate anyone. Her only goal was political advantage. Nikki Haley is exceptionally good at getting what she wants. She is happy to denounce you as a racist in order to get it. She just did. In this case, Nikki Haley's wish came true. The riots were indeed "personal and painful" for everyone. And then the pain kept increasing. Two days after she wrote that, dozens of American cities had been thoroughly trashed, some destroyed. A country already on the brink of recession suddenly faced economic collapse. An already fearful population locked down for months because of the coronavirus had been thoroughly and completely terrorized. Mission accomplished. Let's hope Nikki Haley is pleased. We've now atoned. How did the Trump administration respond to the horrors going on around us? Well, Sunday morning, the country's national security adviser, Robert O'Brien, did a live interview from the White House lawn. Here's how it began: Robert O'Brien, U.S. National Security Adviser: First thing I want to say, on behalf of the president --he said this to the family -- but our hearts and prayers are going out to the Floyd family. We mourn with them and we grieve with them and what happened there was horrific and I can't even imagine what that poor family is going through as his videos are played over and over again. That should have never happened in America and it's a tragic thing. The president said that from the start, and we're with the family and as the President said, we're with the peaceful protesters. "We're with the peaceful protesters," O'Brien announced. Really? Can you be more specific about that? Who are you talking about exactly? Is it the people spitting foam as they scream, "F the police"? Is it the one standing next to the arsonist doing nothing as they set fire to buildings? Is it the kids laughing as they film the looting and the beatings on their iPhones? The first requirement of leadership is that you watch over the people in your care. That's what soldiers want from their officers. It's what families need from their fathers. It's what voters demand from their presidents. Maybe it's the famous people in L.A. who are raising money online to support the rioters? They're all just peaceful protesters. Yes, we support that. It's who we are. What about the president? Where is he during all of this? Well, on Friday night, after the show, Leland Vitter and a cameraman headed to Lafayette Square in Washington to cover what was happening outside the White House. Here's what happened next. Reporter: A Fox News reporter is getting chased out by these -- by the George Floyd protesters here in front of -- at Lafayette Park. Look, there's water being thrown on the reporter here. This is just -- they took his mic. The just threw the mic at the reporter here. As you see guys, things are spiraling here quick at the protest. That was in Lafayette Square in the center of our capital city. The tape raised a troubling question: If you can't keep a Fox News correspondent from getting attacked directly across the street from your house, how can you protect my family? How are you going to protect the country? How hard are you trying? On Twitter the next morning, the president reassured America that he and his family were just fine. The federally funded bodyguards had kept them safe. He did not mention protecting the rest of the nation, much of which was then on fire. He seemed aware only of himself. For people who like Donald Trump, who voted for Donald Trump, who support his policies, who have defended him for years and years against the most absurd kinds of slander, this was a distressing moment. The first requirement of leadership is that you watch over the people in your care. That's what soldiers want from their officers. It's what families need from their fathers. It's what voters demand from their presidents. People will put up with almost anything if you do that. You can regularly say embarrassing things on television. You can hire Omarosa to work at the White House. All of that will be forgiven if you protect your people. But if you do not protect them -- or worse than that, if you seem like you can't be bothered to protect them -- then you're done. It's over. People will not forgive weakness. That's the one thing, by the way, that is not a partisan point. It is human nature. Nero is the only Roman emperor whose name most people still remember. Why? Because he abandoned his nation in a time of crisis. And 2,000 years later, we still don't forgive him. Donald Trump's response to these riots, which is ongoing, is the singular test of his presidency. About an hour ago, the president announced that he's going to marshal all available forces -- military and civilian -- to stop these riots. President Donald Trump: If a city or state refuses to take the actions that are necessary to defend the life and property of their residents, then I will deploy the United States military and quickly solve the problem for them. Good for him. Immediately after that address, the president walked over to St. John's, which, we just told you, was burning fewer than 24 hours ago, and that provided a powerful symbolic gesture. It was a declaration that this country -- our national symbols, our oldest institutions -- will not be desecrated and defeated by nihilistic destruction. We fervently hope this all works. What Americans want most right now is an end to this chaos. They want their cities to be saved. They want this to stop immediately. If the commander-in-chief cannot stop it, he will lose in November. The left will blame him for the atrocities they encouraged, and some voters will agree. Donald Trump is the president. Presidents save countries. That's their job. That's why we hire them. It's that simple. Some key advisers around the president don't seem to understand this or the gravity of the moment. No matter what happens, they'll tell you, our voters aren't going anywhere. "The trailer parks are rock solid. What choice do they have? They've got to vote for us." Jared Kushner, for one, has made that point out loud. No one has more contempt for Donald Trump's voters than Jared Kushner does, and no one expresses it more frequently. In 2016, Donald Trump ran as a law and order candidate because he meant it, and his views remain fundamentally unchanged today. But the president's famously sharp instincts, the ones that won him the presidency almost four years ago, have been since subverted at every level by Jared Kushner. This is true on immigration, on foreign policy, and especially on law enforcement. As crime in this country continues to rise, Jared Kushner has led a highly aggressive effort to let more criminals out of prison and back on to the streets. This is reckless. At this moment in time, it is insane. It continues to happen. What Americans want most right now is an end to this chaos. They want their cities to be saved. They want this to stop immediately. If the commander-in-chief cannot stop it, he will lose in November. The left will blame him for the atrocities they encouraged, and some voters will agree. The president seems to sense this. At times he seems aware he is being led in the wrong direction. He often derides Kushner as a liberal and that's correct, Kushner is. But Kushner has convinced the president that throwing open the prisons is the key to winning African-American votes in the fall and that those votes are essential to his reelection. Several times over the past few days, the president has signaled that he would very much like to crack down on rioters -- that is his instinct. If you've watched him, you'll believe it. But every time he has been talked out of it by Jared Kushner and by aides that Kushner has hired and controls. Kushner's assumption, apparently, is that African-American voters like looting. That is wrong. Normal Americans of all colors hate looting, obviously. Why wouldn't they hate looting? They are decent people. So one of the lessons of all that we have seen and we've seen so much over the past five days is America is going to change because of this -- that is certain. What can we learn from it? What should we demand going forward? The first thing to know is that we can no longer accept race-baiting from our leaders. Never. That has become so common now that we barely notice it. But it is dividing and destroying this country. We should make them stop. On Sunday, for example, Mayor Jenny Durkan of Seattle tweeted this: "I want to acknowledge that much of the violence and destruction both here in Seattle and across the country has been instigated and perpetrated by white men." Is that factually true? Who knows? Who cares? The skin color of criminals is totally irrelevant to how we prosecute them for the crimes they commit. It must be irrelevant. Otherwise, we're committing the bigotry we claim to abhor. Weakness invites aggression. That is true in nature and it's every bit as true in human society. Our leaders are weak. Predators know it. That's why this is happening. Yet everywhere on television and social media, prominent people are now talking exactly like this. Not just a few crackpots -- thousands of people, well-known people. They are amplifying race hatred at exactly the moment that we need at least at the moment when it's the most dangerous. This is Art Acevedo. Acevedo with the police chief of Houston. Houston is the fourth biggest city in this country. Acevedo's job, his sworn duty, is to enforce the law fairly and evenly regardless of the ethnicity of the suspect. Watch this and tell us if you think he is capable of doing that. Do you think he's even interested? Art Acevedo, chief of the Houston Police department: My people for -- as an immigrant, we are raised like this. But you know what? We built this country ... We have got news for them. We ain't going nowhere. We ain't going nowhere. I think the ship has sailed. So if you've got hate in your heart for people of color, get over it, because this city is a minority-majority city. "My people." If a police chief of any color -- any color -- said that, we would attack him instantly, and we would mean it. It is wrong. When you run a law enforcement agency, you don't get to consider "my people" much less claim your people deserve some kind of special consideration because they "built this country." No. Your obligation is not to consider your people, but all people and consider them equally. Period. Art Acevedo is not even trying to do that. Imagine being arrested by this creep. Think you'd get a fair shake? There's almost nothing that hurts America more than this. If you are worried about the rise of extremism here -- and honestly, you should be worried -- this kind of insanity is absolutely certain to cause it. And let's be clear, when we say extremism, we're not talking about unconventional views that get you bounced off Twitter or scolded by the corporate HR department. We mean actual extremism where people espouse violence against other people, where large groups come to believe their racial identity is the most important thing about them. Now, at this moment, no matter what they're telling you, no matter what they claim for political advantage, there's not a huge amount of that in this country, thank God. Most people still think of themselves as Americans and want to. But if the left keeps talking like this, there definitely will be and very soon. And you don't want to live here when that happens. We should demand they stop immediately. Enforcing the law is not white supremacy. Insisting that everyone in the country follow the same rules is not racism. In fact, it's the answer to racism. It is equality -- equality under the law. It is the one thing we must defend, and if we don't, it's over. Things fall apart. Weakness invites aggression. That is true in nature and it's every bit as true in human society. Our leaders are weak. Predators know it. That's why this is happening. If you let people spray paint obscenities in City Hall, pretty soon they are overturning cop cars. If you put up with that, they'll come right to the front door of the police precinct, and they will burn it down. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The next thing you know, they are beating people to death in shopping malls. And then what? What happens the next time the mob doesn't like something? What will the mob demand next? Let's hope we never find out because we are close. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on June 1, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON


 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. My senior year at West Point I decided to go after one of the items on my bucket list: Climb Mount Everest. Some would call it crazy to juggle a demanding school like West Point and pursue such an aspirational goal, and it probably was. With the support of my then fiancé and now wife Rachel, I decided I was going to do everything it took to make it happen. The thing is, I had no real mountain climbing experience. I’m from the great state of Georgia, where our tallest mountain stands fewer than five thousand feet. SEN. MARTHA McSALLY: IN CORONAVIRUS FIGHT TO WIN AGAINST COVID-19 WE MUST DO THINGS AFRAID Even so, I gathered the support of a lot of people who helped me form U.S. Expeditions and Explorations (USX). And in 2016, I had the honor of helping lead the first active-duty team and combat-wounded veteran expedition to the summit of Mount Everest as a means to bring attention to PTSD and veteran suicide. At the time, I didn’t fully comprehend the risk I was taking after just getting married and what it would mean for my wife Rachel and our dream of starting a family. We share our story in the book "A Higher Calling: Pursuing Love, Faith and Mount Everest For a Greater Purpose." The ascent was harder than I ever could have imagined but the descent was a story all its own. Looking back, I think we’re all going through a similar descent as we slowly return to our pre-COVID-19 lives. None of us had experience going into this crisis, and we don’t know what we’re facing as we return to normal. So how do we keep our focus, deal with what’s not in our control and fight for our future? I think coming down the world’s highest mountain taught me some lessons I’ll never forget. On my descent from Everest, I found myself fighting for every step. My Sherpa gave a thumbs-up and a nod. “I’m good to go.” It was time to get moving. Every step was agony. I tried to block from my thoughts any factor that was not in my personal control. The vicious gusts of wind that were shoving me off balance and making my bones ache with cold. Not in my control.   The drunken zombie effect caused by the altitude that was sapping my strength and breath and draining the life from my blood. Not in my control.  The burning pain in my toes that was giving way to numbness. Not in my control.   The need to keep moving down the mountain at all costs, no matter how agonizing ... that was something I could control. So I focused every ounce of concentration I had on my feet. Everything else fell away as my life narrowed into a single repeated objective: Take a step. Take another step. Take another step. I thought about Rachel, 9,487 miles away and at this very moment likely worried out of her mind about me. I had passed along a request earlier to some Sherpas heading down from Camp Three for our team’s camp manager to get word to my family that we had safely arrived at the final camp and were going to make the push to the summit. I was not sure if my message ever made it there. I learned that communication can be the difference between life and death; that when you are in pivotal moments, you must clearly communicate and keep things simple to understand. The unthinkable reality was that I didn’t know for certain if I was going to make it back. But I viewed that outcome as simply unacceptable. No force in the world was going to keep me from Rachel. Despite the year I’d spent training for this trip, I was completely unprepared for the reality of being on Everest and the toll it would take on me physically and emotionally. I knew I had to harness every weapon in my physical and spiritual arsenal now. I added a silent mantra with each footstep. Focus. Step. Pray. Every inch of progress was a step closer to Rachel and to our future together. For me, that future was worth climbing every massive peak in the Himalayas. Our team slowly worked our way off the mountain. We had more than a weeklong journey back to our families. I was heading home to the love of my life, who was waiting for me. She was all I could think about. I’d had a dangerous love affair with a mountain that almost took me away from my wife, and coming out on the other side, I just wanted to see her warm smile and wrap her in my arms. I learned so many things on that mountain. I learned that communication can be the difference between life and death; that when you are in pivotal moments, you must clearly communicate and keep things simple to understand. Even if you are right next to someone, it doesn’t mean that communication is actually taking place. I learned that when I am tired, I am vulnerable to mishaps. Which means I need to take a tactical pause, rest, and then recenter and reengage. I learned that although our mission comes first (raising awareness for PTSD), it shouldn’t be at the expense of the team or my family. I learned that as the youngest and least experienced member of my seasoned team, I can always use common sense to help bridge the gap left by the experience I don’t have. I learned that it is harder to sit and wait helplessly to find out if your loved one is alive or dead than it is to climb the highest mountain in the world. I also learned, as Rachel told me later, that you can’t just ask God to save the person you love most and leave it at that. This kind of prayer relies only on one-way communication. Instead, Rachel taught me through her own example that you must fully put your faith in God to carry you through the worst, no matter the outcome. That is the essence of true communication with God. It’s the definition of faith in its purest form. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER I will carry these lessons with me and rely on them as I continue to grow as a leader, husband and person. Just as I began my journey with no prior mountain climbing experience, few of us have experienced a pandemic of this magnitude before. But that doesn’t mean we aren’t capable of climbing and descending this unexpected mountain. As we make our way out of COVID-19 together, I encourage us all to remain focused, let go of what’s not in our control, and continue to put one foot in front of the other until we’re safely on the other side. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Adapted from "A Higher Calling: Pursuing Love, Faith, and Mount Everest for a Greater Purpose." Copyright © 2020 by Harold Earls IV and Rachel Earls. Published by WaterBrook, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, on June 2, 2020. 

 With all that our nation is experiencing, I believe what it really needs right now is leadership from each other. We can’t pass the buck to the president or lawmakers. It is up to us as American citizens to help implement change and truly come together as a nation. Looting and rioting do not help the cause; they just create opportunities for criminals. War without strategy is suicide. You can be upset, but you must have a plan. DONNA BRAZILE: GEORGE FLOYD AFTERMATH – WHEN WILL IT END? We all agree that the killing of George Floyd was wrong. We might also agree it is time for real change and you don’t accomplish that by tearing up our cities. As Atlanta Mayor Keisha Bottoms says, “This is not a protest. … This is chaos.” Too often our many black leaders have gotten complacent with their power, their status as elected officials and all that comes with being a celebrity. They tend to go with what the markets say or what is politically correct. When you have organizations such as Black Lives Matter, which was created when we had a black president and a black attorney general and they were not able to deliver, it is even more cause for concern. It is time for direction! It is time for leadership. It is time for change. But what does change look like? Change its not throwing Molatov cocktails at police cars and hurting the very officers that help defend and keep our country safe. Going to the White House to climb fences and play tug-of-war with the Secret Service does not change anything. We need Americans and young people to know that, instead of tearing the streets up, it is more effective to come to our nation’s capital with a list of ideas for legislation and action, and to stand before House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., to get a bill passed. By lead, I don’t mean talk or rant on social media or simply say that both sides need to stop. I am talking about LEADING. In 2018, I spearheaded and developed, alongside then-U.S. Rep. Scott Taylor, R-Va., a resolution designed to help create alliances to enhance and improve communication and collaboration between members of the law enforcement community and the public they serve. This resolution was specifically designed to help enhance relationships so that law enforcement and the public could truly understand each other. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Specifically, the idea was to acknowledge legitimate concerns of citizens and the strain and mistrust that often clouded their relationship with local police. It would foster constructive and mutually respectful dialogue meant to address legitimate concerns, which can undermine effective policing strategy and public safety. It is up to us all, citizens and leaders, to take this idea and lead. It is lawmakers like former Congressman Taylor, who believed in what I was saying and teamed up with me for action, and resolutions like this that can guide us in working together in difficult times like these. So, if no one in our communities is going to lead, then who will? By lead, I don’t mean talk or rant on social media or simply say that both sides need to stop. I am talking about LEADING. Pushing and challenging the civil protesters who want real change and the law enforcement officers who want to work more with communities for a better relationship. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I will commit to LEADING the charge and creating what Congressman Taylor and I envisioned in House Resolution 285:  a greater sense of trust and cohesiveness in our communities. We cannot accomplish greatness by tearing down or taking apart our great land. We are one, we are America and together we must continue to focus on further building a great nation. A nation that is built on freedom, life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CHRIS PRUDHOME

 Cities across the country are in ruin, and the fear that took root when stay-at-home orders went into effect is being compounded by violent protesters who’ve abandoned reason and justice in the wake of George Floyd’s wanton death allegedly at the hands of a Minneapolis police officer. People’s livelihoods are up in flames. Others are afraid to leave their homes and many who depend on public transportation no longer have a community pharmacy or convenience store for essentials, like food and medicine. Rioters all but guaranteed many of the businesses in their own communities will never reopen again. Meanwhile, local leaders have a chance to stop the lawlessness instead of watching as rioters in their grief and anger destroy neighborhoods. Mayors have a duty to restore order. JIM HANSON: TRUMP'S ANTIFA DECLARATION – THIS IS HOW IT HELPS US FIGHT BACK President Trump has taken this matter seriously and directed the Department of Justice to conduct a civil-rights investigation into the death of George Floyd. But mayors are the ones whose leadership matters the most right now. How they respond to the crisis is what has the power to build up or tear down public confidence. In order to build confidence in their constituents, mayors must operate on the age-old wisdom that “Without peace, justice can’t take root.” In their anger and grief over the needless loss of George Floyd, folks cannot torch their own communities — hurt their neighbors and friends — in the name of justice. Local leaders must harness peoples’ grief and anger and channel it in a constructive direction. Otherwise, the violent rioting could prove the final straw for businessmen and women hanging on by a thread as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and serve to undermine the very change rioters and protesters seek to effect in their communities. We cannot let provocateurs and rioters co-opt our legitimate desire for justice and use it to wreak havoc on our country. This is common sense — not a “right” or “left” issue. Rioting is no way to honor the memory of George Floyd. As the former mayor of Cincinnati and former ambassador to the U.N. Human Rights Council, I witnessed first-hand the truth of Martin Luther King Jr.,’s immortal words: “The chain reaction of evil — hate begetting hate, wars producing more wars — must be broken, or we shall be plunged in the dark abyss of annihilation.” We cannot let provocateurs and rioters co-opt our legitimate desire for justice and use it to wreak havoc on our country. This is common sense — not a “right” or “left” issue; this is about coming together as Americans and ensuring justice is done. Those of us in positions of authority and influence have a duty to restore and unite for justice. Chaos and wanton destruction will destroy our communities. We cannot let our grief and desire for justice over the unnecessary death of George Floyd get lost in this chaos. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Frustration and anger are understandably high. What happened in Minneapolis is shocking and tragic, and George Floyd should still be with us today. The violence and destruction that followed, however, dishonor the pursuit of justice for a man widely remembered by his friends and family members as a “gentle giant." People are losing their life’s work, the businesses they built with their own two hands and their own sweat and hard work. In many cases, those businesses have been closed because of the virus, and now they are being physically destroyed or burned to the ground. Local officials must restore order, end the riots and preserve communities — this is a time for peace, for calm and for unity. We must always remember that what unites us outweighs what divides us — as Americans, we must come together. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We can only achieve our desired goals, however, if we work together. With our spirit, our passion and our love of country, we can ensure justice is achieved and peace restored. If we do this our communities will be the stronger for it, and the thing that will stand out at this moment in history will not be the violent, Antifa-fueled rioters, but the strength of the human spirit. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KEN BLACKWELL

 The thug disguised as a Minneapolis police officer who is charged with third-degree murder in the death of George Floyd does not speak for me. The rioters on the streets of dozens of American cities, destroying valuable property, from shopping malls to synagogues, also do not speak for me. So who does? JASON NICHOLS: GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS – A LONG TIME COMING. WHY THEY WON'T END SOON I am not a racist and neither are most Americans or most police officers. I am not a destroyer of property and neither are most Americans. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Chances are, you are just as appalled by what happened in Minneapolis, and what has happened in American cities and in some other places around the world, as I am. So who speaks for us? I resent the implication that if I’m not torching police cars, I am condoning the actions of a bad cop. I equally resent the implication that my attitudes toward race can be divined simply by looking at the color of my skin. When it comes to race, it seems that we Americans have lost the plot. There was a time, not that long ago, when we had begun to move toward a society where people judged each other as individuals, by the content of their character, in Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s words. And somehow that morphed into a new kind of racism, where assumptions are made that if you’re white, you think this way, if you’re black, you think that way, if you’re straight, if you’re gay, and so on. What happened? When did we move from striving for color-blindness to living in a world where color and other forms of identity trump individual thinking? The academy and social media deserve much of the blame. College students are being taught to see life through a prism of race, gender and sexuality, as if you could define a human being in all of his or her complexity by a few key tests. You can’t. You can’t shorthand people. And yet, my visits to college campuses over the last 10 years have indicated that the progressive movement has taught the young to view themselves and others almost entirely in terms of race, sexual identity, and so on. We used to be people. Now we’re categories. And then what kids learn in college makes its way into the workplace, as they graduate and get jobs, and then into the culture, through the shorthanding of ideas that occurs in social media. In the musical "South Pacific," there was a groundbreaking song about racism called “You’ve Got To Be Carefully Taught.” In other words, racism and hatred are not built into us from birth.   All that gets amplified by progressive politicians who play the shame and blame game to accumulate more power and prestige. And now we live in a world where interactions between people of different opinions, colors, religions or lack thereof, and sexual identity are rooted in distrust, cynicism and outright hatred. In the musical "South Pacific," there was a groundbreaking song about racism called “You’ve Got To Be Carefully Taught.” In other words, racism and hatred are not built into us from birth. They are learned behaviors. And in my lifetime, we recognized the folly of such bigoted thinking and we began to move toward a society where people were accepted as individuals and not judged as members of groups. A far-from-perfect society, but a better society. As Dr. King said, the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice. And then things went the other way. The thug in a cop’s uniform who has been charged with murder was likely taught to believe certain things about race. The thugs in expensive jeans and designer tops rampaging through our cities and destroying parts of an already fragile economy were carefully taught that annihilation and rage are appropriate responses to behavior of which they disapprove. Neither of those kinds of people speaks for me. Or, I would think, for you. Or for who we are trying to be, fitfully, agonizingly, as a just society. I am not a racist, or one who condones rogue cops or rioters. They are not America. This is not a society of blind hate. We have come too far. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We took a wrong turn. We sent our children to college, and the progressive movement that controls thought on college campuses carefully taught our children to hate. And now we are reaping that whirlwind. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY MICHAEL LEVIN 

 George Floyd is a martyr. His death is more than a tragic incident on the streets of Minneapolis, it is emblematic of a traumatic and abusive 401-year relationship. When former Police Officer Derek Chauvin drove his knee into the neck of Floyd – the latter bound by handcuffs, face pressed against hard concrete, his cries for mercy falling on deaf ears from men in uniform who were sworn to protect him – the pain and suffering of so many was on full display and could not be ignored. Since 1619, America has placed its knee on the necks of black people, while others who had the opportunity to intervene stood idly by and watched. DONNA BRAZILE: GEORGE FLOYD AFTERMATH – WHEN WILL THIS END? We saw our country explode this weekend. It is true that some of the people involved in the wreckage and destruction of property had different agendas. However, you witnessed a generation of young people who are angry and frightened that someone they know or love could be next. They are resentful of their countrymen who, just five years earlier, ignored or worse, opposed their pleas that their lives and the lives of those in their communities simply mattered. In 2015, with the exception of a few cities, most of the marching was done peacefully. The media vilified the protesters, their cause, their means of protest, and even the victims of violence themselves by impugning their character. Colin Kaepernick and other NFL players knelt in solidarity with the fallen and in a silent call for justice. They were called "sons of bitches." I wish I could say George Floyd’s death was exceptionally different or more egregious than the others before him. The truth is, it wasn’t. The protesters rightly feel patronized by those who feign expressions of grief and then instruct them on the right way to protest. The question is, where were you? Where were you when Eric Garner begged for mercy, screaming the very same words as Floyd that haunt so many of our nightmares: "I can't breathe“? Where were you when Aiyana Stanley-Jones, a 7-year-old girl, was shot in the head by a police officer during a raid? When 12-year-old Tamir Rice was gunned down while playing with a toy? When Philando Castile was killed while a child watched from the backseat of his vehicle only a few miles from where George Floyd took his final breath? When Atatiana Jefferson was shot through a window in her own home during a wellness check? What occurred on May 30, 2020, will live in infamy like many days before it. It is like Aug. 11, 1965, and April 29, 1992, and April 25, 2015. We have seen images of police brutality and unjust killings on film since at least the early 1960s. What we are seeing is nothing new, except now the images no longer go through a newsroom filter, where often an older white man gets to decide whether or for how long it is newsworthy. America has allowed police brutality and other related issues to go unchecked, and today every major city in the country is smoldering. This country needs to have a spiritual, social, cultural and political reckoning. Systemic racism is cancer. For too long we have been told to ignore the symptoms or given temporary pain relievers, like an uplifting speech from a well-respected politician or an encouraging word from a celebrity. Like all cancers, when you fail to address the underlying issue, it grows and metastasizes until the body is in full-blown crisis. America has allowed police brutality and other related issues to go unchecked, and today every major city in the country is smoldering. The knee of America has been on the necks of black people for so long, despite their fealty to the principles enshrined in our Constitution. Any cancer survivor will tell you that the treatment and healing process is arduous, painful and prolonged. It is not comfortable but it is necessary for survival. The need in this country is for peace, justice, progress, unity. As we can see, there will be no peace without justice, no justice without progress, no progress without unity. Until we can show that peaceful protests yield tangible, lasting results, we will continue to have these explosions every few years. We are a leaderless nation. There is no one at the helm whom the public can trust to usher change and progress, who fights to unify us with words and in action. There is no political or spiritual leader who can reset our ailing country. That leaves the responsibility on us. Some are saying that the protesters who are destroying property don’t respect the law. That is true.  And it's because the law has shown repeatedly that it doesn’t respect black and brown people. In a cathartic rage, they feel as though they are fighting back, disrupting the repressive status quo and placing their knee upon America’s economic and social neck, even if only for a few hours. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It is incumbent upon us to show them they are wrong, that their grievances will be heard and taken seriously, and that true structural change can be achieved through nonviolent means. George Floyd was a martyr and symbol of something much larger. Officer Chauvin’s arrest and conviction are only the first steps. The color of Chauvin’s skin is not the primary issue, the color of his uniform is. I want to know that if I am having a medical emergency, I will be aided by the institutions I help to support, not ignored or hurt worse. There are police reforms that must occur. Stephen Jackson, a former NBA player who knew George Floyd personally, was asked by rap legend Fat Joe about watching Floyd’s death. Jackson responded, “I saw myself.” Fat Joe, who has referred to himself in the past as a “black Latino” appeared emotionally moved. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I am a 6-foot-2 black man. I saw myself. Black wives saw their husbands. Black young people saw their fathers. Black mothers saw their sons. When President Obama saw himself in a black boy who was stalked and killed by a vigilante, he was roundly criticized. Until society fully recognizes our humanity and white men see themselves in Floyd – white women see themselves in Breonna Taylor – white parents see their children in Tamir Rice – white advocates of the Second Amendment see themselves in Atatiana Jefferson or Philando Castile – we will return to this very position with business and communities in ashes. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JASON NICHOLS

 The statement by President Trump that the United States will designate Antifa as a terrorist group is an important one. The biggest reason is they are one, so we can now properly frame their actions. But there are other advantages both in preventing more attacks and catching and punishing the perpetrators. Their actions fit the definition of terrorism as I pointed out in this piece calling for this designation: “The president’s accurate description of Antifa fits the definition under federal law of a domestic terror group. Under that definition, such a group breaks laws ‘to intimidate or coerce a civilian population’ or to ‘influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion.’” DONNA BRAZILE: GEORGE FLOYD AFTERMATH – WHEN WILL THIS END? Most of the hardcore activists wouldn’t even argue with the description or the goals, but previously they were dealing with a much smaller potential downside. Now the array and severity of crimes and especially punishments just jumped exponentially. Many of these wannabe revolutionaries are willing to spend a night in jail, but how many are willing to do 20 years in prison. The immediate effect will be to change the dynamic for the radical Left and their “Burn it all down” wing and create a real deterrent. They have been free to commit vandalism escalating up to violent acts and turn their protests into riots because even if they were caught the local charges were usually minor. This will help slow their ability to grow a pack of angry activists into a howling mob burning buildings, beating bystanders and even killing people. They rely on riding along with the other radical Left activist groups who are all too happy to have them do the dirty work. But if those groups risk being swept up for supporting terror, they are much less likely to tolerate Antifa & friends in their midst. It will also make the college student adventure activists wary and the folks just out for a quick looting consider whether a flat-screen is worth doing real time. Those are real benefits and should not stop anyone who wants to peaceably assemble and petition their government for a redress of grievances. But it will serve as a reminder the word “peaceably” is in there for a reason. Another major damage the designation has on their efforts is the prohibition of financing and material support for terrorism. This won’t deter the diehards who believe rioting is just a warm-up. They will be targets of the increased law enforcement and surveillance powers enabled by the terror designation. This is important due to the very nature of an anarchistic movement like Antifa. They don’t organize as much as they flock together in common cause. That makes identifying, tracking and catching them difficult. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER A whole array of online surveillance and nationwide warrant capabilities allow our federal law enforcement agencies to watch and identify their members and plans as well as gather evidence if crimes have already been committed. Without the designation the diffuse nature of Antifa makes it very tough to jump through all the hoops needed to make this happen. Another major damage the designation has on their efforts is the prohibition of financing and material support for terrorism. While Antifa operations are not particularly high budget, they do cost money and require some types of expertise. Anyone providing that type of support will now find themselves in jeopardy. Antifa and other radical left organizers often pay protesters. Drying up that funding stream and ensuring other groups sympathetic to their cause can’t financially support them will severely hamper their efforts. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP One more positive aspect of this action is to show the vast majority of people in this country that this type of terror against them and their livelihoods will not be tolerated. The avowed goal of Antifa and the other radicals with these riots is to create fear and force changes that will appease the attackers. The governors and mayors have the still difficult task of reining in the current violence. This action by the president will make it less likely another one will happen, or if it does, that those responsible pay a heavy price. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM HANSON

 Just a week ago, newspapers all across our country listed the names on their front pages of thousands of Americans killed by COVID-19. More than 100,000 Americans have perished from the coronavirus. And, as I have repeatedly pointed out, nearly 23 percent of these deaths are African-Americans, even though we black people make up only 13 percent of the U.S. population. WHEN WILL THIS END? There is another invisible disease afflicting our country, and that disproportionally impacts African-Americans. This disease is the insidious systemic racism that killed George Floyd on Memorial Day. JUAN WILLIAMS: GEORGE FLOYD DEATH – NO MORE US VS. THEM POLICING. THESE CHANGES WILL BRING HEALING As primarily peaceful protests spread across our country, at the same time as the death toll from the pandemic finally begins to drop, I urge newspapers to list three more names on their front pages: George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery. These three African-Americans were killed in the past months. Not by the coronavirus. But by racism. WHEN WILL THIS END? If I had it my way, I would urge newspapers to list on their front pages the names of all African-Americans killed by racism. But, sadly, newspapers don’t have enough print to do so. I hope that you already know the facts of the tragic killings of Mr. Floyd, Ms. Taylor and Mr. Arbery, all slain since February. But, if not, here is a brief summary. On May 25, George Floyd, a 46-year-old African-American man, was killed while being arrested by a white police officer in Minneapolis, Minn. As shown in video footage, Floyd was handcuffed and pinned to the ground for several minutes by the officer’s knee on his neck. Even as Floyd repeatedly pleaded, “I can’t breathe,” the officer continued to pin Floyd to the ground until he stopped breathing. Floyd was pronounced dead at a local hospital less than an hour later. On Friday, May 29, the police officer, Derek Chauvin, was charged with murder and manslaughter. On March 13, Breonna Taylor, a 26-year-old African-American woman, was shot eight times and killed by three police officers inside her home in Louisville, Ky. Taylor was an emergency medical technician and an aspiring nurse. The police were executing a “no-knock” search warrant for narcotics in Taylor’s home, but no drugs were reportedly found. Remarkably, to date, none of the police officers has been identified, arrested or charged in Taylor’s murder. 
      George Floyd (left), Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Arbery
       On Feb. 23, Ahmaud Arbery, a 26-year-old African-American man who was jogging in Satilla Shores, Ga., was chased by two white men and killed. As shown, yet again in video footage, one of the white men had a shotgun and three shots were fired. Arbery tried to run away, staggered, fell to the ground and died. Shockingly, it wasn’t until May 7, two and a half months after Arbery died, that the two men, Gregory McMichael, a former police officer, and his son Travis McMichael, were arrested and charged with murder. And it took nearly three months for the white man who took the video while Arbery was being chased, William Bryan Jr., to also be charged with murder. WHEN WILL THIS END? Why do innocent African-Americans keep getting killed by the police? And why are these murders even more horrific, in that they occurred in the middle of one of the deadliest pandemics in American history? Why do innocent African-Americans keep getting killed by the police? And why are these murders even more horrific, in that they occurred in the middle of one of the deadliest pandemics in American history?  Because the current president of the United States has shown no leadership outside of his twitter rantings. Days after Floyd’s murder the president tweeted, at 1 a.m., in response to growing protests of Mr. Floyd’s murder, "These THUGS are dishonoring the memory of George Floyd, and I won't let that happen. ... Any difficulty and we will assume control but, when the looting starts, the shooting starts. Thank you!" Rather than leading our country and bringing the country together by calling for calm and unity, Trump instead ratchets up the rhetoric of violence and division. In doing so, as many have pointed out, the president’s use of the phrase "when the looting starts, the shooting starts," was the exact same phrase used by a racist police chief in Miami in 1967 during his department’s violent policing of communities of color and its response to the civil rights movement. The White House denies that Trump was aware of this phrase’s origin. Yeah, right! So, I ask again: WHEN WILL THIS END? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER This will end when we all work together to eradicate racism, denounce white supremacy and work toward healing and reconciliation. It will end when we work together as community leaders, elected leaders, houses of worship and all others, including the business community, to help alleviate the unnecessary pain of centuries of systemic racism. This will end, when we all have the courage to recognize and respect points of view different from our own. This will end when our politics are about compromise and not always about political combat. The time has come, for us to come together. One Nation under God, indivisible for liberty and justice for all. Then this will end. This will end when our leaders, including public safety officials, take responsibility to train members of their workforce. When we have leaders who, rather than blaming everyone and everything else for his own failures, step up and work across barriers to build bridges of understanding. Leaders who  have  empathy, rather than indifference. Who unify and protect our country, including communities of color, rather than divide us and pit red and blue states against each other. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I pray this will end, or at the very least begin to end, with each of us reflecting on what we can do to make this better. When we elect leaders who will unify our country in its fight to defeat systemic racism and stop the murders of innocent African-American men and women. All of these tragic deaths, by the pandemic and by the police, WILL END! CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DONNA BRAZILE

 Republicans and Democrats in the Senate are unifying around three infrastructure bills to fix America’s highways, ports and water systems. The bipartisan pieces of legislation are the result of input from every U.S. senator and – as of last month – all three have passed out of committee with unanimous support. As our country begins to open back up, these bills will help get the American people and the American economy moving again. They will provide an immediate boost by creating jobs, while providing the long-term benefit of efficiently moving goods and services across the country. Meanwhile, Democrats in the House or Representatives are at a partisan standstill. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and House Transportation Committee Chairman Peter DeFazio, D-Ore., have put out nothing other than a partisan outline calling for massive government spending over the next five years. ANDREW McCARTHY: ANTIFA TERRORIST DESIGNATION – TRUMP MOVE UNNECESSARY. HERE'S WHY The dollar amounts included in the plan accompany a laundry list of liberal priorities. Instead of working on bipartisan infrastructure solutions with House Republicans, House Democrats seem focused on writing a second “Green New Deal.” The framework includes measures to make federal buildings carbon-neutral and to eliminate transportation-related emissions altogether. Included in the colossal spending total was over $100 billion for public transit systems. This represents a 72 percent increase over current funding levels. The top reason Democrats gave for spending so much on public systems was not efficiency or public mobility, but the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. As our nation grapples with the COVID-19 pandemic and continues to implement social distancing, it’s clear Americans will rely more on cars, roads and bridges and less on public transportation. A recent survey found 20 percent of people who took buses, trains and subways regularly before the virus will now avoid them in the future. Another 28 percent plan to use them less frequently. That’s nearly half of the people who use public transportation. Even in response to the health crisis, House Democrats have continued to pound the drum for partisan ideas. In March, House leaders floated legislative language to create a “cash-for-clunkers” program for airlines as part of emergency coronavirus relief legislation. At the same time, they wanted to hold hostage financial aid to the airlines by making it conditional on restrictive emissions reductions. Instead of keeping airlines flying, House Democrats prioritized punishing new regulations. Infrastructure is critical to our economic recovery. Senators want to take up the combined bills, once the immediate health crisis is behind us.   While House Republicans have been eager to work on bipartisan infrastructure legislation, House Democrats have excluded them entirely. In response to the House Democrats’ framework, Rep. Sam Graves of Missouri – the top Republican on the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee – said, “Any serious effort toward enacting infrastructure legislation must incorporate Republican principles as well.” It’s become clear that House Democrats aren’t serious. By contrast, Democrats and Republicans in the Senate are working hand in hand on meaningful infrastructure legislation. Last year, the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee – which I chair – advanced the most substantial highway infrastructure legislation in history. The bill will invest billions of dollars in our highways and bridges. It will Increase funds for every state. The overwhelming majority of that money will go directly to state, tribal and local governments. This is good for two reasons. First, local leaders can determine which road and bridge projects are top priorities. And second, it allows funds to be spent more quickly, so people can get to work. Similarly, our committee – on a bipartisan basis – has written and passed two water infrastructure bills to rebuild America’s ports, levees, dams, waterways and drinking water systems. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The three bills together will help cut government red tape, make communities safer and create much-needed jobs. Liberals and conservatives alike support these three bills. President Donald Trump called for the highway bill to pass in his State of the Union Address and every committee member, including Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., has voted in favor of all three pieces of legislation. Infrastructure is critical to our economic recovery. Senators want to take up the combined bills, once the immediate health crisis is behind us. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Democrats in the House should follow the Senate’s lead. It’s time to find real solutions for the American people and economy. Infrastructure should be bipartisan. The Senate is ready to pass major legislation. The Democrat-led House of Representatives is nowhere close. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SEN. JOHN BARRASSO

Andy McCarhty suggests what law enforcement can do to crack down on Antifa and what Trump must do to restore order According to President Trump and his most ardent supporters, he is a “disruptor” here to shake up established Washington ways. Nevertheless, in announcing that he will “designate” Antifa, the far-left radical movement, as a terrorist organization, he is pulling a page from the Swamp’s playbook. It is political rhetoric portrayed as legally significant action to bring to heel an array of sociopaths that, to be sure, are playing their now familiar instigator’s role in the rioting that roils American cities. ANDREW McCARTHY: LAWS AGAINST RIOTING AND TERRORISM MUST BE ENFORCED AGAINST ANTIFA AND OTHER VIOLENT RADICALS The purported designation would be pointless, in that the means of taking aggressive enforcement action against Antifa, and against domestic terrorism generally, are plentiful and ready to hand. The president’s move would also be legally invalid because, under federal law and for very sound reasons, designation is available only for foreign terrorist organizations. Antifa is a domestic enterprise. The name “Antifa” has a European pedigree, going back to the self-described anti-fascist movements of the radical Left, beginning in the 1920s. And there are some overseas groups that also use the name. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER To the extent, however, that Antifa has a relevant identifiable existence as an entity promoting seditionist violence in the United States, it is as a loosely knit, interstate American group (as much as Antifa itself would be repulsed at the thought of being part of AmeriKKKa and fancies itself as an agent of global anarchism). As the New York Times has reported, Antifa is organized in local autonomous cells around the country. Though it is said to lack “official” leaders, it does have operatives who move across the country making mayhem. More significantly for present purposes, on Sunday (the same day the president’s imminent designation of Antifa was announced), the Trump Justice Department branded Antifa a domestic terrorist group. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As Attorney General Bill Barr’s press statement put it, “the violence instigated and carried out by Antifa and other similar groups in connection with the rioting is domestic terrorism and will be treated accordingly.” CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 The tragedy of the riots sparked by George Floyd’s death was brought home by a distraught elderly black woman interviewed by the local ABC affiliate in her ruined south Minneapolis neighborhood. “These people did this for no reason,” wept Stephanie Wilford, who lives in an apartment next to where shops were looted and burned Friday night. “They went straight to ... every store over here that I go to. I have nowhere to go now and I have no way to get there because the buses aren’t running.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The violence “is not going to bring George back. George is in a better place than we are. I’m going to be honest, I wish I was where George was.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But liberal agitators don’t care about Stephanie and the poor urban communities that have been destroyed in the four-day orgy of self-congratulatory violence they sanctioned. They are too busy dreaming up fantasy scapegoats. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MIRANDA DEVINE'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY MIRANDA DEVINE

South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, Republican member of the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, joins Chris Wallace on 'Fox News Sunday.' Just as we begin to see a light out from the threat of COVID-19, the threats of racism and abuse of power rear their ugly heads. The unnecessary death of George Floyd at the hands of a white police officer is yet another symptom of a societal virus that is more difficult to eradicate than any physical disease we’ve faced. Racism continues to claim American lives, and we seem no closer to a cure than we are to finding a vaccine for COVID-19. As a father and an American citizen, I unequivocally condemn the racism, abuse of power and evil that were demonstrated not only in the instances of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, and Breonna Taylor but also in countless other cases. I mourn with the African-American community for the losses they have endured. NICK HALL: GEORGE FLOYD RESPONSE — MINNEAPOLIS PASTOR OFFERS 3 ACTIONS STEPS FOR JUSTICE Yet, while I can easily call out the evil for what it is, I’ll be the first to say that I do not have all of the answers. The solution for this great evil can only come from a posture of listening to those who have been victimized by it. The majority of us who live outside of the black community cannot begin to imagine living in continuous fear of our rights. In the great opposition of establishing the Emancipation Proclamation, Lincoln once said, “Whenever I hear anyone arguing for slavery, I feel a strong impulse to see it tried on him personally.” Until we inform ourselves of the injustices, racism and wrongdoings ingrained in the daily reality for African-Americans, we cannot begin to activate a deep desire for these wrongs to be made right. While it may be difficult for me to understand the unique experiences of my fellow Americans who live this reality every day, I can join them in hoping for a more just and equal future. In desperate circumstances, the potential for hope in our lives can easily be overlooked and underutilized. How we handle one challenge can often determine how we manage future trials in life. Hope offers endless benefits. Hope gives us peace, joy and courage in the face of pain. Hope helps us choose endurance rather than throwing in the towel. The hope of a better future drives us to confront the horrors of the present. Have we fully engaged our responsibility for racial justice? Do we genuinely hope for a future of equality and freedom untainted by fear?  In 1863, President Abraham Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation because he hoped for a great America. In 1955, Rosa Parks declined an order to move out of her seat because she hoped for a better future. In 1963, when Martin Luther King Jr., made his “Dream” speech and led a nonviolent march on Washington, D.C., he hoped that racial prejudice would be a thing of the past. Following the senseless murders of these American citizens, many of us outside of the black community may share our disappointment and outrage on social media. We may offer our condolences to our black friends, co-workers and the community around us. But we must ask ourselves: CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Have we fully engaged our responsibility for racial justice? Do we genuinely hope for a future of equality and freedom untainted by fear? We may think that sharing a post or verbal dismay at these situations is enough support. Yet we have forgotten that for a real change to occur, hope must be activated in our lives, and true hope is most authentically reflected in our actions toward that which we hope for. When we truly embody hope, it ought to have a considerable effect on us. It should impact the way we think, talk and act. It should cause us to be quiet in moments we may speak out, speak up when we'd typically stay quiet, and ignite in us a righteous anger when we would typically turn our heads. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP For those of us watching these injustices take place, it is time we get off the sidelines and begin to activate a hope for racial justice. We must call ourselves, our families, our communities and our nation to a higher standard. True, life-changing hope is not just a feeling or a sentiment. It is a call to action. It is time for our nation to activate and actualize a hope for the millions who live in fear of their lives and fear of their freedoms. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DR. KENT INGLE

 For most of Donald Trump’s brief political career, chaos has been his friend. He draws energy from an endless storm of difficulties and controversies that would send most presidents into the fetal position. Critics and supporters alike compare his presidency to a reality television show, one that always ends with the leading man getting the last word. JIM HANSON: TRUMP IS RIGHT – ANTIFA HAS HIJACKED PROTESTS OF GEORGE FLOYD'S DEATH AND TURNED THEM INTO RIOTS From Russia, Russia, Russia to Ukraine and impeachment, Trump’s time in the White House has been a continuing roller-coaster ride between danger on one side and disaster on the other. A political Houdini, he has always escaped and emerged stronger in victory, but now comes the biggest test. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER He is in the middle of his reelection campaign just as public disorder is expanding and accelerating, leaving many Americans extremely unsettled and fearful about the future. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP For the president, the outcome could turn on the question of how much chaos is too much chaos. And whether independent voters will abandon him because of Trump fatigue. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

 Editor’s Note: This is the second in a two-part series on Rod Rosenstein’s upcoming testimony before Congress. Part one can be found here.  Former Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein played a central role in the Russia hoax. He was vindictive, conniving and unscrupulous as he sought to destroy the very president he pretended to support and serve.  On Wednesday, Rosenstein will finally be questioned about his actions by the Senate Judiciary Committee as its first witness into an investigation of the origins and evolution of the Russia probe that was opened by the FBI in the summer of 2016. Ten months later —thanks to Rosenstein— it morphed into a special counsel case that dragged on for an agonizing 22 months.    It was Rosenstein who presided over the special counsel investigation of President Trump, all the while conspiring behind the scenes to overthrow him. The duplicity was classic Rosenstein.  GREGG JARRETT: IN RUSSIA COLLUSION HOAX, ROD ROSENSTEIN MUST BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR FLAGRANT MISCONDUCT He well knew that his appointment of Robert Mueller in May of 2017 was an illegitimate abuse of power and contrary to federal regulations governing the naming of a special counsel, as explained in my last column. At the time, there was no evidence that Trump or his campaign had colluded with Russia to steal the 2016 presidential election. It was all there in the FBI files, hidden from the public but readily available to Rosenstein.  Months earlier in January of 2017, the FBI had debunked the anti-Trump “dossier” as little more than scurrilous lies, exaggerations and fiction. There was no other credible evidence of a collusion conspiracy. James Comey’s FBI knew it, and so did Rosenstein. Yet, he was undeterred. In a fit of anger, he hired Mueller for an investigation in search of a crime, which is anathema to the rule of law. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The White House was understandably shocked. And so were other top officials at the Department of Justice (DOJ). As I recounted in my book, "Witch Hunt: The Story Of The Greatest Mass Delusion In American Political History" (page 155), Rosenstein was allegedly confronted in his office over what he had done: “Rosenstein was literally cowering … hiding behind and somewhat below his desk. ‘Am I gunna get fired?’ blubbered Rosenstein.”   It is a scathing indictment of Rosenstein’s lack of character that he only seemed to care about himself. Never mind that he had launched — on his own authority — a national nightmare that would hobble the presidency for two more years, divide Americans over an unfounded scandal and inflict profound damage to our system of justice. Why did Rosenstein appoint Mueller? It was an act of retaliation. The deputy attorney general was furious that Democrats in Congress blamed him for the firing of Comey as FBI director.  Rosenstein, who authored the firing memo, was suddenly “regretful and emotional,” according to people who interacted with him at the time. He became unglued and blamed Trump for all the criticism. Mueller was Rosenstein’s revenge. But hiring the special counsel was merely the first part of Rosenstein’s nefarious scheme. Part two constituted one of the most diabolical plots in American political history.  The Attempted Coup            The moment Comey was fired by the president, Rosenstein began meeting secretly with Comey’s temporary replacement, acting FBI director Andrew McCabe (who was later fired for lying). McCabe decided to initiate a new FBI investigation of Trump simultaneous with Rosenstein’s appointment of Mueller as special counsel. In other words, they double-teamed Trump even though neither one had a scintilla of evidence to justify their actions.  At the same time, Rosenstein and McCabe convened repeatedly behind closed doors to discuss a plan to evict the duly elected president of the United States from office and undo the 2016 election results. According to McCabe, it was Rosenstein’s idea to depose Trump by secretly recording the president for the purpose of gathering incriminating evidence of something —anything. Armed with such supposed evidence, he would recruit cabinet members to remove Trump under the 25th Amendment Here is what McCabe later told CBS’s "60 Minutes":     “The deputy attorney general offered to wear a wire into the White House. He said, ‘I never get searched when I go into the White House, I could easily wear a recording device, they wouldn’t know it was there.’ Now, he wasn’t joking, he was absolutely serious, and in fact, he brought it up in the next meeting we had.”     McCabe didn’t stop there in unraveling the sordid story. He explained how Rosenstein intended to use whatever evidence he might gather furtively as a basis for convincing cabinet officials to remove Trump from office.  “Discussion of the 25th Amendment was simply, Rod raised the issue and discussed it with me in the context of thinking about how many other cabinet officials might support such an effort.” McCabe claimed that Rosenstein was already “counting votes” among cabinet members he had contacted surreptitiously. Government memos confirm this account, and those documents were handed over to Mueller. Did he do anything about it? Of course not. The special counsel report made no mention of it.          The Senate Judiciary Committee must confront Rosenstein about his warrant application. The Justice Department has stated that it was illegally obtained without probable cause. The plot to carry out the equivalent of a coup would have been a lawless misuse of power. The 25th Amendment provides for the removal of a president if he is incapacitated or “unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.” Disliking a president or his decision-making is not a basis for evicting him from office under the amendment.  When the story of Rosenstein’s scheme was later revealed in news reports, he dismissed the story as “inaccurate and factually incorrect.” But in his meticulously worded statement to the media, he did not deny seeking an illegitimate basis for removing Trump. It was a canny misdirection and quite typical of Rosenstein’s propensity for deflection. In a bid to hang on to his job, Rosenstein arranged a meeting with Trump. Here is what the president told me about their conversation: President Trump: He (Rosenstein) said it didn’t happen. He said he never said it. What he told other people is that he was joking. But to me, he claimed he never said it.   Jarrett: Did you believe him?  President: I didn’t really know what to believe.    So which was it? A joke or a fiction? Logically, it cannot be both. During which account was Rosenstein telling the truth? In one of them, he must have been lying.  On Wednesday, the Senate Judiciary Committee must grill Rosenstein in detail about his attempted coup to remove the president and subvert democracy. Spying On Carter Page The four successive surveillance warrants to spy on former Trump campaign associate Carter Page were serial abuses of constitutional rights and the legal process. Factual assertions submitted to the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) were not just wrong, they were never validated as true even though the FBI and DOJ officials who signed the documents swore that the information was, indeed, verified. The applications were filled with errors, omissions, deceptions and lies.  Rosenstein signed off on the final renewal in June of 2017 shortly after he wrongfully appointed the special counsel and schemed to depose Trump from office. The deputy attorney general was desperate to come up with some kind of evidence that would justify what he had already done.  The FBI and Rosenstein relied almost entirely on the “dossier” composed by ex-British spy Christopher Steele. It was phony on its face. It was commissioned by the Hillary Clinton campaign and Democrats. Newly declassified documents show that it was nothing more than malicious Russian disinformation. By January of 2017, the FBI knew this. Surely, Rosenstein knew it too. All of this was concealed from the judges. Yet, he affixed his signature on the warrant to spy on Page, thereby representing to the court that the information was both true and verified when he must have known that it was not. Lying to a court constitutes fraud and other potential crimes. Rosenstein was well aware of this, as any lawyer would be.  Consider what he said at a public forum several months after he signed the warrant application: “In order to get a FISA warrant, you need an affidavit signed by a career law enforcement officer who swears the information is true… And if it is wrong, that person is going to face consequences. You can face discipline and sometimes prosecution.”        Rosenstein’s words frame a prophetic indictment of his own wrongful and, arguably, illegal actions. He swore the information was true and verified. The opposite was true. Rosenstein was acutely aware that the FBI had spent months trying in vain to verify the evidence. A month after his public remarks, Rosenstein was questioned by the House Judiciary Committee. He refused to answer direct questions but suggested that he might not have even read the warrant application that he signed. Grudgingly, he admitted that he did not always read what he was signing.  It is ironic that the man who so sternly lectured an audience about how imperative it was for every prosecutor to ensure that a spy warrant contained truthful information is the same man who may never have bothered to read the one he signed against Carter Page. Or perhaps he read it but didn’t care about the many lies and misrepresentations contained therein. On Wednesday, the Senate Judiciary Committee must confront Rosenstein about his warrant application. The Justice Department has stated that it was illegally obtained without probable cause. It has Rosenstein’s dirty fingerprints all over it.  Attorney General William Barr has denounced government officials for their “misconduct,” “malfeasance and misfeasance” and “clear abuse of the FISA process.” Rosenstein was an integral part of it.  Barr has said that officials “misled the FISA court, omitted critical exculpatory facts from their filings and suppressed or ignored information negating the reliability of their principal source.”  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Rosenstein is far more guilty than others. As the highest-ranking official involved, he had a special and affirmative duty to ensure that the law was being scrupulously followed. His chronic failures and malevolent actions, as described above, constitute an egregious breach of trust. Come Wednesday, senators in their questioning of Rosenstein should give no quarter in demanding honest answers from a man who has shown no regard for either honesty or justice.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREGG JARRETT      

 It was bad enough when New York Democrats and Gov. Andrew Cuomo enacted the “Green Light Law” in January that allowed illegal immigrants to legally obtain driver’s licenses. Yes, those who are in the country in violation of federal law were granted the privilege of obtaining a state driver’s license by New York politicians. “Green Light” is an appropriate name because this law gives illegal immigrants a green light to disrespect our immigration laws and our sovereignty. That law also forbids state Department of Motor Vehicle (DMV) agencies from sharing data with immigration authorities like Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) and Customs and Border Protection (CBP). This was beyond even what other states had done with similar laws. NEWT GINGRICH: CORONAVIRUS AND SENIORS — CUOMO SOLD THEM OUT. HERE ARE THE ASTONISHING DETAILS Of course, none of this squares with the Real ID Act but that doesn’t matter. This is about fighting President Trump, about being part of the resistance. Now a bad law has gotten even worse. In the New York state budget signed by Cuomo in April, an amendment was added to the “Green Light Law” that makes it a Class E felony for officials to share DMV information with an agency like ICE or the Department of Homeland Security that enforces immigration laws. You read that right. New York politicians passed a law that makes it a felony for law enforcement to work with law enforcement. If we have learned anything from the 9-11 Commission, it was that law enforcement agencies should always communicate and work with each other. The left will say these agencies don’t need to work together, that this is immigration enforcement overreach. They are misleading the public. This is about knowingly hiding information about those here in violation of federal law, many of whom are criminals. Entering this country illegally is a crime, but I am not talking about that. ICE’s most recent data shows that 89 percent of those the agency arrests in the U.S. either have a criminal conviction or have criminal charges pending against them, in addition to entering the country illegally. That’s right, almost nine out of 10. The Green Light Law and its latest amendment clearly place a political agenda ahead of public and officer safety. But that remaining 11 percent is important too. Remember, at least three of the 9-11 hijackers had overstayed their visas and were illegal immigrants at the time of the attacks. They did not have any criminal history at the time. I’m not saying that all illegal immigrants are terrorists or criminals. Most are not. But how many are too many? I’d say one. During my tenure as acting director, ICE took over 5,000 criminal illegal immigrants off the streets of New York. Cuomo should be sending a thank you letter to ICE for helping keep communities in his state safe, not keeping information away from them. The Border Patrol also arrests not only illegal immigrants but many individuals who are criminals and public safety threats. Consider how this new amendment affects them. J.P. Kennedy, the U.S. attorney for the Western District of New York, said it best: “Border Patrol, for example, working the highway in the middle of the night, pulls over a vehicle. They can’t run the plates to determine who owns that vehicle. I think it’s legislating obstruction and it’s very concerning to me.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Kennedy says the amendment was passed quietly, while the world was focused on a global pandemic, and raises concerns for the safety and security of New York residents. I agree with him 100 percent and I raised the same concerns months ago when the Green Light Law first passed. It is obstruction and the Department of Justice needs to investigate and take action. Imagine if the federal government responded in kind, refusing New York law enforcement officers access to the National Crime Information Center database. That would be devastating to state law enforcement. But of course, Attorney General William Barr and President Trump would never do that because they care about the safety of all law enforcement officers and the people they protect. As he has proven over and over again, the president has the back of our cops. The same is true of Border Patrol and ICE officers. Even though New York has passed a law that puts them at risk, the men and women of these two agencies will never turn their back on New York cops. They would not hesitate to put their lives on the line for fellow officers, ensuring that they can go home to their families at night. You cannot outlaw the camaraderie among law enforcement officers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Green Light Law and its latest amendment clearly place a political agenda ahead of public and officer safety. Every New York legislator who supported this law should visit the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial in Washington and explain to the families of fallen officers, include more than 200 from the Border Patrol and ICE, why they turned their back on those who serve. These officers gave their lives helping keep this country safe while politicians slept soundly in their beds at night. This Green Light Law, sooner or later, will cause more names to be added to that same wall. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TOM HOMAN

 The fear of police among black and brown people can be puzzling to whites who find comfort in the famous “Thin Blue Line” between them and criminals. But the video showing the shocking death of George Floyd under the knee of a Minneapolis policeman makes black fear of the police – especially among black men – a reality for people of all races to see. Now comes the hard part. NICK  HALL: GEORGE FLOYD RESPONSE — MINNEAPOLIS PASTOR OFFERS 3 ACTION STEPS FOR JUSTICE Black or white, Asian or Latino, native born or immigrant, we all need police. And poor people, disproportionately people of color who often live with high rates of crime, need good police the most. Crime drives down property values and pushes out retail stores. It can be just as poisonous as banks and insurance companies using red lines on maps to show where they cut off poor neighborhoods as not worthy of investment for home mortgages or home improvement. It is just as destructive as district lines that separate good schools from bad schools. When people with power signal they are OK with police harassing “those people” it can lead to daily tension that like a burning fuse, is sure to lead to an explosion of outrage after the officer is videotaped pushing his knee into an unconscious man’s neck. And it inevitably leads to fear and sometimes outbursts of anger among young people of color who feel stigmatized and unfairly harassed by the police. Even worse, it sometimes leads to police thinking that roughing up people on the wrong side of town is their job since the powerful never raise a voice against it. The key here for all Americans, but especially for white people at the top of the corporate and political ladder, is to take on the job of shifting a morally corrupt mindset that celebrates the police as a buffer – the Thin Blue Line – between the poor and people in the better parts of town. That failure of conscience by community officials leads police to use skin color as a shorthand as they assess the threat posed by a citizen.  Americans with money and political power can demand respect from public police forces and even buy private security. And they can turn away from police harassment of teen and young adult black males – remember “stop and frisk” – as a necessary police tactic because of higher rates of crime in poor neighborhoods. That kind of thinking – us against them – leads to excusing police abuse of “those people.” That failure of conscience by community officials leads police to use skin color as a shorthand as they assess the threat posed by a citizen. The result of that twisted logic is too often the mistreatment of black people of any economic class because they are not seen as citizens first but as a threat on the basis of skin color. That kind of thinking can lead to harmful, racial stereotyping of a young black man taking a run across town. It can lead to a white woman threatening a black man by telling police that she is in danger from a black man, knowing the police are more likely to believe her lie than his truth that she got angry after he asked her to obey the law. In this moment healing can only come from shared purpose, the tissue of community reconnecting to bridge the wound. It is already on view in Minneapolis, where black and white citizens can be seen with shovels, brooms and “Go-Fund-Me" donations helping to repair the mindless damage done when legitimate, peaceful protests are taken over by violence. And healing will come when leaders in government, in business and in culture agree to take on the daily work of sending the message to their community that the police are here to protect everyone from crime. Healing will lead to peace when the police chief, the mayor, the governor and the president repeat the message that police are here to protect everyone. Healing means insisting that police do all they reasonably can to show respect for citizens of all colors. That means people at their best, people at their worst. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That kind of policing is the best because it will make us all safer. It is hard work to defeat a racial stereotype that has been around for so long. But the best policing begins by successfully crossing racial lines to reach from the poorest neighborhood to the wealthiest with standards in line with the eponymous police pledge to protect and serve all citizens – not just us from them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Recent racially charged incidents including the tragic death of George Floyd have stirred ensuing riots and torn open the rawest of wounds – racism. Judging a person according to skin color is an ancient sin. For that reason, God gave this ancient solution. In the earliest words of Scripture, God spoke: “Let us make human beings in our image, make them reflecting our nature so they can be responsible for the fish in the sea, the birds in the air, the cattle, and, yes, Earth itself, and every animal that moves on the face of Earth” (Genesis 1:26). Embedded in these words is the most wonderful of promises: God made us to reflect his image. PAUL BATURA: PENTECOST AT A TIME OF CHAOS, PAIN – THESE FRUITS OF THE SPIRIT CAN BEGIN HEALING PROCESS No one is a god except in his or her own delusion. But everyone carries some of the communicable attributes of God. Wisdom. Love. Grace. Kindness. A longing for eternity. We are made in his image. Sin has distorted this image, but it has not destroyed it. Our moral purity has been tainted. Our intellect is polluted by foolish ideas. We have fallen prey to the elixir of self-promotion rather than God-promotion. The image of God is sometimes difficult to discern. But do not think for a moment that God has rescinded his promise or altered his plan. He still creates people in his image to bear his likeness and reflect his glory. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Pop psychology is wrong when it tells you to look inside yourself and find your value. The magazines are wrong when they suggest you are only as good as you are thin, muscular, pimple-free or perfumed. The movies mislead you when they imply that your value increases as your stamina, intelligence or net worth does. Religious leaders lie when they urge you to grade your significance according to your church attendance, self-discipline or spirituality. According to the Bible you are good simply because God made you in his image. Period. He cherishes you because you bear a semblance to him. And you will only be satisfied when you engage in your role as an image-bearer of God. Such was the view of King David. “As for me, I will see your face in righteousness. I shall be satisfied when I awake in your likeness” (Psalm 17:15). How much sadness would evaporate if every person simply chose to believe this: I was made for God’s glory and am being made into his image. Would you let this truth find its way into your heart? You were conceived by God before you were conceived by your parents. You were loved in heaven before you were known on earth. You are not an accident. You aren’t a random fluke of genetics or evolution. You aren’t defined by the number of pounds you weigh, followers you have, car you drive or clothes you wear. You are made in God’s image. Print that on your resume. You are a diamond, a rose and a jewel, purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ. In the eyes of God you are worth dying for. Would you let this truth define the way you see yourself? Would you let this truth define the way you see other people?  Every person you see was created by God to bear His image and deserves to be treated with dignity and respect. This means that all people deserve to be seen for who they are: image-bearers of God. Imagine the impact this promise would have upon the society that embraced it. What civility it would engender! What kindness it would foster! Racism will not flourish when people believe their neighbor bears God’s image.  Why does God love you with an everlasting love? It has nothing to do with you. It has everything to do with whose you are. The fire of feuds will have no fuel when people believe their adversaries are God’s idea. Will a man abuse a woman? Not if he believes she bears the stamp of God. Will a boss neglect an employee? Not if she believes the employee bears a divine spark. Will society write off the indigent, the mentally ill, the inmate on death row or the refugee? Not if we believe, truly believe, that every human being is God’s idea. And he has no bad ideas. Parents and grandparents understand the implications of this truth. I recall when my daughter Jenna was pregnant with our first grandchild. She was round as a ladybug. Long before Jenna gave birth to Rosie, I loved our granddaughter. I’d never seen her, but I loved her. She’d done nothing to earn my love. But I loved her. She’d never brought me coffee or called me papa. She’d never sung me a song or danced for me a dance. She’d done nothing! Yet I loved her already. I would do anything for her. That is not hyperbole. Why? Why did I love her so? Because she carries some of me. A small part for sure, but a part of me, nonetheless. Why does God love you with an everlasting love? It has nothing to do with you. It has everything to do with whose you are. You are his. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP How can we respect our neighbors? What is God’s solution to angry racism that gives birth to violence and bloodshed? Government programs might help. Lectures might enlighten. But, in the end, God’s plan is the only plan: see every person on the planet as God’s idea. And He has no bad ideas. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MAX LUCADO

 “No justice, no peace!” This is the cry ringing through the Twin Cities as buildings are burning and businesses are boarded to protect against riots filling our streets. I drove through my hometown, Minneapolis, over the weekend, and what I saw resembled more the war-torn places I’ve been in overseas than the white-collar city I know. I couldn’t help but think of Isaiah 59:15, “The Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no justice.” ALVEDA KING: AS RIOTS SPREAD ACROSS US, HEED WORDS OF MY UNCLE MARTIN LUTHER KING TO END VIOLENCE AND RACISM George Floyd’s death at the hands of police officers last week has triggered an avalanche of anger that has spilled over the streets of not only our Twin Cities but also New York, Los Angeles, Houston, Atlanta and many other cities across America. The arrest of Derek Chauvin, the officer who pinned Floyd to the ground with his knee, seems to have not quelled the anger many Americans are feeling. As Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. said on March 14, 1968: “A riot is the language of the unheard” — and the unheard will be silent no longer. Yet in the midst of this chaos and pain, I was surprised to experience overwhelming hope. As I walked past smoldering buildings and broken people, voices filled the air on a sound system proclaiming peace. And as I stood with neighbors — men and women, both black and white — gathering to pray and call for change at the intersection where the largest riots have been centered, I saw a glimpse of revival. While the images we see on our TVs show arson and theft, what I witnessed was a generation of mostly young black men and women, surrounded by friends from all backgrounds, all unwilling to fit the mold of a culture that highlights crime and controversy over character. They gathered peacefully to express their anger and call for change. They prayed. They cried. They even challenged one another to become cops, lawyers, doctors and preachers. And while most of America may not see these young leaders, they are here in Minneapolis standing in the gap. It is impossible to sensitively respond to issues of racism and injustice if all your relationships are with people just like you, so seek to learn under those different from you. Your life will be enriched, and you just might make a friend!  As a white man, I will never understand what it is like to be followed in a store, abused, harassed or afraid of my loved ones being mistreated because of the color of their skin. But that doesn’t mean I can’t speak up, pray, lend a hand and do whatever I can to work toward justice, unity, equity and peace. For everyone outside Minneapolis, unsure of how to respond, here are three action steps I would encourage: Pray and repent  The first prayer I encourage you to say is the hardest and requires raw honesty from your part: Pray for God to reveal racism in you … and repent. Plainly and simply put, racism is evil. It is sin. Every human being is created in God’s image, and if we don’t see our neighbors in that light, we need to check our hearts and repent. Pray for the men, women and children who are afraid for their lives because of the color of their skin. Mourn with those who mourn. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And pray for your mayor, governor, police officers, first responders and elected officials. Pray for the safety of those protesting. Pray that the church of the Twin Cities will rise up and lead in this time. I long to see our staff, stages and budgets built in ways that demonstrate our belief that all people have value. Learn about the pain of others   We shouldn’t still have to talk about racism, discrimination and the profiling of our brothers and sisters of color in 2020. But the facts do not lie, and it’s our responsibility to bring change. We need to educate ourselves, to humble ourselves to learn from and about their experience. I encourage you to pick up a book, listen to a podcast or talk with someone who knows about the history of racism, privilege and discrimination in America. Seek relationships with those who are different from you and learn how to love your neighbor. It is impossible to sensitively respond to issues of racism and injustice if all your relationships are with people just like you, so seek to learn under those different from you. Your life will be enriched, and you just might make a friend! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Support causes that promote reconciliation and unity   A great Minneapolis effort to help the urban church is called the One Fund. I also support a mentorship and training organization for black young men in Minneapolis called The Man Up Club, which is led by my friend Korey “XROSS” Dean and is providing food for neighbors whose grocery stores have been burned down. Nationally, I love the work of the AND Campaign and my friend Justin E. Giboney. There are countless groups you can learn from and support. ⠀ To all of my friends who are afraid and angry, I am sorry. I am praying for justice. More than that, I am praying for the family of George Floyd. May the Twin Cities and our nation be brought together during this time. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NICK HALL

 George who? The unarmed Minneapolis man who was killed with a cop’s knee in his neck seemed light years away as my neighborhood, and then my intersection, and then my apartment filled with smoke Saturday night.  Around 6 p.m., hundreds of loud, but peaceful, protesters walked up Fourth Avenue toward Manhattan’s Union Square. ”No justice, no peace!” they chanted. “The people, united, will never be defeated,” they promised. ANDREW McCARTHY: LAWS AGAINST RIOTING AND TERRORISM MUST BE ENFORCED AGAINST ANTIFA AND OTHER VIOLENT RADICALS Throughout the late afternoon and early evening, demonstrators lamented Monday’s brutal, police-involved death of George Floyd. Their shouted slogans echoed off apartment buildings as they mustered in Union Square and walked in large numbers, intermittently north, south, east and west. 
      Photos by Deroy Murdock
       Just after dark, yet another crowd of demonstrators headed north on Fourth Avenue as another cadre walked south from 14th Street. The two groups met, mingled, and made noise as scores of NYPD officers stood ground. Within minutes, someone lit a pile of garbage — not a rare find in this town. The flames were not huge, but they were pronounced and menacing, for all that they foreshadowed. The crowd stepped lively west, across the street, as if in deference to the blaze. The police, some in riot helmets, took this as their cue to split the crowd into segments. They formed two lines and stood, shoulder to shoulder, along East 13th and 14th streets. The masses seemed to retreat within a few minutes. Four firemen from FDNY’s Ladder Three Company, steps away on East 13th, walked over, flattened the burning trash with a shovel, and doused the flames with a fire extinguisher. “That settles it,” I reckoned. Bad call. About 20 minutes later, I smelled something burning. I opened my balcony door and saw huge billows of thick, black smoke on 13th Street, between Fourth Avenue and Broadway.  BOOM! Something exploded. What do smoke, scorched aluminum and shards of glass have to do with George Floyd’s needless, wasteful and hideous killing? Nothing.  BOOM! Another blast. I could not see what was alight. But within seconds, flames reflected off the windows of the Regal Union Square, a top-notch tetradecaplex where I savor motion pictures — when America is not menaced by arson within race riots inside an economic implosion tucked into a global pandemic. “My God,” I thought. “The Hyatt Regency Union Square is on fire!” I feared that the hotel’s entire north side would be incinerated. As rioters looted George Floyd's spotlight, I stepped inside and watched Fox News Channel’s live coverage, ironically expecting to find a better angle on this mayhem on TV than from the actual bedlam unfolding half a block from my home Fox News soon revealed the source of this dense, irritating, eye-burning smoke: an NYPD van. It was fully engulfed. Fire raced from its windows. More of New Yorkers’ tax dollars up in flames — this time literally. At least five such NYPD vehicles were badly damaged or destroyed. They now line nearby University Place, where they sit as further victims of Saturday night's anarchy. These far-Left agitators did not spare even a van from the NYPD's Homeless Outreach Unit. Its windshield is bashed in, and its side windows are smashed or busted out completely. So much for the Left's "compassion" for the downtrodden. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As the rape of my neighborhood ground on, Fox’s intrepid camera crew at Broadway and East 13th Street captured an, in some way, even more enraging scene: Some young thug took his skateboard in his hands, tipped it sideways into a window at Santander Bank, and walked on by as the pane of glass shattered into the Spanish lender’s branch lobby. He didn’t do this with any sense of purpose or apparent outrage. He did this more casually than if he swatted a fly. The banality of evil in the East Village. Where was the memory of George Floyd in all of this?  Nowhere. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP What do smoke, scorched aluminum and shards of glass have to do with George Floyd’s needless, wasteful and hideous killing? Nothing. Will this destruction help unify Americans in pursuit of justice for George Floyd? No. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DEROY MURDOCK

 Following yet another caught-on-video killing of a black man by police, our nation once again is engulfed in the flames of racial tension. In multiple cities, the flames are more than metaphorical as rioters burn vehicles, loot businesses and generally wreak havoc in the streets. Many of the victims of this senseless violence are black small-business owners who have seen their stores heavily damaged or destroyed. As we act immediately to stamp out these riots, our nation must also undertake a fresh and earnest conversation addressing the root causes of these waves of unrest. MORE RIOTS, LOOTING PROMPT CURFEWS, CALLS FOR NATIONAL GUARD IN CITIES, STATES ACROSS US And that discussion starts with a clear-eyed look at the incidents provoking the outrage among people of color in the first place – incidents such as the sickening display of unreasonable and deadly force used by white Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin that led to the death of George Floyd on Monday. As a career prosecutor trained in evaluating evidence and the importance of due process, I have made it my practice to reserve judgment on conduct “caught on tape.” Fundamental fairness requires that we allow for evidence to be properly gathered and reviewed before rendering pronouncements – especially in actions where police conduct is subject to public scrutiny. But we also must be real. We must recognize that there exist far too many indications of blatant police brutality captured on video in real time that reflect a consistent disregard for human life, particularly as it relates to people of color. We cannot deny what we plainly see. The arrest of Chauvin, who has been charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter and fired from the police force, provides a proper avenue toward accountability for the death of George Floyd. But this arrest does not even come close to addressing the widening divide of racial animus splitting apart American society. These awful cases of black Americans losing their lives at the hands of police have simply become too much of a regular pattern. Aside from the most tragic incidents resulting in deaths, we see the ugly bubbling to the surface of anti-black prejudice even in the smaller details of daily life. Our Constitution guarantees the right to assemble and protest, but it does not condone anarchy, violence and lawlessness. Consider the exhibition of raw racism caught on another video in which a woman repeatedly used the words “African-American man” as a trigger to falsely depict a black man in Central Park in New York City as dangerous. The clear dismay of the black man, who recorded that encounter, epitomizes the frustration in the black community. While we must seek and encourage peaceful solutions, we must understand that peace and justice can no longer be a one-way street. For me, these issues are personal. My late father was a freedom fighter and NAACP branch president in the 1950s and 1960s. Like my father before me, I am a life member of the NAACP. I appreciate the drive for equality and justice that have produced the civil rights victories of the past and that continue to motivate the push for progress today. And yet no amount of frustration can justify the random destruction of property nor injuries caused to others through violent rioting across the nation, including in my own state of Indiana. Our Constitution guarantees the right to assemble and protest, but it does not condone anarchy, violence and lawlessness – crimes that must be put down quickly and decisively. Furthermore, while shameful conduct by police must be stopped and prevented, the law enforcement community overall deserves our appreciation and support even as we work to improve law enforcement interactions with people of color. I believe the majority of our police officers are worthy of our trust. Let us take a moment to be candid. We all harbor certain stereotypes, preconceptions and implicit biases that influence our beliefs and inform our behavior. We must engage in conversations that encourage us all to confront our own shortcomings in upholding fairness. Therefore, I cling to this hope: Once we recognize that each one of us engages in some type of racial, ethnic, gender or religious stereotyping, then we can be more forgiving and accepting of the shortcomings of others. And we all can work to improve our attitudes and behavior. In cases of gross infringement of people’s civil rights, meanwhile, we still must gird our loins and fight tooth and nail for justice for all. In these cases, we must use the court systems and every legal tool at our disposal. Murderers – even those who wear badges – must pay the appropriate penalties for their crimes. There are times, as Frederick Douglass said, that “it is not light that we need, but fire; it is not the gentle shower, but thunder. We need the storm, the whirlwind, and the earthquake.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In other situations, such as the Central Park incident, we might be surprised at how much we might accomplish simply through civil and respectful dialogue. Our nation is badly in need of racial reconciliation and healing, and it begins by listening and working to understand the concerns of our neighbors. As Indiana’s attorney general, I am calling upon my federal, state and local law enforcement partners; other elected officials; members of the faith community; and citizens from various other walks of life to join me in organizing a Forum on Race and Justice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Through this process, we will engage in frank dialogue to illuminate the conflict between people of color and the law enforcement community, and we will work to create greater understanding, acceptance and accountability. Further, I will reach out to the White House, fellow attorneys general and other partners to encourage the coordination of similar conversations in communities nationwide. Through open communication, we can all work together to improve race relations and achieve equal justice for all. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CURTIS HILL

 Give me a stack of Bibles so I can swear on them this simple fact: The conversion of Norma McCorvey, the Jane Roe of Roe v Wade, to a pro-life position and to faith in Christ, was no act. The assertions gleefully made by abortion advocates that an upcoming documentary show she was lying are about as believable as someone who would presume to tell you that your sibling or best friend was just pretending to be who they were their whole life. My colleague Janet Morana and I were privileged to be by Norma’s side for her journey for 22 years, from her baptism in 1995 to the day of her death in 2017 – a day on which we had our final conversation with her. DR. ALVEDA KING: CLAIM THAT 'JANE ROE' WAS PAID TO JOIN PRO-LIFE CAUSE IS FALSE I received her into the Catholic Church in 1998, as Janet sat next to her. We led her through an intense spiritual and psychological healing process from the wounds she incurred in the abortion industry, had thousands of conversations and spent countless hours both in public and in private, for business and pleasure. The sacrifices Norma made on this journey of healing are not things you can fake. Her life can’t be summarized in an article or in an interview – even with her. One had to see the whole pattern, all the ups and downs, to identify her center of gravity. She was wounded and erratic, and yet knew she was a new creation in Christ; she was needful of help and yet fiercely independent, tender of heart and yet capable of fierce anger and rebellion. I don’t know what the interview was that the documentary is touting, or what was said leading up to it. What I do know is that the conversion and commitment, the agony and the joy I witnessed firsthand for 22 years was not a fake. There is zero percent chance of that. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In 2013, Norma traveled to New York to celebrate with me as I marked the 25th anniversary of my ordination. On what was one of countless similar occasions, Norma regaled a number of us until late in the night with stories from her life. She was a character, funny and flawed. She was a sinner, just like the rest of us. On the day she died, her daughter Melissa – sensing the end was near – called Janet and me in Rome and we were able to talk to Norma before she passed. She urged us to continue fighting to overturn the unjust decision made in the name of Jane Roe, the persona she had long since outgrown. There was no play-acting in Norma’s final words to us. Everyone will talk about this film for a few days but most won’t care about the truth. There have always been people who have tried to reshape Norma’s story, or get her to reshape it. She resented that and would resent it today. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If anything, what the other side has to face up to is that Norma rejected abortion before she became pro-life. The day before the pro-abortion press conference in which she was first revealed as the “Roe” of Roe v Wade, she told Gloria Allred that she thought abortion was wrong. And while working in abortion clinics, she talked women out of their abortions. If there was any ambiguity, it was about her commitment to pro-choice, not to pro-life. Our movement should take this wave of negative publicity as a chance to get to know Norma better, and to urge America to get to know better Roe v Wade, a policy of abortion-on-demand throughout pregnancy – a policy that not only Norma but America has rejected. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY FR. FRANK PAVONE

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. God tells us repeatedly throughout the Bible that He is trustworthy. This seems simple enough at face value--we know God is good, so we can trust Him, right? Makes sense. But do we live our lives as if we believe it? I think it’s safe to say most of us can find areas where we avoid God,  typically because, through fear or pride, we resist giving Him control over these areas. KNIGHTS OF COLUMBUS PROVIDING UP TO $100M IN CORONAVIRUS AID TO CHURCHES STRUGGLING WITH DONATIONS  Sadly, our resistance to release control to God is usually highest in the more important areas of our lives--which ultimately reveals our lack of faith in Him. Whether consciously or not, sometimes we determine the risk is too great to loosen our grip even slightly to make room for God’s timing and will in these areas. Luckily for us, even as we actively resist  Him, God pursues us and works to help us trust Him, one step at a time. God understands us better than we understand ourselves; only He truly knows our full potential. And as strange as it may seem, oftentimes He will increase our confidence and help us reach our potential by first showing us how weak we are without Him. Understanding our limitations will drive us to rely on Him. Jesus spoke about this in His Sermon on the Mount, teaching, “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven”(Matthew 5:3). Pastor Alex Seeley unpacks this in her book, “The Opposite Life.” Seeley points out that although God does not make bad things happen in our lives, He uses them to shape us into the people He created us to be, to bring glory to His kingdom. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As Romans 8:28 declares, “we know that God causes everything to work together for the good of those who love God and are called according to his purpose for them.” Seeley argues that without these trials and, more importantly, our dependence on God in the midst of them, we will never live out our full God-given potential and purpose. God understands us better than we understand ourselves; only He truly knows our full potential. While we all prefer for things to go “as planned” in our lives, we don’t always see the whole picture, because our perspective is limited. But when we surrender our will to God, we tap into His power. It’s important to understand that because God has given us free will, He may not intervene unless we ask Him.  My pastor Manny Hastings of C3 NYC Church frequently says, “God is a gentleman. He will knock on the door, but He will never barge His way into your heart. He will patiently wait for you to invite Him in, but will never stop knocking.” So how do we begin to give God control over these coveted aspects of our lives? It begins simply by talking to Him. We can make our prayers more conversational, admitting our concerns and hesitations, and asking God to help change our hearts to want the same things He desires for us. Beloved evangelist Ravi Zacharias, who passed away earlier this week, wrote, “Prayer is not the means of bringing our wills to pass but the means by which He brings our will into line to gladly receive His will. And what a glad moment that is.” What a beautiful depiction of God’s vision for our relationship with Him. God longs for us to live lives to the fullest, to take us to new heights and to achieve things we never thought possible. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Though there will be trials we have to experience in order for God’s plans for us to unfold, He promises us He will be with us every step of the way (Isaiah 41:10). When we depend on Him rather than ourselves, “We can do all things through Him who strengthens us” (Philippians 4:13). As we give more of ourselves to His will, He will guide us to achieve things for His Kingdom we never would have thought possible. Knowing this,  we can be filled with hope and confidence for whatever may come. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CHRISTEN LIMBAUGH BLOOM

 From Minneapolis to Manhattan and Atlanta, and in numerous other cities across the United States, one gets the sense that mayhem and evil are on the loose. Did it all start with the horrifying death of George Floyd, an African-American man who died while in police custody? I don’t think so. Wickedness almost always starts from the inside out, often long before a flashpoint ignites an explosion. DEROY MURDOCK: RIOTERS DO INJUSTICE TO GEORGE FLOYD, TORTURED AND KILLED IN A CASE OF POLICE BRUTALITY What we’ve been witnessing the last few days is the product of years of neglect, indifference and outright disrespect toward life. Inherent in such a culture is a disdain for dignity. Every man, woman and child is of inestimable value – “red, brown, yellow, black and white, they are precious in His sight” – as the old children’s Sunday school song goes. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What’s the answer? Governors can call in the National Guard and President Trump can deploy troops to help restore order. But, in a sense, it will be a fragile peace because neither warriors, for all their good intentions, nor their weapons can reach the real source of man’s wickedness. At the root of our current crisis, and the reason for the madness is our sin and our failure to see that all people are made in God’s image. It was the late Billy Graham who once said, “Jesus made it plain that sin was far more than a wrong act. Anything that is against or contrary to the will of God is sin.” And racism and rioting are clearly against God’s will. Ironically, this latest crisis falls amid a transformative season of the Christian church as Christians celebrate a force that can turn hostile hearts to loving and peaceful ones. In the hierarchy of Christian holy days, Christmas and Easter stand alone. One follows the other, of course. Without the birth of Jesus of Nazareth, there would be no need or reason for His resurrection from the dead 33 years later – a singular, monumental and transformative event upon which every Christian’s faith rests. But there is a third day on the Christian calendar that is woefully understated and under-recognized. I’m referring to the feast of Pentecost – an ancient festival commemorating the day when followers of Jesus believe the Holy Spirit descended from the heavens and rested upon His once scared and frightened apostles. The anniversary of that special day is today – the 50th day after Easter. In Christian teaching, God is three persons in one – God the Father, God the Son and God the Holy Spirit. Some theologians even divide history into three corresponding eras based on this triune belief. Prior to Jesus’ three-year ministry, we lived in the era of God the Father. Then there was the brief but substantial era of Jesus. Ever since His ascension, we’ve been living in the era of the Spirit. When the apostle Paul wrote a letter to his friends in Galatia, an area in modern-day Turkey, he reminded them that the “fruit” of the Holy Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control.  Pentecost is celebrated in many churches, marked in some by the wearing of red and the reading and singing of relevant Scriptures and hymns. But I’ve long thought it should be way more of a big deal, because the arrival of the Holy Spirit changed everything, most especially the trajectory of the early Christian Church. But speaking more personally, the Holy Spirit didn’t just change the world – He changed me. I remember a day in the sixth grade when it all came together for me. I had an awakening to the Holy Spirit that inexplicably filled me with a confidence and boldness that seemed to put feet to my faith. I was overwhelmed with a sense of peace, assurance and conviction. It was so wonderful that even 36 years later, I can hardly explain it. I didn’t hear any audible voice, but I could sense the Lord telling me, “Paul, you’re ready to go out and share your faith. People may mock and make fun of you, but don’t worry about it. Just tell them in your own words what I am doing for you.” When the apostle Paul wrote a letter to his friends in Galatia, an area in modern-day Turkey, he reminded them that the “fruit” of the Holy Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness and self-control. Rarely have the people of the world needed the “fruit” of the Spirit more than today. There’s an old saying that something too good to be true usually is – but not in this case, nor ever in God’s economy. There are thousands of promises in the Bible, and one of my favorites involves how to bring the Holy Spirit into your life. In reality, it’s also the way to eternal life. It’s from the evangelist Luke: CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.” We’re all a work in progress, but I hope you’ll join me in praying for peace throughout America, and may the power of the Holy Spirit infuse and transform all of us from the inside out. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The epicenter of the coronavirus outbreak in the United States is in New York state, particularly the New York City region. As of this writing, New York state has 376,309 confirmed cases and 29,653 deaths — most of which are in New York City. Why is New York the epicenter of the virus? Did the lack of leadership from New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D.) and New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio (D.) contribute to increasing the spread of the virus? I try to answer these questions on this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World.” My guest is Dr. Betsy McCaughey, former lieutenant governor of New York from 1995 to 1998 and author of "The Next Pandemic," in which she discusses the coronavirus crisis and how to battle the next pandemic without an economic shutdown. TUCKER CARLSON: CORONAVIRUS AND THE SHOCKING ABUSE HAPPENING IN NURSING HOMES. THIS TRAGEDY WASN'T BY ACCIDENT Of course, the news media has been utterly unwilling to tell the truth about New York state. Cuomo has been portrayed as some Churchillian figure, leading his state through this crisis courageously and effectively. Just a few weeks ago, people were even calling for Cuomo to run for president. Contrast that with the coverage of red-state governors from Georgia, Florida and other places who have been portrayed as heartless and incompetent. In reality, New York has far more infections and deaths than any other state, and it’s because of bad decisions from Cuomo and others, not bad luck. Most egregiously, Cuomo’s Health Department actually mandated that nursing homes accept patients with coronavirus from hospitals. As the pandemic worsened and hospitals in New York filled up with people infected by the virus, hospitals said they needed to move elderly patients into nursing homes with empty beds to make room for others. The state government wouldn’t even let nursing homes require coronavirus testing for admission. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER This process led to an astonishing number of deaths in nursing homes. And McCaughey, who has intimate knowledge of Albany’s inner workings, explains in detail how it all happened because Cuomo sold out New York’s senior citizens to the hospital industry. Indeed, the Greater New York Hospital Association is a massive donor to Cuomo. With so much money at stake, McCaughey argues, Cuomo and his Health Department kowtowed to the hospital industry and chose money over lives. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We also go beyond New York and look toward the next pandemic by discussing McCaughey’s book. She details how we don’t need to put the country on lockdown to fight a pandemic and can use a number of new technologies that, inexplicably, we don’t seem to be prioritizing now. I hope you will listen to this week’s episode to hear the truth about what is happening in New York and help me think through how we can prepare for the next pandemic. I also hope you will listen to my next episode, set to air Wednesday. We’ll be discussing the future of space exploration and space as an infrastructure investment, topics near and dear to my heart. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

 President Trump was right when he placed blame Saturday for the riots tearing apart cities around the country on Antifa and other radical left-wing groups. He should now go one step further and declare Antifa a domestic terrorist organization. The rioting this past week was ostensibly sparked by the death of George Floyd – a 46-year-old black man who was arrested by Minneapolis police Monday for allegedly trying to use a counterfeit $20 bill to buy cigarettes. There is no question that Floyd’s death was horrific and should never have happened. But in fact, many of the rioters affiliated with Antifa simply and cynically have used Floyd’s tragic death as an excuse to spread mayhem and destruction. The officer who knelt on Floyd’s neck – Derek Chauvin – was charged Friday with third-degree murder and manslaughter. Chauvin and any other officers who go on trial for Floyd’s death should be punished to the full extent the law allows if convicted. But Floyd’s killing should not be used as an excuse by anyone to justify rioting and domestic terrorism that in many cases has victimized African-American small-business owners and others in many cities. DUELING CLAIMS: TRUMP BLAMES ANTIFA FOR RIOTS, MINNESOTA OFFICIALS POINT FINGERS AT WHITE SUPREMACISTS AND CARTELS “These are ‘Organized Groups’ that have nothing to do with George Floyd. Sad!” Trump tweeted Saturday in describing the rioters. “It’s ANTIFA and the Radical Left. Don’t lay the blame on others!” The president’s accurate description of Antifa fits the definition under federal law of a domestic terror group. Under that definition, such a group breaks laws “to intimidate or coerce a civilian population” or to “influence the policy of a government by intimidation or coercion.” Antifa claims to be an anti-fascist group dedicated to stopping oppression of marginalized communities. But the group considers law enforcement officers and many government agencies to be among the “oppressors,” along with many others who reject its radical agenda. Antifa members have been advocating for and conducting violence to intimidate for a long time now, but the wave of terror they unleashed this past week makes taking action against them truly urgent. There’s no question that many of those protesting the killing of George Floyd had every right to peacefully express their outrage over his death. But in many cases, Antifa radicals hijacked those legitimate protests to turn them into riots. Antifa sent the word out far and wide to burn buildings, loot stores, destroy cars and attack law enforcement officers. Police agencies warned that Antifa and its many tentacles were using the Floyd protests to further their agenda. "Domestic extremists, including anarchist extremists and other anti-government extremists, are using the unrest in Minneapolis to amplify and justify their calls for dismantling law enforcement agencies and carrying out attacks on law enforcement, government, and capitalist targets," a Philadelphia Police Department bulletin reported. Antifa members have instigated violence many times before and for a variety of leftist causes like shutting down speech they don’t like, armed attacks on Immigrations and Customs Enforcement detention facilities and other anti-police violence. The nexus for violence at any leftist protest will always be a band of black-clad Antifa thugs burning, breaking windows and attacking anyone they see as part of the oppressive system Antifa’s track record of violence is undeniable, but it is a nebulous and diffuse group. Antifa is anarchistic by nature and members are more likely to be squatting in an abandoned building than running a storefront office. Since all terrorist groups operate mostly in the shadows, we must empower our law enforcement and security agencies with all the tools possible to illuminate their malevolent and dangerous activities. These vital tools will become available under the Patriot Act if Antifa is designated as a domestic terrorist group. As a terrorist group, Antifa could have its electronic communications monitored by law enforcement agencies that obtain search warrants. This would enable authorities to gain knowledge of what criminal activity Antifa was up to and more easily prevent violence and apprehend organizers. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In addition, the terrorist designation would make it a federal offense for Antifa to engage in terrorist attacks and other acts of violence against mass transportation systems. A favorite tactic of Antifa members is to burn buses when rioting. As a terrorist group, they could face federal prosecution for this crime. The terrorist designation would also ban aiding Antifa because that activity would be considered to be providing material support to terrorists and terrorist organizations under federal law. Antifa members often work with other leftist groups, serving as their shock troops. These other activist groups know that they can rely on Antifa to do the burning and breaking, but would themselves be held liable for these crimes if Antifa is officially designated as a terrorist group. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The bottom line we need to keep in mind is that peaceful protesting is a cherished American right – but violent attacks are criminal conduct. By accurately labeling Antifa as a domestic terrorist group we can protect against its terrorist crimes without infringing on the rights of the rest of us to protest and exercise our rights of free speech under the First Amendment of the Constitution. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM HANSON

Dr. Alveda King, niece of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., says Americans need to come together as one people to end violence and racism. As we see cities burning across America following the senseless killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis on Monday, there is a cry to heaven going up across America: Lord, please heal our land! It is a cry for unity, for social justice, for safety and for an end to hatred. There is a unique opportunity for leaders of our families, our communities and our nation to open our stadiums, town halls, sanctuaries and social media streams and invite people to stop panicking and stop fighting and breathe. George Floyd was robbed of his very God-given breath. The unarmed black man accused of passing a counterfeit $20 bill was on the ground in handcuffs when white police officer Derek Chauvin knelt on his neck for about eight minutes, crushing the life out of him even as Floyd pleaded that he could not breathe. ANOTHER NIGHT OF RIOTS ERUPTS IN US AS PROTESTERS, POLICE CLASH IN NYC, PHILLY, CHICAGO, OTHER CITIES Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter in the merciless killing of a defenseless man suspected of a minor crime. What a senseless loss of life! Right now, here in America we are in a season of repentance and revival. It is very important for spiritual leaders to lead the way in repentance and prayer; especially with the violence erupting out of Minneapolis spreading destruction across the country like wildfire. Thankfully, spiritual leaders are recognizing that we are in a battle of evil against good. Of course, good always prevails in the end. God is good. As members of one common race – the human race – we continue to fight this battle. We should unite, fighting as one with our spirits, souls and bodies in full engagement. As leaders, we must encourage people who are frightened and frustrated. We must stand in solidarity and unity as one human race. We must reject the socially engineered concept that our skin colors and ethnicities divide us into racial groups. As my uncle, the prophet Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. – who was also killed by a white man – famously said, he dreamt of a world where people “will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character.” Amen. Martin Luther King preached love, not hate; peace, not violence; and universal brotherhood, not racism. The Bible tells us: “The God who made the world and everything in it, this Master of sky and land, doesn’t live in custom-made shrines or need the human race to run errands for God, as if God couldn’t take care of God. God makes the creatures; the creatures don’t make God. Starting from scratch, [from one blood] God made the entire human race and made the earth hospitable, with plenty of time and space for living so we could seek after God, and not just grope around in the dark but actually find God. God doesn’t play hide-and-seek with us. God’s not remote; God’s near. We live and move in God, can’t get away from God! One of your poets said it well: ‘We’re the God-created.’ Well, if we are the God-created, it doesn’t make a lot of sense to think we could hire a sculptor to chisel a God out of stone for us, does it?” (Acts 17:24-29) People are human beings with so much more uniting us than dividing us. People have human personalities. As Martin Luther King once said: “When we value the human personality we won't kill anybody.” He also said: “Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere. I have decided to stick with love; hate is too great a burden to bear.” In the midst of the Minneapolis crisis, President Trump has said anarchists must not be allowed to drown out the voices of peaceful protesters. Now is a time for a peaceful protest prayer and repentance. I am saddened yet undaunted that a quote from my Uncle Martin is being taken out of context. The prophet said that "violence is the language of the unheard.” Some people are calling this an endorsement of violence, but nothing could be further from the truth. MLK spoke those words in defense of non-violence; he refused to promote violence as a solution to the ills of society. Martin Luther King preached love, not hate; peace, not violence; and universal brotherhood, not racism. “Love is the only force capable of transforming an enemy into a friend,” he said in 1963. If only my uncle could still be with us now; fighting nonviolently for justice and against all manifestations of hatred and racism. As we are in the eye of the storm, the solution remains: peace be still. No peace, no justice. I believe MLK would agree. America is in flux, with George Floyd, Martin Luther King Jr., COVID-19 and unborn aborted babies all whirling around in a chaotic storm. Peace be still. Anchor with the Gospel of Jesus Christ. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As these storms coincide and converge we must ask: What can we do so that we are not fearful and not panicking but praying, believing and loving? We must pray and unite as people of one blood, one America, one human race. My heart is heavy with grief and is moved by the cruel killing of George Floyd, who was a man of God. An urgent cry is growing in my heart. Please America, pray for an end of the looting and shooting! Unite in prayer as one blood. Thank God for promises made and promises kept. We must continue on. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I am spending part of my Sunday with my goddaughter, Angela Stanton, and others in prayer. We are praying for an end to violence and racism in America. And as we pray, as we thank God, we see all of the progress we are making together in America. We will get through this, just as we will get through the coronavirus pandemic. Pray for America! CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM ALVEDA KING

 Attorney General William Barr issued a statement Saturday decrying the rioters who have violently hijacked peaceful protests over the killing of George Floyd by Minneapolis police. The attorney general made explicit reference to “groups of outside radicals and agitators” who are pursuing a “separate and violent agenda.” Barr added: “In many places, it appears the violence is planned, organized and driven by anarchist and far left extremists, using Antifa-like tactics, many of whom travel from out of state to promote the violence.” The mention of Antifa is significant. It is a loosely-knit, interstate movement whose objective is to wage a terrorist war against the United States, using violence against the government and our civilian infrastructure. DUELING CLAIMS: TRUMP BLAMES ANTIFA FOR RIOTS, MINNESOTA OFFICIALS POINT FINGERS AT WHITE SUPREMACISTS AND CARTELS Equally salient is the attorney general’s assertion that the radical groups involved in the rioting are pursuing a specific, violent agenda. That obviously refers to the ongoing campaign to coerce acceptance by the country of these groups’ counter-constitutional totalitarianism. Barr vowed that the Justice Department will take enforcement action across the nation. This is worth pausing over, particularly because when these uprisings occur, as they do with disturbing frequency, there are inevitable calls for the enactment of domestic terrorism laws. I’ve investigated and prosecuted terrorists – jihadists who adhered to foreign terrorist organizations but operated domestically, as well as those who attacked American interests overseas. I can thus tell you that the laws we already have are more than adequate to the task. There is no need for new laws. Calls to enact them are either ill-conceived or the usual case of preening politicians sensing the need to look like they’re doing something in response to a crisis. Rioters can and will do immense damage if, as some foolishly suggest, we wait for them to exhaust themselves. I led the 1990s prosecution of the jihadists who bombed the World Trade Center and then planned a more ambitious campaign – which, fortunately, we thwarted – to bomb such New York City landmarks as the Lincoln and Holland Tunnels, the United Nations complex, the FBI’s lower Manhattan field office, some military installations, and so on. Concurrently, the terrorists plotted political kidnappings and assassinations, as well as jailbreaks of imprisoned jihadists. They were unable to execute these ambitions schemes, but it was not for lack of preparation, including extensive paramilitary training. This is why Attorney General Barr’s mention of the violent agenda of the rioters pinged my antennae. We prosecuted the so-called Blind Sheikh (the late Omar Abdel Rahman) and his subordinates using a Civil War-era statute that criminalizes “seditious conspiracy.” This rarely invoked penal law targets conspiracies to levy war against the United States, or to forcibly oppose or overthrow our government. The key element is violence – either its use or planned use. That is the attribute that fundamentally distinguishes legitimate protest from insurrection. The attorney general also pointed out in his statement that it is a federal crime to cross state lines or use interstate facilities in order to incite or participate in rioting. Indeed it is, and this also raises the specter of federal racketeering laws. We think of these principally as a vehicle for prosecuting organized crime groups. But they actually apply to any “enterprise,” which is simply an association of some kind. It could be informal and secretive, like a Mafia “family” or a drug cartel; or it could a more formal entity (racketeering laws have been applied to corporations, guilds, political parties, labor unions, and so on). CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The racketeering enterprise must affect interstate commerce through a pattern of criminal activity. This would enable the Justice Department to investigate outfits like Antifa, which are organized around a nihilistic vision and which dispatch members throughout the country to commit mayhem, seriously injuring Americans and destroying property. Our existing laws, at both the federal and state levels, are more than adequate to the task of dealing with terrorism and seditionist violence. The Justice Department and the FBI, including the bureau’s Joint Terrorism Task Forces (partnerships with police authorities in major cities throughout the country), are highly experienced and adept in this area, and they have the resources to get the job done. The job needs doing. The ravaging of our major cities right now is a violation of the rights of peace-loving Americans, both those who are legitimately exercising their First Amendment rights to protest, and those who are going about their lives expecting the governmental protection to which the Constitution entitles them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP For society to flourish, the rule of law must assert itself. Justice must be done, which means bringing anti-American domestic terrorists to heel. Rioters can and will do immense damage if, as some foolishly suggest, we wait for them to exhaust themselves. The failure to confront radicals only increases their energy and appetite to do harm. Order does not happen spontaneously. It takes a commitment to enforce the laws. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  It’s been 11 Sundays since Richmond Community Church had a live Sunday service. But this Sunday that unbelievable streak ends. We will meet together again at our Glen Allen campus. Of course, it will not look like the last time we met on Sunday, March 8. There will be no hugging or handshaking, no passing of the offering bags, no refreshments after the service. And the auditorium capacity is capped for physical distancing. Just to come this Sunday you have to pre-register to attend the service. We’ve had five Christmas Eve services to accommodate the crowds but we never required a registration. Now you need to register just to attend a service the Sunday after Memorial Day. NEWT GINGRICH: AMERICA'S SUCCESS IN SPACE IS DUE TO CHEERFUL PERSISTENCE, DESPITE DANGERS AND CHALLENGES There will be those who choose not to attend. And that is fine. We don’t want anyone to feel uncomfortable or unsafe. But we do want to be open for those who desire to attend. Who desperately want to be back at church. Some will say it is wrong to reopen, we are putting lives at risk. But we are not forcing anyone to attend, only offering the option. They can continue to attend our online service. We were the first church in Virginia to have an online campus over 12 years ago. We are quite comfortable doing ministry in this format. We don’t have many people in the high-risk category of over 60 in our church. We are following the governor’s mandate and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines. I can’t see a compelling reason for our church not to start having live services again. In fact, the biggest question is not, should we have services, but rather, what is God saying to us? What is the message from this pandemic for the church? Is this enormous disruption for a purpose? There is an amazing story in the history book of the New Testament. The book of Acts tells us how the early church began and expanded. It gives us a timeline of church growth and shares the stories of church leaders who led the way. One of the most fascinating stories is about the apostle Paul. He was the Christian leader who started churches and wanted to continue expanding the church into Asia. Since God has a purpose for all of us then he must be up to something. This virus certainly did not take him by surprise. Is there something new we need to discover?  But God stopped him. He did not allow Paul to preach the Gospel, he actually stopped him twice. Acts 16: 6-7 tells us, “Paul and his friends went through Phrygia and Galatia but the Holy Spirit would not let them preach in Asia. After they arrived in Mysia, they tried to go to Bithynia but the Spirit of Jesus would not let them.” What a remarkable event. Throughout the New Testament Christ-followers are told to preach the Gospel, to share the good news and yet here God stops it. Just like the church has been stopped from meeting since March. Could God do his greatest work in the new reality of a broken plan? Since God has a purpose for all of us then he must be up to something. This virus certainly did not take him by surprise. Is there something new we need to discover? Paul ended up going to Macedonia. And it changed history. Christianity advanced from Asia to Europe. The Church was established in Europe and then spread throughout the world. There are now over 2 billion Christians. It never would have happened without God’s disruption. Paul responded enthusiastically and positively to the change in his plans. He is the one who wrote the poignant words “All things work together for good to those that love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Paul could have been mad at God or felt sorry for himself. He could have begrudgingly gone to Europe but not given himself to the work. But instead, he established the church in many cities. We are like Paul in a situation we did not plan to be in. No one could have ever predicted churches would be stopped from meeting on Sundays for services. It’s a total disruption, a complete change from everything we normally do. Paul went to Macedonia because he had a dream of a man asking him to come over and help them. In the midst of this change to our lives and church there is an opportunity to do even greater good. To have a higher impact. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Church is not stopped, certainly not defeated. We have a new chance, a new possibility. Jesus went to Calvary and all seemed lost but he triumphed over it and won the victory. And we can too. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM RICK MCDANIEL

 Equal application of the law, justice, is what we all need to calm the country. “The greatness of our nation comes from our commitment to the rule of law,” said Attorney General William Barr, and he is correct. Without justice, everyone in our country is at risk. Everyone I spoke with, on all sides of the political spectrum, was sickened, disgusted, saddened, frightened and mad about the apparent excessive force by a Minneapolis police officer evidently carrying out his own justice on George Floyd, who was handcuffed and pinned to the ground for nearly nine minutes. He died. It should not have happened. KAY COLES JAMES: GEORGE FLOYD'S SENSELESS KILLING – END RACISM THAT AFFLICTS AMERICA'S SOUL LIKE A CANCER Unfortunately, there are a small number of people who seek chaos in the United States. They take advantage of tragedy and try to compound it with violence, fear and rioting. Barr said, “Groups of outside radicals and agitators are exploiting the situation to pursue their own separate and violent agenda.” Barr added, “In many places, it appears the violence is planned, organized and driven by anarchistic and far-left extremists, using Antifa-like tactics, many of whom travel from out of state to promote the violence.” While there must be swift justice for the death of George Floyd, there can be no acceptance of lawlessness. After four nights of violence and rioting in his city, Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey boldly stated, “This is no longer about protesting….This is about violence, and it has to stop.” Perceptive, but unfortunately four nights too late. We should not tolerate rogue cops nor should we tolerate “protesters” who go too far by stoking violence and breaking the law. The mayor and the governor, both Democrats, have been far too slow to address the problem before it erupted, and once it was spiraling out of control, law enforcement was nonexistent. Friday night they issued a curfew but refused to enforce it, adding to the chaos and ceding deference to looters and rioters. That should not be acceptable in America. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We should not tolerate rogue cops nor should we tolerate “protesters” who go too far by stoking violence and breaking the law. Ultimately the long-term solutions for peace, prosperity and united communities will be found in families, neighborhoods, churches, safe schools, good jobs and a justice system that is fair. They will be found in communities where Lady Justice wears a blindfold and equally administers the law, no matter who you are, where you came from or who you know. Until that confidence is restored, no community deserves to be overrun with looting and fear.  Order must be restored as the wheels of justice turn. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Barr said, “We must have law and order on our streets and in our communities, and it is the responsibility of the local and state leadership, in the first instance, to halt this violence. The Department of Justice (including the FBI, Marshals, ATF, and DEA), and all of our 93 U.S. Attorneys across the country, will support these local efforts and take all action necessary to enforce federal law." The good news is solutions will best be found in our local communities, where an individual’s voice can have the most impact. If we wait for Congress to solve these issues, it most likely will never happen. These problems can be expeditiously addressed by prioritizing justice and rejecting fear and violence. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JASON CHAFFETZ

 Things are often more complicated than they appear at first blush. That is certainly the case with the murder of George Floyd, with which former Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin was charged in a complaint filed on Friday. KAY COLES JAMES: GEORGE FLOYD'S SENSELESS KILLING – END RACISM THAT AFFLICTS AMERICA'S SOUL LIKE A CANCER For one thing, contrary to most people’s assumption, Floyd appears not to have died from asphyxia or strangulation as Chauvin pinned him to the ground, knee to the neck. Rather, as alleged in the complaint, Floyd suffered from coronary-artery disease and hypertensive-heart disease. The complaint further intimates, but does not come out and allege, that Floyd may have had “intoxicants” in his system. The effects of these underlying health conditions and “any potential intoxicants” are said to have “combined” with the physical restraint by three police officers, most prominently Chauvin, to cause Floyd’s death. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As I’ve noted, Hennepin County prosecutors have charged Chauvin with third-degree depraved-indifference homicide. Now that the complaint has been released publicly, we see that a lesser offense was also charged: second-degree manslaughter. This homicide charge involves “culpable negligence creating an unreasonable risk” of serious bodily harm, and carries a maximum sentence of ten years’ imprisonment. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is easy to see why prosecutors added this charge (and why they shied away from more serious grades of murder described in my column). The case is tougher for prosecutors if there is doubt about whether Chauvin’s unorthodox and unnecessary pressure on Floyd’s neck caused him to die. Had he been strangled, causative effect of the neck pressure would be patent. But if the neck pressure instead just contributed to the stress of the situation that triggered death because of unusual underlying medical problems (possibly in conjunction with intoxicants Floyd may have consumed), it becomes a harder murder prosecution. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Saturday’s successful launch of the first manned space flight from American soil since 2011 marked a triumphant and thrilling turning point in America’s remarkable history of space exploration. The days of American astronauts hitching a ride out of this world on Russian rockets are over. America is once again a spacefaring nation operating under our own power, not dependent on any other country. Like millions of others, I watched with excitement as NASA astronauts Bob Behnken and Doug Hurley were blasted into the heavens with explosive force, headed to the International Space Station. SPACEX MAKES HISTORY, LAUNCHES NASA ASTRONAUTS INTO SPACE FROM US SOIL FOR THE FIRST TIME SINCE 2011 The launch from the Kennedy Space Center in Cape Canaveral, Fla., of SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket was a welcome relief after the planned liftoff Wednesday had to be scrubbed with only minutes to go due to bad weather. Importantly, the launch proved that the partnership between NASA and private enterprise can work, marking a new chapter in space exploration. NASA has harnessed the mighty engine of our free enterprise system to drive space exploration in the most efficient and cost-effective way possible. The launch also gave the American people a much-needed boost of hope and good news. We certainly need that at now. Rioting has broken out in many cities following the death of an unarmed and handcuffed black man, George Floyd, after white police officer Derek Chauvin was captured on cellphone video kneeling on Floyd’s neck for about eight minutes. Chauvin has been charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter. The space launch is something we can all celebrate after too much bad news. And, of course, the coronavirus pandemic has tragically claimed the lives of over 100,000 people in our country, cratered our economy, and thrown millions of Americans out of work. The space launch is something we can all celebrate after too much bad news. Outer space has long been the source of great human fascination – long before Russia launched the Sputnik satellite in 1957 and American astronaut Neil Armstrong’s historic first steps on the surface of the moon in 1969. Those events took place before I was born, but I know from my parents and other relatives and friends who lived through the historic early days of space exploration and the race to the moon how those adventurous journeys captured the attention of billions of people around the world. Humans have always looked skyward and wondered what lies beyond. It was the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates who once observed: “Man must rise above Earth to the top of the atmosphere and beyond, for only then will he fully understand the world in which he lives.” Thousands of years have passed since that statement, but the quest for answers and the curiosity of the unknown persists. As he awaited the liftoff Wednesday that was scrubbed, SpaceX founder Elon Musk called the project the “culmination of a dream” that was 10 years in the making. With the launch Saturday, he saw his dream turn into reality. The controversial and quirky Musk suggested that if someone had asked him a decade ago how likely it was that he and the team would be able to pull the launch off now, he’d have given it no more than a 1 percent chance. If you’ve lived long enough, every successful launch brings a sigh of relief. Your mind can’t help but wander back to the tragedies of Space Shuttles Challenger in 1986 and Columbia in 2003 that claimed the lives of a total of 14 astronauts. Fortunately, the three astronauts of the Apollo 13 survived a close call that could have resulted in their deaths. We know the price of exploration can be fatal – which is why we rightly hold explorers up so high in our esteem. We cheer for them when they succeed because we know their victory ultimately benefits us all. Reaching for the heavens reminds us, too, that there is life and wonder beyond what the eye can see. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The late John Glenn, who became the first American to orbit Earth, told reporters: “To look out at this kind of creation and not believe in God is to me impossible. It just strengthens my faith.” I’ve long believed that one of the keys to happiness is to keep reaching – even for things beyond my grasp. Goals provide structure and force us to focus – but they also provide us with the thrill of the pursuit, something that Musk has long championed. “There have to be reasons that you get up in the morning and you want to live,” Musk reflected. “Why do you want to live? What’s the point? What inspires you? What do you love about the future?” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s cheer on the astronauts heading toward the Space Station and allow their triumph to inspire us to work toward the fulfillment of our hopes and dreams. Americans love longshots and underdogs, especially dreams that seem out of reach and out of this world. Maybe it’s because intuitively or even subconsciously, we know that if a person like Musk’s dream can come true, maybe someday, somehow ours might as well. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

 The senseless and completely unjustified killing of George Floyd – an unarmed black man – by a white police officer in Minneapolis on Monday should shock the conscience of America. While I understand the frustration and anger, I do not condone the violence spreading across this country in response to Floyd’s horrific killing. Rioting tearing apart Minneapolis and cities coast-to-coast will never lead to anything but more suffering. Those who are committing crimes are distracting us from the even larger group of people who are peacefully demonstrating. But we cannot shrug off Floyd’s killing – along with the killings of so many other black Americans throughout our nation’s history and up through today. DEROY MURDOCK: RIOTERS DO INJUSTICE TO GEORGE FLOYD, TORTURED AND KILLED IN A CASE OF POLICE BRUTALITY How many more black people must die, and how many more times will statements of sympathy have to be issued? How many times will protests have to occur? How many more committees will have to be formed until America admits that racism is still a problem in this country? Racism in America is a fatal wound. Every time another incident occurs we put a Band-Aid on it, but the Band-Aid keeps falling off. Band-Aids are not enough to ever stitch this country back together. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The arrest of fired Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin on Friday on charges of manslaughter and third-degree murder is a welcome step, but it is just a Band-Aid. Chauvin is seen on cellphone video kneeling on Floyd’s neck as Floyd lay on the pavement handcuffed and helpless. Other officers with Chauvin did nothing as they watched Floyd die, and should face justice for their inexcusable inaction. During my 70 years on this Earth I have lived through the civil rights movement, I have seen the highs and lows of this country, I have seen America’s goodness, and I have seen its hatred. There is no other country like ours in the world – nothing compares to its greatness. But the issue of racism is America’s Achilles’ heel. It has been embedded into our culture for 400 years, since the first Africans were seized from their homes on the other side of the world and brought to colonial America in chains and enslaved. The racism experienced by black Americans is not a political issue and to anyone who tries to use it as one, on the left or the right, I say shame on you. No longer should our communities be pieces in a grand chess game. The promise of the Declaration of Independence that we are all created equal applies to people of every race. This is not about politics – it is about morality. It’s time America takes responsibility and expands human flourishing to all of its citizens – not just the majority of them.  This country’s founding principles have created a system for injustices to come to light. They are designed to enable the human flourishing of all America’s citizens. Let’s use those principles to guide us. It’s time America takes responsibility and expands human flourishing to all of its citizens – not just the majority of them. Americans must speak up and reject the racism and division in their own communities. There has always been a remnant outside the black community fighting for racial equality. It can no longer be just a remnant. Racial equality is something that every one of us, regardless of skin color, must work toward on a daily basis. Individually, we can make a difference by promoting peace and prosperity for all people, knowing that life is better for everyone when we as Americans succeed together. It will take courage to speak up, but it is the only way we can overcome racism and the problems plaguing our nation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Simple acts like starting a dialogue with a neighbor or teaching your children the difference between right and wrong can have a profound impact now and for generations to come. Nothing can bring George Floyd back to life. But if his horrific and needless death proves to be a turning point to make Americans finally end the ugly racism that stains our nation’s history and afflicts us like a cancer of the soul, he will leave behind a legacy we sorely need. CLICK HERE FOR MORE BY KAY COLES JAMES

 President Trump announced on Friday that he has directed his administration to "begin the process of eliminating policy exemptions that give Hong Kong different and special  treatment." This means a wide range of agreements between the U.S. and Hong Kong, from and extradition treaty to trade policies, will be affected. His announcement came a day after China's National People's Congress (NPC) rubber-stamped a national security law drafted by the Chinese government. The law seeks to ban “treason, secession, sedition and subversion.” But it is so broadly defined and vaguely worded that it will greatly expand the CCP's control over Hong Kong by criminalizing Hongkongers for exercising their basic rights to free speech and free assembly. The fact that Beijing chose to bypass Hong Kong's legislature to impose such a controversial law on the people of Hong Kong effectively ends the "One Country, Two Systems" framework, which was supposed to guarantee Hong Kong's political autonomy from Beijing fo 50 years. Beijing's action and announcement have drawn international outcry and condemnation. CHRISTIAN WHITON: TRUMP'S TOUGH ACTION AGAINST CHINA IS LONG OVERDUE – BEIJING MUST PAY FOR ITS MISCONDUCT As Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in a statement, "No reasonable person can assert today that Hong Kong maintains a high degree of autonomy from China, given facts on the ground." To fulfill his duty required by the Hong Kong Human Rights and Democracy Act (HRDA) mandate, Pompeo informed the U.S. Congress on Wednesday, "Hong Kong is no longer autonomous from China." Based on Pompeo's recommendation, President Trump instructed his administration now to revoke Hong Kong’s preferential treatment as a separate customs and travel territory from the rest of China. Trump also said his administration will sanction individuals and officials from both the Communist China and Hong Kong who are responsible for eroding Hong Kong's autonomy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Beijing's breach of  international treaty in Hong Kong certainly warrants such strong responses from the U.S. The Trump administration's actions are welcomed by pro-democracy Hongkongers. In addition to imposing these punitive measures, the Trump administration should also consider humanitarian assistance to Hong Kong by laying out a welcome mat for freedom-loving Hong Kongers. There are three good reasons for the U.S. to do so. First, Hong Kong people meet the refugee definition. The U.N. Refugee Agency defines refugee as someone who has been forced to flee his or her country because of persecution, war or violence. Hong Kong was once one of the freest places in the world, but now it is a police state. Amnesty International has documented Hong Kong police's brutality against protesters, including arbitrary arrests, brutal beatings and evidence of torture during detention. In recent weeks, Hong Kong police indiscriminately arrested and detained hundreds of peaceful Hong Kongers, most of whom are young people and some who never even participated in any protests. Beijing already said it would send security agents to Hong Kong to help enforce the national security law. It has become increasingly clear that it is next to impossible for Hong Kongers to exercise their rights to speech and assembly without the fear of persecution. Freedom-loving, pro-democracy Hong Kongers have to find a new home because their beloved city is no longer safe for them. Second, when the U.S. removes Hong Kong's special treatment, it will cause economic pain on Communist China, but it's the Hong Kong people who will suffer the most. Hong Kong’s economy already declined after months of unrest in 2019 and the coronavirus outbreak in the first half of 2020. Hong Kongers' knowledge, skills, work ethic and their devotion to freedom will make them a good addition to our great nation. They will no doubt enrich any community that welcomes them with open arms. Losing special economic status and facing the U.S. economic sanctions will likely prompt mainland Chinese businesses and international businesses to move their operations, transactions and trade to other places, taking capital and jobs with them. Hong Kong people will be left to suffer economic hardship. If they want a better life for themselves and their families, they have to pack up and leave. Third, welcoming Hong Kongers benefits the United States too. Hong Kongers are well-educated. Since English is an official language in the city, many Hong Kongers are already used to communicating in English on a daily basis. Hong Kongers are also industrious, creative and resourceful. They successfully transformed Hong Kong from a small fishing village into an international financial and trade center and one of the wealthiest places in the world. Most importantly, Hong Kongers are well-versed in democracy and have a deep appreciation for political freedom. They often look up to the U.S. for inspiration. More than once, we have seen them wave American flags and heard them sing the American anthem during their protests. Their peaceful mass demonstrations, last summer especially, demonstrated their dignity and maturity as responsible citizens, serving as a powerful rebuttal to Beijing’s assertion that western democracy is incompatible with Chinese people and culture. Hong Kongers' knowledge, skills, work ethic and their devotion to freedom will make them a good addition to our great nation. They will no doubt enrich any community that welcomes them with open arms. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The British government is reportedly already working on a migration plan that would allow some Hong Kongers to settle in the United Kingdom. It's time for the Trump administration to join our closest ally in this noble effort and designate a special process to speed up the application and approval process for any Hong Kongers seeking political asylum in the United States. It is in our nation's DNA to serve the unique role of being “the last best hope of earth,” in the words of Abraham Lincoln, for freedom-loving people around the world. People of Hong Kong are at the front line fighting against tyranny. They simply wish to have what we Americans know very well: freedom and the right to self-determination. The United States can and should help them. Let's welcome them to our land of the free. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM HELEN RALEIGH

Former Assistant Commerce Secretary Bruce Mehlman shares his predictions for the economy as it begins to reopen. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  New York state law mandates K-12 schools practice 12 fire drills per year. But the state has never required schools to practice remote instruction, leading to predictable failures and avoidable inequities when the coronavirus pandemic arrived and schools closed. And 19 years after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks shut down airspace across the nation, Congress still had no plan for remote operations in a national emergency when the coronavirus hit. Voters in Wisconsin’s primaries had to literally risk their lives to exercise their franchise because planners never planned for foreseeable contingencies. NEW YORK CITY IS NOW ONLY PART OF STATE STILL WAITING ON REOPENING When the pandemic postmortem is written, historians won’t need to look far to find fault. For decades, policymakers underfunded pandemic preparedness and opted for health system efficiency over surge resilience. Our safety nets are woefully inadequate: 53 percent of American families lack emergency savings, over 33 million have no paid sick leave, and 28 million lack health insurance. Across our economy, we see a mixed bag of readiness. Government, health care and education were least prepared for the arrival of the disease COVID-19 that is caused by the novel coronavirus. In stark contrast to these failures, the more digitized sectors of our economy proved the most buoyant in dealing with the pandemic. Technology companies led the way, shifting employees to remote work before government mandates, and enabling the millions of other Americans to continue working, playing and learning. Digital readiness begat pandemic resilience beyond the technology sector itself. From retail to banking to communications to manufacturing, businesses that had embraced mobility, the cloud and broadband-enabled services persisted and often increasing productivity despite the lockdowns. Of course, few of these businesses became digital-savvy in anticipation of a global pandemic. Rather, digital readiness is a 21st-century business imperative, and few companies or individuals can hope to compete without leveraging the power of such technologies. We see this in the productivity statistics. From 2000 to 2015, the digital industries generated productivity growth of 2.7 percent per year, compared to just 0.7 percent for physical industries. And according to data from the National Science Foundation, digital industries were twice as likely to innovate compared to physical industries. This contrast will only accelerate after the coronavirus pandemic has ended. In this decade it’s not the strongest companies that will survive nor the most intelligent individuals. The businesses and people who are most digital-ready and adaptable to technological change will succeed. Survival of the connected-est. The fourth industrial revolution is accelerating, and even more than before the pandemic, software is “eating the world.” Despite many positive possibilities for workers, consumers and students of the future, this trend threatens to exacerbate the already significant inequality between the digital haves and have-nots. Well before the COVID-19 outbreak and lockdown, we saw how digital divides contribute to gaps in learning, earning and even life expectancy. Today some children who were struggling to keep up in the physical classroom are denied admission to the virtual school for want of Internet-enabled devices. Rural businesses without broadband connections found it impossible to apply for and obtain government stimulus loans. Older Americans in need of health care services but unable to leave home could not access the telehealth providers to whom so many of us have turned. We can do better. As policymakers focus on helping Americans rebuild our economy and our lives, they can take meaningful steps to close these digital divides and accelerate our comeback by making broadband more available, affordable, accessible and American. Available Deployment of broadband to serve rural areas takes investment in infrastructure where market forces alone may not reach – in addition to regulatory approaches that do not discourage private sector investment and spectrum policies that prioritize broadband. Congress could include such incentives in the next round of COVID-19 recovery legislation. Affordable While there are effective existing programs to help make broadband more affordable to low-income Americans, they need greater funding – especially now. Additional initiatives could ensure that K-12 students have access to computers with Internet access so that no child is denied entry to the Zoom classroom and no family is unable to access government services. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Accessible Even when broadband is available and affordable, it remains inaccessible for too many businesses and individuals. Some lack the digital literacy that should be taught in schools. Others reasonably worry about cybersecurity risks or insufficient privacy protections. Still more find essential government and health care online offerings poorly designed and user-unfriendly. American Years of aggressive investment in innovation combined with robust government subsidies and domestic protectionism enabled Chinese technology companies such as Huawei to vie for global dominance in 5G. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP American policymakers have awakened to the economic and national security challenges presented by questionable foreign network equipment deep in the network. They should catalyze efforts by U.S. innovators to develop and deploy alternative technologies that replace expensive proprietary hardware systems with smarter, American-made open standards software alternatives. The coronavirus pandemic exposed many longstanding failures in our nation’s safety nets and policy priorities. But we know how to fix the challenges. Investments in today’s recovery can yield greater leadership, fairness and innovation in the decades ahead.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BRUCE MEHLMAN

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  I was supposed to give the commencement address at Southern University Law Center in Baton Rouge, La., this month – until the coronavirus pandemic forced the postponement of graduation ceremonies at universities, colleges and high schools around the nation. This was a special occasion for me because my niece, Brianna Francis Golden, was in the graduating class. She is now the first law school graduate in the Brazile family – and graduated cum laude! Well, the coronavirus won’t stop me from sharing my message with new graduates – not just at Southern University, but with every graduate reading these words. So here is my commencement address for all college and university graduates who had no commencement ceremonies of their own this year. OBAMA KNOCKS 'FOLKS IN CHARGE' WHILE DISCUSSING COVID-19 IN COMMENCEMENT SPEECH Dear Class of 2020: Let me begin by saying how much I am impressed with you. I am impressed because you are graduating. That’s no mean feat in the best of times. This is also a remarkable occasion because you are the first generation of university graduates who have already made history – you are the first to graduate virtually.                                      You already have “a first” to tell your future grandchildren. And you are graduating after surmounting obstacles that haven’t been faced by young people entering this society in many generations. You are beginning your adult lives after already having accomplished something impressive just by getting this far. If you begin to wonder if things will ever get back to normal, remember this: Not only do “all good things come to an end,” so do “all bad things come to an end.”  Gratitude lifts the spirit, soothes the strain of struggle and replenishes your energy. It’s been over a century since our world has seen a pandemic on this scale – longer than living memory for almost all of us. The 1918 flu pandemic ended in the spring of 1919, in a world much less equipped to deal with the challenges the disease posed. This current pandemic will also end, more from our own efforts than from the vicissitudes of nature. Not every generation experiences a pandemic. Not every generation is as rudely tossed into the tides of history as your young generation already has been. It’s a challenge. But rising to that challenge is not simply a necessity – it’s also an opportunity. My ancestors survived American slavery. My grandparents experienced the 1918 flu pandemic. My parents were born during the Great Depression, grew up during World War II, and graduated into the Korean War. They call the generation that grew up during the Depression and fought the Second World War the “Greatest Generation.” Like you, their path to adulthood was littered with obstacles. But their success in dealing with those obstacles shaped them and benefited all subsequent generations. And they earned the gratitude and admiration of all who have followed. Most of you were born during the presidencies of Bill Clinton or George W. Bush. The first president you remember much about is likely Barack Obama. And because the universe likes variety, you are graduating when Donald Trump is president. You’ve already experienced the entire gamut of presidents! Who knows what other twists life has in store for us. But whatever comes our way, we’re equipped to survive and thrive. Consider this: we are all here today because some relatives survived the 1918 flu pandemic and found each other. They had children who persevered and triumphed. And they in turn raised another generation that fought to make the world we were handed a better place for all of us to live. Now it’s your turn to take the torch. I know you will make your own descendants admire and revere you as much as we admire and revere those who have come before us. So what is it that I can say that you will want to take with you today? It is this: Regardless of how unique the novel coronavirus pandemic is, you have a place in this world and God has a purpose for you. That purpose may be a once-in-a-generation responsibility, or it may be to serve where you are living, as supportive spouses, parents, friends, good neighbors and good citizens. Whatever purpose there is for you, you’re up to it! You’re up to it because you’ve not only acquired knowledge at a good institution of higher learning. You’re up to it because you’ve passed tests of your courage, your endurance, your resourcefulness and your persistence. The fact that you’re here today, graduating, is evidence you’re ready and able to confidently enter into life. Take time to pursue your goals. Do not be a bystander. Be a participant in – and a shaper of – history. Most importantly, the history of helping to meet the current challenges of your generation. Here is my challenge to you: Go beyond yourself. Seek to be of service every single day. Look for the goodness around you; express kindness in the small acts you can do. If you see a lack of love, then how much more important it is for you to be a small, steady light of love in this world. Measure yourself soberly, in humility, yet with a quiet confidence. By whatever name we give the presence of good in this world – know that you have the ability to do great things. Go beyond the ordinary. You are not where you are by accident of time and birth. You are exactly where the universe intends you to be. Take it one day at a time. Know that you are an agent of change and a manifestation of love that others can depend on. Do not despair of graduating into a world of dangers. This has always been a dangerous world. The cave dwellers daily experienced wild animals that saw them as lunch, and came down with illnesses they didn’t understand and couldn’t treat, much less prevent or cure. Rather than feel a victim, believe that you are born to serve at a time when you have a vital role to undertake and an opportunity to make a difference. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER “In all things be thankful,” says scripture. It doesn’t say: “For all things be thankful.” When you are most discouraged, think about what you can be thankful for. The Almighty, who is still in charge of this universe, wants you to be grateful because gratitude helps you. Gratitude lifts the spirit, soothes the strain of struggle and replenishes your energy. We are meant to struggle in this world. Take hold of hope and faith. They are gifts that allow us to keep going and to accomplish the seemingly impossible. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP How fortunate you are to be where you are now, just when the world most needs you. Those of us who have graduated prior to this day have your back – and you have our support. Just be yourself. That’s all you have to do because you, like the Greatest Generation, have a rendezvous with destiny. Believe that you will be the difference we need in the future. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DONNA BRAZILE

 PROGRAMMING ALERT: Watch special coverage of the SpaceX launch on Fox News Channel anchored by Neil Cavutor at 3 p.m. EST on Saturday, May 30. This is the moment to remember that cheerful persistence is the key to America’s success in space. We have lost rockets. We have lost satellites. Tragically, we have lost people. Yet, again and again, Americans return to inventing, discovering, and developing the future. This commitment to progress – despite frustrations, disappointments, and difficulties – was held by the original settlers crossing a dangerous Atlantic Ocean in small ships. SPACE ALLIANCE: ELON MUSK AND PRESIDENT TRUMP SET FOR HISTORIC DEMO-2 LAUNCH It was possessed by the pioneers following Daniel Boone and others into dangerous places with unknown threats. It was embodied by the wagon trains and after them the railroad builders. The inventors and developers of aviation had far more crashes and lost far more lives than everything we have experienced in space. And yet, at every instance, we have picked ourselves up and continued to build the future, despite the dangers and challenges. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER American perseverance and daring to launch astronauts on a reusable private rocket have attracted attention from around the world. My wife Callista, currently serving as U.S. Ambassador to the Holy See, caught some of this excitement in a video in which she noted that Pope Saint Paul VI had gone to the Papal Observatory at Castel Gandolfo, near Rome, and watched the first landing on the moon back in 1969. As a tie between the past and the future, the Papal Observatory is an amazing place. It has roots in helping Pope Gregory XIII reform the calendar (the Gregorian Calendar which we still use today) in 1582. The modern observatory was established by Pope Leo XIII in 1891 “so that everyone might see clearly that the Church and her Pastors are not opposed to true and solid science, whether human or divine, but that they embrace it, encourage it, and promote it with the fullest possible devotion.” While based in Italy, the Papal Observatory also runs telescopes at the Mount Graham International Observatory in Arizona. As part of understanding the worldwide impact of the renewed American space program, Callista got the director, Brother Guy Consolmagno, an American Jesuit, to share his good wishes and hopes for the future. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP On Saturday, we will once again be watching the coverage and sending our best wishes and prayers to the brave Americans who are leading us into the future. I hope you will watch, too. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

 Don't listen to White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany's predictable critics. The level of vitriol the leftist media hurls at her daily -- during and apart from the press briefings -- conclusively proves she is doing a superb job. Liberal journalists whip their long knives in her direction and seem shocked she doesn't grovel. They've been savaging her since her first press conference on May 1. No one with the audacity to work for President Donald Trump deserves a second's worth of honeymoon. On McEnany's first day, New York Times White House correspondent Annie Karni quoted her as saying she would never lie to the press and then cited numerous examples of her supposedly violating the oath right off the bat. WHITE HOUSE BRIEFLY LOCKED DOWN AS UNREST SPREADS TO ATLANTA, DC, NYC AFTER GEORGE FLOYD DEATH They were lying in wait for her. They still are. On May 26, Tom Jones from Poynter called McEnany "arrogant, inexperienced and ineffective." "(S)he just looks overmatched," he wrote. "(I)n barely more than a month, McEnany has already had several high-profile controversies." I wonder why she's had "controversies." Could it be that the White House media cabal enters those briefings with war paint -- ready to smear President Trump and discredit McEnany if she interferes with their plan? The media's attitude is purely adversarial, yet they act appalled that McEnany returns fire, albeit calmly, respectfully and eloquently. They uniformly dismiss this Harvard Law graduate as green and over her head, but she is remarkably polished, and it is driving them mad. It would be different if the media were to use the briefings to help inform the viewing public. But few of them ever ask questions that could better inform the citizenry. Instead, they serve up accusations not even thinly disguised as genuine questions. Let me give you a sadly typical example. Politico's Ryan Lizza asked McEnany: "What does the White House view as having -- by Election Day, what does the White House view as the number of dead Americans where you can say that you successfully defeated this pandemic? Is there a number?" As I watched this, I was stunned at the brazen inappropriateness of the question -- and few things from this bunch surprise me. When McEnany refused the bait and said that every single life matters, Lizza persisted, asking, "When voters go to the polls in November and they want to judge the president on his response to this pandemic, what is the number of dead Americans that they should tolerate ...?" The question was so out of line I admire McEnany for retaining her composure. But she crossed the media's inviolable line in telling Lizza he was asking the wrong question and suggesting that he could have asked a more pertinent one. How dare she position herself as his equal? Fair observers know that Lizza's question was crass, outrageous and an egregious example of the left politicizing everything about the coronavirus. The media's attitude is purely adversarial, yet they act appalled that McEnany returns fire, albeit calmly, respectfully and eloquently. They uniformly dismiss this Harvard Law graduate as green and over her head, but she is remarkably polished, and it is driving them mad. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER You see, you are not allowed to talk back to the sacrosanct Washington press corps, especially if you work for that unrefined, interloping president who stole the election and is still trespassing on 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. As Trump's press secretary, McEnany is an accessory to his adverse possession of the White House who forfeited any expectation of civil treatment when she accepted the job. Some television anchors and commentators are particularly offended by McEnany's aforementioned practice of parrying the hostile questions they volley at her with suggestions of other questions. This just cannot happen because the press is holy and McEnany is their inferior who must curtsy while they abuse her and slander her boss. It is odd enough these self-important journos believe they are above challenge, but it is even more so considering they draw first blood. Do they actually believe McEnany is supposed to stand there passively in the face of their mistreatment, and not fire back and reasonably defend herself and President Trump? I can guarantee you one thing: The tens of millions of Trump supporters don't agree, and they have her back. We don't share the media's warped belief that they can behave rudely and then whine like innocent victims when they get a small dose of their own medicine. The media can continue this sick charade that they are objective journalists, but half the nation knows better, and the other half probably does, too. But many approve of the media's odious behavior because they applaud a media at war with a president they loathe. Anyone familiar with media "fact-checkers" knows that today's left describes contrary opinions as lies. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Even if McEnany were completely deferential, the Trump-hunting media would never accept her unless she betrayed Trump. They would accuse her of lying anytime she presented a position that differs from theirs. The liberal media will continue to posture and complain about McEnany, and the rest of us can rest assured that in so doing, they further validate her in our eyes. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID LIMBAUGH

 It's ironic that Democrats and their mouthpieces in media have been pounding the table the past few years about Russia, Russia, Russia and the importance of preserving the integrity of our elections while overlooking the fox in the henhouse of Silicon Valley. A powerful tech sector, run by ultra-liberal political activists at Twitter and other social media networks, routinely censor conservatives and any voices that stray from its left-wing ideology. This includes Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., whose Twitter account was suspended last August. This week, ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee Rep. Jim Jordan, R-Ohio, tweeted: "Two years ago, Twitter shadow bans @RepMattGaetz @MarkMeadows @DevinNunes and myself. Now they've decided to censor @realDonaldTrump What's next, @jack?" JIM HANSON: TRUMP’S SOCIAL MEDIA EXECUTIVE ORDER IS JUSTIFIED – PROTECTS FREE SPEECH, COMBATS CENSORSHIP Of course, Jack Dorsey, Twitter's CEO, denies any foul play while the rest of us see pervasive evidence of alarming political bias -- and de facto election meddling. Take Twitter's latest attempt to humiliate President Donald Trump by fact-checking some of his tweets expressing concern about mail-in voter fraud. This week, Twitter singularly targeted the president -- in the midst of a presidential election cycle -- effectively labeling his tweets as "fake news" despite ample evidence that mail-in voter fraud exists. Had Twitter administrators bothered to do a simple internet search, they would've found that federal prosecutors charged Thomas Cooper, a 47-year-old postal carrier, on Tuesday for fraudulently altering mail-in ballots from one political party to another. Or Twitter's content monitors could've easily gone to WhiteHouse.gov and found a comprehensive study done by the Heritage Foundation which details scores of examples of voter fraud surrounding absentee ballots. Or, heck, Twitter could've watched a 2004 video available on YouTube by Rep. Jerry Nadler, D-N.Y., who warned: "Paper ballots are EXTREMELY susceptible to fraud... I can show you experience which would make your head spin." This is precisely what the president was warning us about in his tweets, but alas, Twitter's "fact-checkers" either didn't bother to do basic research or, worse, deliberately chose not to. If you suspect it's the latter, then you are correct given the politically charged, anti-Trump tweets recently uncovered and outlined in an eye-opening piece at Fox News. Yoel Roth, Twitter's Head of Site Integrity has tweeted his disdain for our commander in chief and the millions of patriotic, law-abiding Americans who support him. In November 2016, Roth tweeted "I'm just saying, we fly over those states that voted for a racist tangerine for a reason." Translation: If you live in "fly-over" states and voted for Trump, then your voice doesn't count. Twitter is "fact-checking" the president -- while turning a blind eye to his past and present political opponents who've spread malicious misinformation on its platform in an attempt to stop Trump from getting elected in 2016 and to block him from getting re-elected this November. Or how about this missive? In September 2016, Roth tweeted: "I've never donated to a presidential campaign before, but I just gave $100 to Hillary for America. We can't f--- around anymore." Roth has also compared the Trump administration to "ACTUAL NAZIS." This is who Twitter wants us to trust as a "neutral" fact-checker. Now also consider that when Twitter "fact-checked" the president, it linked to selectively chosen information that attempts to counter the accuracy of the president's tweets. Articles that were -- you guessed it -- created by anti-Trump left-wing media. No bias there right? But that's not all. What's also glaringly obvious and warranting the executive action by the president we're told is forthcoming is that Twitter hasn't fact-checked any Democratic lawmakers, media outlets or blue check-marked "journalists" who've spent the past four years spreading malicious lies and misinformation about the Russia collusion conspiracy theory and propaganda campaign that was waged against President Trump and his 2016 campaign since debunked by a special counsel probe. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Twitter is "fact-checking" the president -- while turning a blind eye to his past and present political opponents who've spread malicious misinformation on its platform in an attempt to stop Trump from getting elected in 2016 and to block him from getting re-elected this November. This stacked deck has sparked a widespread backlash against Twitter and a historic warning by the president via tweet Thursday morning: "This will be a Big Day for Social Media and FAIRNESS!" The president is expected to announce an executive order addressing the matter in the near future. Not a minute too soon! Twitter has not only demonstrated rampant political bias for far too long -- it's also crossed the line into election meddling -- as studies have shown most voters get their news online. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So if conservative candidates like the president are being censored but not his Democrat opponent, Joe Biden, it's a rigged system that jeopardizes the integrity of our elections. It's high time to right the ship. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ADRIANA COHEN

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here In less than nine minutes, President Trump delivered remarks at the White House on Friday signaling his administration has ditched almost five decades of the American policy of engagement with China. It’s about time. China has been challenging the United States across the board, and Trump – with his comprehensive comments Friday – signaled the United States would defend itself across the board. Trump announced a series of actions, including: Terminating America’s relationship with the World Health Organization. Trump said the WHO is biased in favor of China and has failed to approve reforms arising out of its dealing with the coronavirus pandemic that originated in China. The move cuts off about $450 million in U.S. funding for the WHO. Trump said the U.S. would use those funds for “other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs.” Suspending entry into the U.S. of Chinese nationals posing a security risk. Revoking almost all special exemptions and rules for Hong Kong and imposing sanctions on Chinese and Hong Kong officials. Studying the “differing practices” of Chinese companies listed in the U.S. The president signed a proclamation stating that he will block entry into the United States of Chinese students and researchers tied to U.S. military efforts. In his brief remarks, Trump also commented on other matters, especially the spreading of the coronavirus. “The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government,” he said. On the issue of Hong Kong, Chinese leaders were undoubtedly waiting to see if Trump would withdraw America’s special treatment of the beleaguered territory on trade and other issues. Some thought Trump would not do this, making this issue a test of his resolve. In meeting the test, the president showed political will rarely seen in American leaders. Most observers thought the president would concentrate his remarks on Hong Kong. The surprising aspect of the comments was their comprehensive nature. Moreover, the tone of the president’s words – he was not only adversarial but also angry – broke with decades of precedent. Chinese leaders have not heard an American leader talk to them this way in public. The range of announced actions should concern Chinese leaders. The actions suggest Trump is now leading a whole-of-government charge on China. Not everyone thought Trump was so resolute. The Financial Times, for instance, said Trump “pulled his punches,” not adopting a “range of measures” the markets feared. For instance, he did not terminate the Phase One trade deal, signed Jan. 15. Yet the trade agreement looks shaky – termination or no termination. There are signs China will not meet its principal commitment – increasing purchases of American goods and services by $200 billion over a two-year period. A result, the trade deal is in danger. The Financial Times also said the markets were relieved that Trump did not impose new tariffs or freeze assets of Chinese nationals. The markets should not break out the champagne just yet, however. The Trump administration will be announcing more actions in the weeks to come, probably including “full expensing” for costs to relocate factories from China and Hong Kong to the United States. Larry Kudlow, the director of the president’s National Economic Council, talked about such subsidies in an interview with Fox Business’ Stuart Varney on Tuesday. Moreover, Trump’s mentioning of the behavior of listed Chinese companies is a warning that investment is the next big area on the chopping block. China for months has been saying the “decoupling” of the United States from China was not possible. However, on Friday Trump was making the process look inevitable. Trump said he wanted “an open and constructive relationship with China” – but ultimately the state of relations is not up to him. Beijing, showing off its “wolf warrior diplomacy” has taken a series of aggressive actions since February including: invading India; engaging in boat-bumping and other incidents against six of its neighbors in the South China and East China Seas; threatening to invade Taiwan; breaking promises over Hong Kong; and increasing the tempo of dangerous intercepts of the U.S. Navy in China’s peripheral waters and airspace. It’s not entirely clear why China is lashing out at this moment. Some say it’s a sign of strength. Others says it is a sign of weakness. But it is evident that America’s engagement policy has failed. Engagers, adopting a long view, often ignored or condoned unacceptable Chinese behavior. That feckless policy approach – conducted by U.S. presidents of both parties and by liberals and conservatives alike – only emboldened the worst elements in Beijing by showing everybody else that aggression worked. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The upshot is that there is now a perception that Chinese communism cannot be reformed – meaning the only thing the Trump administration can do to protect America is to reduce exposure to China. The underlying theme of the president’s actions Friday was that his administration is cutting ties with Chinese communism. That is the correct approach. The People’s Republic of China is more than just an adversary. A year ago the Communist Party declared a “people’s war” on America. That hostility means that apart from surrendering to Beijing, there is not much Trump can do to patch up relations with China. This is not a Trump issue; it is a China one. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There will be costs in unwinding decades of misguided U.S. policies toward China – how could there not be? But Beijing is leaving Trump with little choice. It’s time an American leader did what is necessary: go after China on all fronts. And that’s what the world heard Friday from President Trump. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GORDON CHANG

 Here's a simple question: A police station in a major American city was occupied, looted and burned on Thursday night. Most of us assumed we’d never live to see something like that happen here. But it did happen. So the question is, has anyone been arrested for doing it? Will anyone ever be arrested? No one in authority seems especially interested in apprehending the people who did it. All of it happened on camera, but the perpetrators just walked away. And it’s, maybe likely, that most of them will never be punished for it. TUCKER CARLSON: OUR LEADERSHIP CLASS IS FANNING RACIAL FLAMES. THEY'RE DOING NOTHING TO CALM THE SITUATION That’s striking. It’s a very different experience from the ones most Americans have living here. As Minneapolis burns and crowds grow in the streets of Atlanta and many other cities, the rest of us are continuing on as we always do -- dutifully following the rules. There are many of those. Every year, there seem to be countless new rules to follow. They multiply like insects. We do our best to keep up. We get our permits, apply for our licenses, put on our reading glasses to check the latest regulations on the internet. We wear our little masks. We keep our dogs on leashes. We drive sober. We don’t eat on the subway. We never litter. We make orderly lines and patiently wait our turn. In airports and government buildings, we remove our shoes and submit to body searches from strangers. We lose our dignity every time we do this, but they tell us we must, so we accept it without complaint. In public, we hide what we really think. We bury our natural instincts. We keep our deepest beliefs to ourselves. We know the boundaries. We understand we will be punished for telling the truth. This is the America the rest of us live in. For the privilege of citizenship in a country like this, we work as hard as we can. We never stop sharing what we earn with others. We send money we’d rather give to our own children to politicians in faraway cities. With that money, they make new rules. We follow those rules to the letter. That’s what we were told to do as children. That’s the deal we’ve struck. At least we thought it was. Now we know that other people have somehow negotiated a far better deal than the one we have. They get to ignore the rules. There don’t believe in order or fairness. They reject society itself. Reason and process and precedent mean nothing to them. They use violence to get what they want immediately. People like this don’t bother to work. They don’t volunteer or pay taxes to help other people. They live for themselves. They do exactly what they feel like doing. They say exactly what they feel like saying. They spray paint their opinions on buildings. On television, hour by hour, we watch these people — criminal mobs — destroy what the rest of us have built. They have no right to do that. They don’t contribute to the common good. They never have. Yet suddenly, they seem to have all the power. This is hardly the first time this has happened in America. Spasms of destructive violence are a recurring feature of our history — of every country’s history. The ideologues will tell you that the problem is race relations, or capitalism, or police brutality, or global warming. But only on the surface. The real cause is deeper than that and it’s far darker. What you’re watching is the ancient battle between those who have a stake in society, and would like to preserve it, and those who don’t, and seek to destroy it. Underneath it all, this violence doesn’t have much to do with the behavior of the Minneapolis police department. For evidence, watch this tape. It’s from the 1992 riots in Los Angeles. It was shot almost 30 years ago. It could have been shot this afternoon: Elderly African-American man confronts rioters on tape: It’s not right! It’s not right what y’all are doing! I came from the ghetto, too! Same as all of you kids! Why are you destroying my business?! Why are you destroying my truck?! Why are you destroying my computer?! I tried to make it! Can you understand that! The first thing you notice about that video is, it’s not a racial dispute. The elderly man could be the grandfather of the young rioters swarming around him. But that’s misleading. They are nothing at all alike. The old man is fighting to defend civilization, he’s armed only with a hammer. The young men are working to tear it down. And those are the battle lines. They always are. Which side in that war have our leaders taken? Watch carefully. It’s obvious. The rioters in Minneapolis and in other places act as if they’re allowed to loot and burn. In fact, they are allowed. No one stops them. The authorities don’t arrest them. Instead, they pander to them, flatter them, desperately try to win their love. Why are masked lunatics setting fire to Wendy’s? Because the rest of us are sinful. That’s what our leaders tell us. The crimes of the mob are the punishment we deserve. That’s their argument. Many seem to buy it. On a White House executive staff call just this morning, key domestic policy advisors Brooke Rollins and Ja’Ron Smith argued that it would seem racist to say anything about the rioting in Minneapolis. Better just to let it happen. So that’s what they are doing. We should have seen this coming. When you express an opinion our leaders don’t like, they call it violence. When criminals commit acts of actual violence, they call it speech. In other words, the game is rigged. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So why are the rest of us still playing it? We have more power than we think we do. Our system only functions because dutiful normal people — people with self-control and decency, and a sense of responsibility toward others — created our system. They sustain it. They pay the bills. None of the thugs looting Target, or the well-paid nihilists on television who are egging them on, have added a thing. Nothing. Yet all of the destroyers expect this arrangement will last forever. For them, it’s been a very good deal. But what exactly are you getting in return for your contributions to this system? The authorities clearly don’t care about you. The police won’t show up to save your life. Literally. During election years, sweaty politicians claim to be on your side. It’s a lie. They’re not. They’ll waste your time with hollow posturing. They’ll feed you pointless symbolic victories and expect you to celebrate, like you’ve actually won something. But when the mob comes, they’re gone. You’re on your own. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP That’s true. Those are the facts. We can’t change them. All we can control is our own behavior. Should you keep playing along with all of that? Ponder that the next time they demand you get a permit to put a deck on your own house. Think about it even harder the next time you write a tax check. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 President Trump spoke Friday with more clarity about China than any previous president, referencing the “malfeasance” of the Chinese government and its outrageous “cover-up of the Wuhan virus” as he announced his latest tough action against the communist regime. Trump spoke in the wake of Beijing’s progressive assault on freedom in Hong Kong, and as China continued to refuse to come clean about the coronavirus pandemic it started. Invoking human rights that we often take for granted in America, Trump cited the Chinese Communist Party’s refusal to see the benefits of the liberty and human rights that existed in Hong Kong and that China solemnly promised to preserve when Britain handed back the colony in 1997. We now see that China’s pledge is another in a long line of its broken promises. TRUMP ANNOUNCES US ‘TERMINATING’ RELATIONSHIP WITH WHO Unlike his predecessors in the White House, Trump followed tough words with tough action Friday. He terminated U.S. membership in the corrupt and pro-Chinese World Health Organization. This is another welcome blow to globalist bureaucracies that mainly serve the purposes of the world’s bad guys. Trump put an end to visas for graduate students with links to China’s People Liberation Army. This step is fundamentally important. China’s outright theft of the free world’s technology prevents the kleptocracy there from falling too far behind. But China’s real dream is to beat America and its allies, and that means having doctoral and post-doctoral science and technology students learn from masters in the United States and then bring their way of thinking back to China. Ultimately we should halt all student visas for Chinese nationals, who displace American students and harm Asian-Americans in particular, given that many institutions have tacit quotas that limit Asian students. Colleges would scream at the loss of revue from Communist China, but frankly, those institutions deserve it given their lack of patriotism and their fleecing of Americans in exchange for degrees of decreasing usefulness. Trump also moved closer to delisting Chinese equities from U.S. stock exchanges, where they pose a systemic risk given the penchant of Chinese companies for corruption and opacity. It is a testament to Wall Street’s cluelessness about the threat from China that the Chinese companies were allowed to list on U.S. exchanges in the first place. Finally, Trump threatened targeted sanctions against Chinese officials involved in undermining freedom in Hong Kong in violation of China’s explicit promises. He also vowed to adjust Hong Kong’s status as a separate trade entity from mainland China that enjoys low-tariff trade with the United States. In stopping short of fully revoking this status, Trump maintained leverage against China for future use. Overall, Trump made a strong move to begin making China pay for its misconduct. However, Trump still has not laid out a clear overall vision for how to beat China. We are still left mostly with tactics and sentiment, as opposed to a strategy the whole of our government and the American people can get behind. Trump and his aides should look back at the Ronald Reagan and Harry Truman administrations, which both understood how to construct a coherent plan to wage cold war and how to communicate it to the public. Truman promulgated “NSC 68,” a reference to the policy compiled by his National Security Council, which was a blueprint for resisting Soviet expansionism through military and other means. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Reagan issued National Security Decision Directive 75, titled “U.S. Relations with the USSR” two years into his administration. On a single page, it outlined a three-fold strategy that helped undermine the Soviet threat and that caused the demise of the Soviet Union itself: contain Soviet expansionism with military deterrence; promote political change inside the Soviet Union; and engage in negotiations without a double standard that favored the opposition. While the documents were classified at the time, each administration’s public statements stemmed from these clear policies. Today the idea of putting political pressure on the Chinese Communist Party is still anathema to some. Indeed, a report the Trump administration sent to Congress last week said: “United States policies are not premised on an attempt to change [China’s] domestic governance model.” In fact, that is precisely what we should do, because when the Chinese Communist Party is forced to play defense at home, it will have less bandwidth and ability to be aggressive with America and the free world. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Perhaps someday the Trump administration can back into a strategy from the various tactics it has employed. Fighting China through nonviolent means is one of the few issues for which there is bipartisan support in Washington and across the country. Nevertheless, Trump has made clear that America will fight China using the timing and tactics of our choice. The zealots who run the Chinese government are on notice. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CHRISTIAN WHITON

 In the name of George Floyd, Minneapolis rioters have done a huge injustice to George Floyd. Floyd, 46, is dead. A widely viewed video confirms that the unarmed black man was killed after white police officer Derek Chauvin, 44, arrested him for allegedly passing a counterfeit $20 bill, handcuffed him, pinned him to the asphalt, and then planted his knee on Floyd’s neck. “His nose is bleeding,” one horrified onlooker said off-camera. “How long y’all gotta hold him down?” MINNEAPOLIS COP WHO KNELT ON HANDCUFFED BLACK MAN GEORGE FLOYD CHARGED WITH 3RD DEGREE MURDER, MANSLAUGHTER “He’s human, bro,” one man beseeched Chauvin, the subject of 12 unpunished police-misconduct complaints. This did not continue for a few moments or just long enough to stop Floyd from resisting arrest, which – being cuffed – he didn’t do anyway. Instead, this dragged on for eight minutes. “I can’t breathe,” Floyd implored. “Don’t kill me.” Chauvin did not relent. Floyd’s plea became a premonition: He died. Unless something astonishing is hidden on that recording, this is a museum-grade specimen of overreaction, excessive force and police brutality. Citizens rightly assembled, expressed their outrage, and called for the arrests of Chauvin and the three cops/spectators who let this happen. (Chauvin was arrested Friday afternoon and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter). But then things went too far. The protests – as CNN called them, even after violence erupted – soon became riots. Locals attacked an elderly lady in a wheelchair and sprayed her with a fire extinguisher. That’s not activism. That’s bedlam. When those who derided Floyd’s killing smashed police car windows and lobbed bottles at cops, the rioters began their slide off the moral high ground. The ski jump off the moral high ground began when Minnesotans turned this into a 100 percent-off shopping spree. Whatever sympathy people may have felt for Black Lives Matter or greater police accountability collapsed when hoodlums looted HDTVs, sneakers and other merchandise. Stunning images of thieves hammering open cash registers at a picked-clean Target store did not engender empathy for George Floyd or justice for his survivors. AL SHARPTON SAYS DESTRUCTION OF 'BLACK-OWNED STORES' IN MINNEAPOLIS IS 'RECKLESS' Arsonists turned Auto Zone, Minnehaha Lake Wine and Spirits, and at least 14 other structures into cinders. How many disproportionately black locals now will lose their jobs because these establishments have been torched? Those whose jobs survived the COVID-19 lockdown now likely will join 40 million other Americans on unemployment. The membrane between civilization and savagery is about a millimeter thick. In the Twin Cities, it dissolved like a communion wafer. Minneapolis police officers deserted Third Precinct headquarters, which rioters breached, a la America’s Tehran embassy in 1979 or the Bastille in 1789. The flames that leapt from the abandoned police building gave proof of the total anarchy that officials permitted, to let rioters “blow off steam.” The membrane between civilization and savagery is about a millimeter thick. In the Twin Cities, it dissolved like a communion wafer. Korboi Balla, a black firefighter, plowed his life savings into a sports bar, which he expected to launch on Monday. Grand opening canceled. Arsonists had other plans for his watering hole. Even worse, Balla had no insurance. So, his life is a smoldering ruin. Nice work, thugs! As Balla explained all of this to a TV crew, looters tiptoed through the embers of his American Dream, as they tried to swipe his safe in broad daylight. Rioters also incinerated Midtown Corner, a privately funded, $37 million, 190-unit affordable- housing complex, slated to open next spring. Where’s the social justice in that? “Waking up this morning to see Minneapolis on fire would be something that would devastate Floyd,” his girlfriend, Courtney Ross, told the Star Tribune newspaper. None of this will encourage police officers to behave better. If anything, it will arch their backs. The rioters body-slammed the spotlight from the torture and killing of George Floyd to the narcissistic, nihilistic destruction of their own city. These barbarians resemble Palestinians who demolish their surroundings, such that they reduce any legitimate grievances into rubble. Leftists predictably blame President Trump. Regardless, he called this “a very shocking sight” and correctly ordered the Justice Department and FBI to “take a very strong look” at what happened. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Trump’s enemies are never satisfied. If he dispatched federal agents to hunt Floyd’s killers and blast them with revolvers, Hate Trump, Inc. would scream, “Why not Glocks? Why not machine guns?” President Trump said Friday that he has contacted Floyd's loved ones family and expressed his condolences and those of the nation. “I spoke to members of the family, terrific people,” Trump said. “I understand the hurt, I understand the pain. People have really been through a lot. The family of George is entitled to justice and the people of Minnesota are entitled to live in safety.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The president said he supported peaceful protests but “we can’t allow a situation like happened in Minneapolis to descend further into lawless anarchy and chaos.” Trump now should bring burned-out merchants to the White House and ask them to urge people to stop the mayhem that has converted a worthy cause into total chaos. Bucknell University’s Michael Malarkey contributed research to this opinion piece. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM DEROY MURDOCK

Former House speaker and Fox News contributor Newt Gingrich says the anger over George Floyd's killing is justified but the violence is not. The death Monday of George Floyd, a black man in police custody, is a complete outrage. The complete failure of Minneapolis officials to stop and prevent the ensuing rioting is a second outrage. Derek Chauvin, the fired white Minneapolis policeman seen on cellphone video kneeling on Floyd’s neck despite Floyd complaining that he couldn’t breathe, was arrested Friday afternoon and charged with third-degree murder and manslaughter.  I will discuss Floyd’s horrifying death in a moment, but I’ll start with the Minneapolis system’s failure. POLICE CHIEFS ACROSS US CONDEMN OFFICERS INVOLVED IN GEORGE FLOYD DEATH The first rule of riots is to preempt them and stop them. While people are rioting, the rule of law is collapsed and street mobs dominate. Because mobs are directionless and led only by waves of emotion, hostility and hate, every innocent person nearby is inherently in danger. The more authority pulls back, the more lawlessness moves in and the mob takes property, destroys property, and endangers lives. People who had been forced to stay home by COVID-19 now might find themselves forced to stay home because of fear of what might happen to them if the mob catches them in the street. And in the most violent neighborhoods, even staying in your own home is not a guarantee of safety. Small business owners in Minneapolis – who are often Somali, black or Hispanic, and mostly women – may find their lifetime’s work destroyed by a vengeful, hateful mob. The first duty of government is to provide physical security. But the city of Minneapolis failed to protect its citizens. The state of Minnesota failed to protect its citizens. Now President Trump is threatening to intervene with federal forces as President Lyndon Johnson did when rioting hit Detroit in 1967 and as President George H.W. Bush did in Los Angeles in 1992. Unfortunately, the tragedy unfolding in Minneapolis is one we have seen again and again. The first rule of riots is to preempt them and stop them. A significant part of the black community rightly feels abandoned and alienated. Liberalism has cheated them in virtually every aspect of their lives. They are trapped in a political system controlled by bureaucratic unions, interest groups dependent on or regulated by government, and left-wing activists. There is both a sense of hopelessness and a feeling of constant anger that can explode into rage. In Minneapolis, the teachers’ union traps poor children in schools that fail to educate them. This makes it hard to get a decent job. High taxes and layers of self-serving, unaccountable bureaucrats make it hard to create small businesses. Faced with high unemployment, few property owners, even fewer business owners, and no one to mentor young people in how to succeed, there is a depth of bitterness and despair. The liberal elected officials who dominate Minnesota and Minneapolis hold beliefs that simply don’t work. They hire too few police, train them too little, and offer them no support. Meanwhile, there are many studies that show if you want to reduce use-of-force incidents, government must fund police and ensure they are well-trained. Much of the black community sees the police as an occupying force. Liberals spew hatred of the police. Meanwhile, much of the police force sees itself as trying to protect people who dislike and sometimes despise the police. The video of the killing of George Floyd was horrifying to see. Anyone who saw it who had an ounce of compassion had to have been deeply enraged. The minute the video went viral, officials should have moved decisively to establish control. First, officials should have found a plausible reason to keep Officer Chauvin (who was finally arrested Friday) detained earlier, pending an investigation. The videos from multiple directions provide overwhelming proof that something horrendous happened, and officials should have known this would enrage people. Officials should have announced immediately and firmly that no violence or destructiveness would be tolerated. Peaceful demonstrations should have been accepted and encouraged. In addition, officials should have immediately mobilized enough National Guardsmen to retain control of the street. The liberals on the Minneapolis City Council have so weakened the police department that it should have been obvious the police could not maintain control. Furthermore, the police were going to be the focus of community anger, so asking the police to be the line between civilization and barbarism was inviting a disaster. The minute the crowd began to build around the police station, the National Guard should have been sent in to flood the streets with the forces of law and order (the classic British principle for controlling riots in Hong Kong).  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER If necessary, the Minnesota State Police should have been assigned to work as partners with the Minneapolis Police in arresting anyone who broke the law. Instead of these tried and true principles for controlling a crisis, elected officials reacted in exactly the wrong way. They enraged the crowd by announcing they were not ready to immediately arrest Officer Chauvin, even though he was seen on video kneeling on George Floyd’s neck. Officials sounded weak and uncertain, giving the mob the impression its violence would be tolerated and condoned. The Minneapolis Police – after years of budget cuts, training cuts and vilification by elected officials and activists – decided it wasn’t their fight and began to empty the precinct station because they saw no reason to risk their lives for a political system that held them in contempt. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There is every reason to be angry about what happened to George Floyd and to demand justice. There is no reason to allow a mob to take over Minneapolis. Sadly, this is a glimpse of much deeper roots of tragedy and failure in many American cities.  To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

 This week, for the first time, Twitter “fact-checked” one of President Trump’s opinions and redirected users to coverage from that paragon of fairness and objectivity, CNN (don’t laugh). Twitter announced the introduction of the new feature earlier this month. The goal, two workers wrote, is to “make it easy to find credible information” and to stanch the flow of “misleading content.” But I wonder: Will the platform also append “fact-check” labels and links to tweets from prominent liberals that also turned out to be “misleading” or outright false? JIM HANSON: TRUMP’S SOCIAL MEDIA EXECUTIVE ORDER IS JUSTIFIED – PROTECTS FREE SPEECH, COMBATS CENSORSHIP Start with a 2017 tweet from CNN contributor Ana Navarro claiming that an “Ivanka Fund got $100 million pledge from the Saudis and UAE.” The truth: The cash went to a World Bank initiative for female entrepreneurs. Navarro’s tweet garnered more than 43,000 retweets. Or how about a 2019 tweet from actress Nancy Lee Grahn that featured photos of migrant children at a border detention center and railed against Team Trump for allegedly torturing kids? As Internet sleuths pointed out, Grahn’s photo was cropped to remove the timestamp: 2015. It garnered nearly 50,000 retweets anyway. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Then there was Rachel Maddow’s blog’s 2018 claim that the White House had edited the video of the president’s Helsinki news conference with Russian strongman Vladimir Putin “to remove [a] question about whether [he] wanted Trump to win.” The Washington Post and numerous other outlets debunked the claim, yet the tweet is still up, with 24,000 retweets — and no Twitter warning label. In January 2019, former President Barack Obama’s ambassador to Russia, Michael McFaul, joined thousands of other members of the blue-check Twitterati in touting a made-for-Twitter BuzzFeed News exposé. “This is big,” McFaul wrote, “President Trump directed his attorney to lie to Congress.” Yes, big — and false: Special counsel Robert Mueller’s team was quick to characterize the story as inaccurate, and its report made clear that the president had done no such thing. No Twitter “fact-check” hazard for McFaul, et al., though. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Harvard law professor and #Resistance icon Laurence Tribe in December 2017 asked his followers to “retweet if, like me, you’re aware of nothing in the Christopher Steele dossier that has been shown to be false.” Nearly 8,000 did retweet, despite the fact that the dossier has been thoroughly debunked. Finally, on a local note: Surely, if a tweet should come with a health hazard, it was city Councilman Mark Levine’s February invitation to Gothamites to celebrate the Lunar New Year in Chinatown “in defiance of the coronavirus”: “If you are staying away, you are missing out!” This column originally appeared in the New York Post.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The COVID-19 pandemic has drastically changed our day-to-day lives. With so many forced to adopt telework and distance learning policies in a matter of days, it is very likely this national health pandemic will permanently shift the operational mindsets of many businesses, universities and local governments. As we aim to embrace our new reality, society is looking for alternative means to achieve some sense of normalcy. Whether it be video conferencing in a work environment, distance learning for students, or more phone calls instead of face-to-face interactions, in so many ways we have leaned on technology to fill the gap of physical presence. While utilizing these forms of technology have been proven to be a saving grace for many Americans, a group of lawmakers on Capitol Hill and several political action groups are now suggesting we should offer fully digital ballots for the upcoming 2020 election. From a societal stance, I understand why this is a proposed solution. But, as the CEO of a cybersecurity firm, I can tell you that from a technological stance, it is quite frankly a terrible idea. RNC CHAIR McDANIEL: DEMOCRATS AND VOTER FRAUD IN NEVADA — HERE'S HOW IT WILL IMPACT YOU First and foremost, just as we’ve seen recently with Zoom, the Internet is not a secure place.  Why on Earth would anyone think hosting an election in an environment where hackers target Americans and hold their personal data hostage is a good idea? Even more so, say we do offer ballots that are delivered, completed and returned digitally – the data captured during the voting process and the integrity of the ballot has multiple places to be potentially compromised. The first potential area the ballot could be compromised – delivery. Whether it’s done through a website or app, the American democracy is now reliant upon the functionality and security of this platform. What happens if the website or app has technical issues like Iowa experienced during its caucuses earlier this year? How will the site be kept secure? America is in no position to begin hosting elections online.  Next, you have the completion of the ballot. How will officials know who is completing it and what validation measures will be in place to ensure my vote is truly my vote? Between the potential technical issues, the threat of security breaches, concerns of ballot integrity, and the idea of putting a massive target on this process for cybercrime, the pros of voting online most certainly do not outweigh the cons.  Assuming personal information is being shared, how will that be kept safe? Data breaches happen regularly, and if America decides to host an online election, can you imagine how big that target will be for cybercrime? Personal information for every American eligible to vote?! A hackers goldmine. Then there is the submission phase. This data would be stored on a server somewhere. How secure is it, both physically and digitally? What backups are in place to ensure the integrity of the ballots is not compromised, or hacked and held for ransom? Now, while it is understandable to question why we accept mail-in absentee ballots but are urging that we shouldn’t consider an absentee online voting system, I’d point to one distinct added variable to an online voting process – cybersecurity risks become an imminent threat. In every absentee situation, regardless of where those ballots originate, we are forced to validate the integrity of each ballot. With an online voting process, not only would we have to see the validation process through, but we’d be charged with securing an online-based electoral process from falling victim to a cyberattack when we’re not even fully successful at protecting basic government entities from falling victim to the very same sorts of attacks. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Between the potential technical issues, the threat of security breaches, concerns of ballot integrity, and the idea of putting a massive target on this process for cybercrime, the pros of voting online most certainly do not outweigh the cons, and absolutely could undermine the integrity of our nation’s entire electoral process. There’s no doubt that technology is amazing and really has become the crutch for America during these uncertain times. However, even with that being true, America is in no position to begin hosting elections online. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 If you were watching any of the coverage from Minneapolis about what happened Wednesday night, you know perfectly well that what's happening on the streets there. No matter what it may look like, is actually a quest for justice. It's long overdue search for answers by legitimately frustrated protesters who, if we are going to be honest about it, have been oppressed for so long they can no longer stand idle. What you're seeing in Minneapolis is democracy in its purest form. CNN REPORTER, CREW FREED AFTER BEING ARRESTED WHILE COVERING GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS Effectively, it's a political rally. Here's was a representative scene last night. Unidentified male: This is literally the craziest stuff I've ever seen right now. This is Target right now. "Now, wait a second," you may be thinking. "That didn't look like a political rally. Those people look like looters. They were smashing cash registers with hammers to steal other people's money." Well, yes, technically they were doing that. And yes, as a factual matter, they were smashing the cash registers because they had already stolen everything else in the store. So no, it doesn't look like conventional political activism. But before you judge them, keep in mind, it could have been far worse. It's not like they were doing something immoral, like protesting Gretchen Whitmer's coronavirus lockdowns in Michigan. That would have been a different story. Joy Reid, MSNBC host: Black people's right to protest is secondary to white people's right to be an armed protest with long guns, terrifying-looking war weapons. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host: This is how the protest of George Floyd's death ended up. Police in riot gear, flooding the streets with teargas and shooting rubber bullets into the crowd. Another example of how this pandemic has been a kind of black light, exposing all the inequalities in American life. Chris Cuomo, CNN anchor: That's the meme that's going around right now with the cops, with the black kid on the ground saying hello to the white guy in camo with the AK-47 and the mask who was protesting in Michigan. That when it's white people with guns and they're out and they're angry and their faces with cops -- CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Don Lemon, CNN anchor: I didn't see any of that. Cuomo: Everybody is civil. Eddie Glaude, Jr.. chairman of African-American Studies at Princeton University and MSNBC contributor: It says if some people are accorded the rights of citizenship and other folks are just expected to be obedient. Peaceful -- it ended up in the [Michigan] state capitol, Craig, with automatic weapons and they were treated with kid gloves. Oh, you see, it's not at all like those fascists in Michigan. In Minneapolis, there is a reason people are doing it -- a legitimate reason, even the cash register masters. They were simply smashing the cash register, so relax. In any given year, police kill more white suspects, armed and unarmed, than black suspects. And that's a fact, by the way. It's not political propaganda. It's probably true. Yet no one on television will ever say that because that fact threatens the scams they're working. By the way, the cash registers deserved it anyway. As Joy Reid suggests on MSNBC, they're probably European cash registers and therefore complicit in oppression. Reid: Europeans came to this country to get away from being subjects of the kings in Europe. But what they did was they created for themselves sort of a kingdom -- every man a king, but the subjects are black people. These armed white men who can get armed up and walk into a state capitol [in Michigan], and that's okay and the police are benign. They don't even act afraid. But let black people show up and protest the death of an innocent black man, and suddenly, you know what, we need tear gas. We've got to go full force. Charlottesville, the same thing. The police were there to protect the people who were marching as Neo-Nazis, not to protect the black people. So who watches Joy Reid, you may be wondering? Well, it turns out the people who run Minneapolis apparently watch Joy Reid. As their city crumbled around them, local leaders huddled in deliberation. They emerged with a plan. They declared that racism is "a national emergency." CNN immediately trumpeted the development as if it were breaking news. Meanwhile, mobs in downtown Minneapolis kept looting stores, kept burning. Normal people of all colors huddled indoors, terrified. No one bothered to explain how any of this was connected. How exactly does racism have anything to do with looting ATM machines or stealing PlayStations from Target? It's confusing. What we do know is that riots are now acceptable because racism is a national emergency. That's the new standard. Okay. So now that we're in a state of national emergency, the question is, what is not acceptable? What's not okay? Anything? Here's what some of the quote "protesters" were chanting last night in Minneapolis. Unidentified female: Shoot the white folk. Shoot the white folk. So, you're not going to see that clip on CNN. How come? It is simple. Facts like this -- and there are a lot of them -- challenge the carefully constructed storyline that our leaders richly profit from. Therefore those facts must be suppressed. Things are falling apart in Minneapolis. And as they collapse, our leadership class seems thrilled. They're doing nothing to calm racial division. In fact, they're eagerly stoking it. For example, practically every day, we're told that white cops are a mortal threat to black men and some are, obviously. It's what started this whole thing. A black man was killed by the police. It's awful. But what are the national numbers on this? Well, actually, we know the answer. A study from last year found that white police officers were less likely to shoot and kill nonwhite suspects than nonwhite police officers were. In any given year, police kill more white suspects, armed and unarmed, than black suspects. And that's a fact, by the way. It's not political propaganda. It's probably true. Yet no one on television will ever say that because that fact threatens the scams they're working. Eddie Glaude, Jr. might be the living embodiment of this phenomenon. If you've ever wondered whether yelling racist at the people you want things from its an effective business plan, Eddie Glaude is living proof that indeed it is. By regularly screaming "racist," Glaude has been able to ride a mediocre academic career all the way to an endowed professorship at Princeton. It's a job with such high pay and so few actual requirements that Glaude can dress like a British lord, and spend much of his day shuttling by limo between cable news hits. Talk about a sweet gig. As long as Eddie Glaude continues to denounce people as racist -- the right people -- he can probably keep that job forever. So naturally, Eddie Glaude has no interest in explaining how exactly racism makes people loot Target. It just does, okay? And if you disagree with that premise, you're a racist yourself. So shut up. Minneapolis has decided to just let their riot happen and damn the consequences. As Glaude told viewers in MSNBC, it's all about the "context." Glaude: Most human beings' natural inclination when they feel wronged, when they feel put upon, when they're living under oppressed conditions, is to lash out. And this is the history of the modern West, the history of the world. And so part of what we have to do is try to understand the context of what led to what happened. Oh, "the context" -- and squint your eyes as you say "the context." Of course, there's a context to setting fire to McDonald's, says Professor Glaude. It's interesting. So, you've got to wonder how would Eddie Glaude, Jr. respond if something like this happened to him. If looters descended on his house, would Glaude gently describe them as "protesters" as they made off with his Hermes necktie collection? If thugs with bandanas on their faces smashed the windshield of his BMW with rocks, would Eddie Glaude call the police? Or would calling the police be racist? Just how long, in other words, could Edie Glaude maintain his fraudulent racial justice shtick in the face of the kind of violence that he routinely excuses on television? We're thinking not very long. It's just a guess. Let's hope Eddie Glaude is never tested on that, certainly, anytime soon. Let's hope none of us are tested. The problem with outbreaks of mob violence is you really have no idea where they're going next. You can't know. Sometimes they subside; often, they metastasize. They're unpredictable, and they are mortally dangerous, and that's why you don't encourage them. In St. Paul, signs have appeared in store windows announcing, "This is a black-owned business." In other words, we're the right skin color, spare us. What does that tell you? Imagine if you saw a sign saying "white-owned business" in windows. You would be horrified and you should be. You'd know it was a race riot. We've had a lot of those in this country through the years and there is nothing worse than that. But Minneapolis has decided to just let their riot happen and damn the consequences. Watch the city's police chief explain why he doesn't plan to do anything at all to stop rioters. Reporter: So, what you're saying is it's too dangerous for police to directly confront the looters, so you've made the decision to maybe let that site go for now and focus on keeping the rest of the neighborhood as safe as possible? Minneapolis Police Chief Medaria Arradondo: Absolutely. Our officers are being -- have been through several hours here, Molotov cocktails thrown at them, rocks and other projectiles. And so obviously their safety is paramount, and so I don't want them going into an area where they're at risk of harm themselves. Obviously, the safety of officers is paramount announces the chief. The interviewer says nothing. But in fact, it's not at all obvious. In fact, it's perfectly backward. Society's first concern is the safety of citizens, especially the weakest citizens. That's why we have police in the first place -- to protect people who cannot protect themselves, the public. Not everyone wants to do that job and that's fine. Do something else. But we can't allow this. Imagine if the Secret Service adopted the same attitude. Sorry, I can't protect the president today, too risky. How about the military? We'd love to repel the invasion, but unfortunately, we might get hurt. Our apologies. Things would fall apart. Things are falling apart in Minneapolis. And as they collapse, our leadership class seems thrilled. They're doing nothing to calm racial division. In fact, they're eagerly stoking it. The New York Times wrote a piece Thursday morning with the title, "How White Women Use Themselves as Instruments of Terror." The subhead read this way: "There are too many noosed necks, charred bodies and drown souls for them to deny knowing precisely what they are doing." Wait a second. "Them"? What "they" are doing? Keep in mind, this didn't run in Louis Farrakhan's free weekly. This was The New York Times, this country's most important newspaper, the high temple of American liberalism. The New York Times is telling you that every single person of a certain color and sex has a hand in genocide. They are stained by bloodguilt. They are murderers, every one of them. What do you do to murderers? You know the answer. It's hard to believe our leaders are actually talking like this. But they are -- a lot and loudly. And if they keep it up, things will not end well. Yet, they show no signs of slowing down. Watch as two of CNN's leading lights get to the bottom of the national emergency we're living through. They've discovered who is responsible for it -- 100 percent responsible. They know who is guilty. Here's a hint: It's an entire racial group. Don Lemon: It is not incumbent upon black people to stop racism, to stop this. It is incumbent upon people who hold the power in this society to help to do that, to do the heavy lifting. And guess who that is? Who is that, Chris? Chris Cuomo: White people. The funny thing is, as we often point out, these are the very same people who claim they're fighting your racism. Okay. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But the problem is much bigger this time than mere hypocrisy. We're very used to that. This problem is far more ominous. Here it is in three sentences. There are 320 million of us in this country. A lot of us are very different from one another, yet we all have to live together. In fact, most of us want to live together. But suddenly our leaders are making that dangerously difficult. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 28, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Ohio continues lifting restrictions and soon will allow weddings with up to 300 people. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. “As Ohio goes, so goes the nation.” That’s the mantra we have heard in presidential elections time and time again. A ruling by an activist federal judge in the Buckeye state foreshadows a dangerous outcome for the rest of the country. Hopefully, an appellate court ruling has saved the day for now, but we now have insight into the liberal playbook for future elections. Once hailed as the most purple state in the country, Ohio’s changing demographics are making it redder by the year. That will not stop Democrats from putting resources into the Buckeye state to try and expand Joe Biden’s path to electoral victory. The national COVID-19 pandemic has impacted all facets of our lives and our ability to vote in elections is included. Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose, a Republican, has been focused on having as normal an election as possible in November, but an unelected, Bill Clinton appointed judge has attempted to throw a wrench in the process. And, it’s a precedent we are likely to see more of in the future. OHIO GOV. MIKE DEWINE SAYS CAREFUL REOPENING PROCESS SHOWING POSITIVE RESULTS Last week, Southern District Court Edmund Sargus Jr. ruled that because groups trying to get liberal pet issues into the Ohio constitution “cannot collect signatures in person” by the legal deadlines due to the state’s stay-at-home order, the Secretary of State must accept electronic signatures. By allowing signatures to be submitted electronically, Sargus effectively tried to remove accountability from the process. Under his ruling, witnesses were no longer required, and his recommendations essentially required a computer science degree to determine whether potential fraud may be occurring. Our democracy demands better. In reading between the lines, here’s the simple strategy: the more liberal issues which appear on the ballot, the more likely it is that Democrats will come to the polls.  This is especially true when they are not enamored with their candidate at the top of the ticket. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER I’m not a believer that either voter fraud or voter suppression occurs to the degree advocates on either side of the debate profess it happens.  But, activist decisions like this one degrade the efficacy people have in the electoral process. The integrity of our elections is as equally important as the ability for citizens to believe their vote is counted. Provisions like this have been introduced in legislatures across America.  Not a single one has passed and currently, electoral signature gathering is only allowed in Massachusetts. Oh, and that one was forced by the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court just a few weeks ago. Notice a pattern? Thankfully, LaRose asked Attorney General Dave Yost to appeal this faulty decision to the U.S. Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals and the judge’s order was stayed pending further appeal. Depending on where this case goes from here, Ohioans could be forced into this scenario even though the process has not been vetted in any meaningful way by any other state. Nor has it even been debated in Ohio!  We have foreign governments that we know have targeted our elections, yet it’s OK for an activist judge to mandate a technology on voters without informing us about the potential downsides? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP While Judge Sargus only made this ruling for a select group of liberal issues and only for this November’s election, we all understand how the slippery slope works.  Once the goalposts move, it is almost impossible to have a sane discussion about returning to normalcy without voting groups screaming about suppression from the tops of their lungs. If electronic signature gathering is allowed only for the 2020 pandemic, smart money is it starts to spread in 2021 and beyond. Moreover, why would this only apply to issue campaigns. Signature gathering is the same basic process regardless of the type of elections.  Candidates will likely be granted this ability to use the internet to gather signatures as well. Thankfully, the U.S. Sixth Court of Appeals has restored temporary sanity to the process. Regardless of the ultimate outcome of this particular case, electronic signature gathering is likely going to be the next hot topic in the battle over the ballot box. If it’s true that Ohio sets the tone for the nation, electronic signature gathering could be coming to your state. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAI CHABRIA

 Former Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein is a master of prevarication and deflection. He holds an M.S. in BS and a Ph.D. in vacuous excuses. He’s a professor emeritus of duplicity and deception. As a prodigious suck-up, he’s the Eddie Haskell of lawyers. We can expect Rosenstein’s skill set to be on full display Wednesday when he finally and belatedly appears before the Senate Judiciary Committee as its first witness in an investigation into the origins and evolution of the fallacious Trump-Russia collusion probe. During his ignominious tenure at the Justice Department, Rosenstein was at the center of the Russia hoax, pulling the investigatory levers of manipulation over an imaginary collusion conspiracy that eventually went bust. But not before incalculable damage was done to the Trump presidency, government institutions and America’s faith in our system of justice.  ROSENSTEIN TO TESTIFY AS FIRST WITNESS IN SENATE JUDICIARY'S RUSSIA PROBE Before his departure from the Justice Department in May 2019, Rosenstein consistently spurned most attempts by Congress to explain his inexplicable actions and shady tactics. He was a profile in cowardice. Perhaps now he will be held to account. It won’t be easy. When the truth is at issue, Rosenstein is as slippery as an eel. He’s deathly allergic to personal and professional responsibility. Everyone else is to blame. When in doubt, deny it ever happened. In Rosenstein’s orbit, integrity is a mythical platitude. FBI Investigation Was Illegitimate Rosenstein’s testimony comes at a critical juncture. Just recently, the FBI document that launched the Trump-Russia witch hunt was declassified and made public. The FBI Electronic Communication (EC) dated July 31, 2016, identifies not a single scrap of plausible evidence that justified the bureau’s investigation of the Trump campaign. Under FBI regulations governing the opening of a formal probe, the agency is required to present specific articulable facts and credible evidence in support of a crime. None was stated in the EC. Hence, there was never a factual predicate nor a reasonable basis that warranted what then-FBI Director James Comey’s bureau was doing. Moreover, there was no reliable intelligence information to merit a counterintelligence probe, which was a cleverly contrived cover for a criminal investigation.  Undeterred, then-FBI agent Peter Strzok engineered what can only be described as a “phantom” EC record to target the Trump campaign with a baseless investigation in search of a crime. As Kevin Brock, a former FBI assistant director of intelligence, observed: “It was a document created by Peter Strzok, approved by Peter Strzok, and sent from Peter Strzok to Peter Strzok.”   Brock says the EC memo proves that the FBI’s investigation should never have been opened up “in a million years.”  He called it a “made-up investigation that sprung from the mind of someone who despised Donald Trump, and then blessed by inexperienced leadership at the highest levels who harbored their own now well-established biases.” Given this newly discovered information, Rosenstein must be asked during his Senate testimony about his knowledge of the FBI’s corrupt conduct in triggering an invalid investigation of Trump. When then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions recused himself, Rosenstein was placed in charge of the case in April 2017. Did he examine the FBI file and discover it was devoid of evidence and therefore illegitimate? How could he not? Why didn’t he expose the truth? Did Rosenstein question Comey, Strzok and others at the FBI about any of this or demand that they produce some tangible evidence that would justify the continued investigation? Why didn’t Rosenstein shut down an obviously illicit probe of the president? He had every opportunity to do so, but did not. Instead, he accelerated and elevated the investigation to a more dangerous level. Mueller’s Appointment Was Illegitimate              The appointment of a special counsel applies only to criminal investigations, not to counterintelligence probes. Yet, at the time that Robert Mueller was appointed as special counsel to investigate what we now know is the Trump-Russia collusion hoax by Rosenstein on May 17, 2017, the FBI’s case was a counterintelligence matter, according to Comey’s own testimony. Rosenstein must be asked specifically by members of the Senate Judiciary Committee why he appointed Mueller. There was still no evidence of a collusion conspiracy involving the Trump campaign and Russia. Months earlier, in January of 2017, the FBI had debunked the infamous Steele “dossier” upon which the FBI had so heavily relied. It turned out to be a collection of fabrications and exaggerations, as Inspector General Michael Horowitz later found. Other FBI efforts to locate collusion evidence produced nothing.  Therefore, upon what legal and factual basis did Rosenstein make the appointment? The special counsel regulations require that there first be some evidence of a potential crime. What crime? What evidence? An “articulable criminal act” must be identified. What act? It is clear that Mueller’s appointment was defective because he was empowered to investigate something that was not authorized by the regulations. Those same regulations also state that a special counsel can only be named where an investigation or prosecution “would present a conflict of interest for the Department of Justice.” Where exactly was the conflict? Sessions had already recused himself, and there were no other known conflicts that would have prevented regular prosecutors from handling the case. Rosenstein has never offered an explanation for that fundamental defect. He must now be asked.  A lawyer cannot be an impartial investigator, witness, prosecutor and judge all rolled into one. It is folly for Rosenstein to argue (although he surely will) that the firing of Comey was the reason for the special counsel, inasmuch as it was Rosenstein who authored the memo recommending the director be sacked for repeatedly violating FBI regulations. Was Rosenstein unduly influenced by Comey himself? Recall that the canned director bragged how he leaked presidential memos to the media for the sole purpose of triggering a special counsel. Rosenstein must be asked if Comey’s devious machinations prompted the decision to name Mueller. And why select Mueller of all people? He was a longtime friend, colleague and ally of Comey. Isn’t that a serious conflict of interest? Was there some hidden deal? Was Mueller hired to either justify or cover up what Comey had done? Who did Rosenstein talk to about hiring Mueller? Where did the idea emanate?  When Trump met with Mueller in the Oval Office (ostensibly to interview Mueller for the job of replacing Comey as FBI director) the day before Mueller was named as special counsel, why was Mueller’s pending appointment concealed from the president? Was this a scheme to gather evidence against Trump about his firing of Comey? Rosenstein’s Refusal to Recuse Himself  Once Mueller was appointed, he began investigating whether Trump had obstructed justice in the firing of Comey – again, an absurd proposition. Since Rosenstein had held extensive conversations with Trump and Sessions about discharging Comey for a justifiable cause, this made Rosenstein a central witness in any obstruction case. It presented an egregious conflict of interest that demanded his recusal. Yet, Rosenstein refused. Why? The most important person who could attest to the president’s motivations was the very man who supervised the investigation into Trump’s intent. There is no greater conflict of interest. Footnotes in the Mueller Report seem to confirm that Rosenstein was actually interviewed as a witness by the special counsel. Although Mueller answered to Rosenstein it was Rosenstein who had to answer Mueller’s questions. That is about as warped and improper as a case can get. Think of it this way: the boss was questioned by his subordinate, and then the boss played an instrumental role in deciding whether charges should be brought based, in whole or in part, on his own testimony. It does not take a genius to realize that the scenario was fundamentally wrong and unethical. A lawyer cannot be an impartial investigator, witness, prosecutor and judge all rolled into one. Rosenstein must be asked hard questions about his atrocious lapse in judgment that rendered the entire special counsel investigation inherently suspect amid persistent questions of self-interest, political bias and a lack of objectivity. The then-deputy attorney general advised Trump how to get rid of Comey and then hired Mueller to investigate whether that decision constituted obstruction of justice by the president. No responsible and ethical lawyer would ever do such a thing. What if Rosenstein did not tell the truth when he was interviewed? What if other witnesses or documents offered proof that he lied? As supervisor of the case, would he disregard it and cover it up? Or would he decide to charge himself for false statements or perjury?  Rosenstein had not just one but two untenable conflicts of interest. He was tangled up in the “collusion” case, as well. He signed his name on the fourth FISA (Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act) warrant application to spy on Trump campaign associate Carter Page. The Justice Department subsequently determined that the warrant was unlawfully obtained without probable cause.  In my next column, I will outline how the Senate Judiciary Committee should hold Rosenstein to account for the lies and fraud perpetrated on the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I’ll also address how Rosenstein should be grilled by senators over his leading role in what became known as the “attempted coup” – a disgraceful plot to secretly record the president and recruit Cabinet members to remove him from office under the 25th Amendment. Rosenstein told Trump that “it didn’t happen.” Government memos show that it did.  There is a lot to this sordid story … and many more questions for the reprehensible Rosenstein.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREGG JARRETT

 Ahmaud Arbery. Breonna Taylor. And now, George Floyd. These promising young Americans had their whole lives ahead of them until two white male vigilantes, a rage-filled law enforcement officer, and a no-knock warrant cost them everything. These Americans, who were just like me, were killed simply because they happen to be black in the United States of America. I know that some will attempt to view the lives and deaths of Arbery, Taylor and Floyd in a vacuum. These individuals will also attempt to flip the stories and make you believe that these three Americans’ deaths were standalone incidents that don’t describe the general American experience for people of color. They will also try to urge you to hold judgment until we get all the facts, while bringing up facts about the victims’ past mistakes as if those indiscretions should somehow excuse their deaths. The truth is that the apologists are wrong. We as a nation must come to the realization that prejudice is alive and well. These young people are just three more victims of the deadly epidemic known as racism. GEORGE FLOYD CASE: TWO MINNEAPOLIS COPS CAUGHT ON TAPE HAVE HISTORY OF CONDUCT COMPLAINTS There isn’t a black person I know who wants to debate race and racism all day. Truth be told, just like every other American, black people – myself included – want to live in peace. We want to sleep in our beds without fear. We want to send our kids to school without worrying about an overzealous school resource officer. We want to live in our communities without trauma, judgment, scrutiny or being deemed a threat. For more than 400 years – even before America was an independent nation – this land has been stained by the impacts of racism. While we have made a lot of progress, the stain hasn’t been washed away. It has actually become more pronounced. When a police officer is allowed his freedom after suffocating a fellow American to death while atop his neck with his knee – as happened to George Floyd – we have a problem. When two men can shoot and kill a black man jogging in his neighborhood – as happened to Ahmaud Arbery – and not be arrested on the spot, we have a problem. When a law enforcement officer can fatally shoot an EMT in her head while she’s at home resting between shifts – as happened to Breonna Taylor – we have a problem. America’s racism problem won’t be solved in the halls of Congress or in state capitols. Though there’s a great deal of legislative work that we can do, our problems must be resolved around kitchen tables and in living rooms. We as a nation must come to the realization that prejudice is alive and well. For far too long, African-Americans have led the fight for racial justice and equity. The news over the last three months makes it clear that white racial animus can only end when white Americans make the choice to be anti-racist. Anti-racists acknowledge their privilege, work to challenge internalized racism and most importantly, interrupt racism when they witness it. Now let’s be clear, acknowledging privilege in America has nothing to do with economic, political or social status. It has everything to do with how one is seen by society. The best way to understand it is by asking yourself this simple question: would the three black people discussed above still be alive today if they were white? The likely answer is that yes, they probably would. That’s because the idea of a white officer placing his knee on a white man’s neck sounds almost improbable. It is! About 1 in 1,000 black men and boys in this country can expect to die at the hands of law enforcement, according to a recent analysis of officer-related deaths by the National Academy of Sciences. That makes this group 2.5 times more likely than their white counterparts to not survive an encounter with a cop. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER For decades, black America has been raising its voice and demanding change in this country. We have urged our elected leaders of both parties to work with us to end the health, economic, education and societal disparities that have plagued this country. We have pushed for greater police accountability and transparency. We have also asked, simply, to be treated justly in classrooms, courtrooms and boardrooms. This time around, we are tired and we can no longer do it by ourselves. We didn’t create racism, and we can’t be tasked to dismantle it by ourselves. George Floyd should be with his children right now. Ahmaud Arbery should have just returned from a jog. Breonna Taylor should be getting ready for work. Sadly, they have all been killed by racism – a solvable epidemic that’s spreading. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP To flatten racism’s deadly and dangerous curve, we must see others as mothers, fathers, sisters, brothers, sons and daughters – all members of one race: the human race. My message to non-black Americans is simple: If you can see us as humans, you should be willing to add your voice to the choir of justified protesters around the country demanding justice, fairness, and – most importantly – liberty for other Americans. You should be willing to do so just as you would do for your son, daughter, mother or father CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY RICHARD FOWLER 

 President Trump was absolutely right to direct the Justice Department and FBI Thursday to conduct an expedited investigation of the death of George Floyd, an African-American man who died in the custody of Minneapolis police Monday. Rioting and violent protests of the death continued for a second night Thursday in Minneapolis and spread to New York City and other cities. The Justice Department has confirmed that the investigation of Floyd’s death is a high priority and according to the Wall Street Journal “it was assigning experienced prosecutors and FBI criminal investigators to see if Minneapolis police officers broke federal law, including whether they willfully violated Mr. Floyd’s constitutional rights.” GEORGE FLOYD UNREST IN MINNESOTA: FEDS, LAW ENFORCEMENT CALL FOR CALM, TIME TO INVESTIGATE AMID RIOTS From 2007 to 2011 I worked at the city of Boston Corporation Counsel’s office defending police officers in civil claims of excessive force, wrongful conviction and other lawsuits alleging constitutional violations. My natural inclination from that experience is to not rush to judgment in these kinds of cases, but to learn all the facts and see it from both sides before making a conclusion. The George Floyd case is different. There is no nuance here. Surveillance video from a nearby restaurant makes it crystal clear that Floyd was handcuffed and appeared to be fully cooperative with police. The video shows there was no need for Minneapolis Police Officer Derek Chauvin to push his knee into Floyd’s neck for eight minutes, ultimately killing a restrained and defenseless man. The case is now in the hands of U.S. Attorney Erica MacDonald in Minnesota and the special agent in charge of the Minneapolis FBI field office. They will work in conjunction with the Civil Rights Division at Justice Department headquarters, which is run by Assistant Attorney General Eric Dreiband. Undoubtedly, Attorney General William Barr will be heavily involved with how this investigation moves forward. Surveillance video from a nearby restaurant makes it crystal clear that Floyd was handcuffed and appeared to be fully cooperative with police. Whether the investigation results in an indictment of Chauvin or the other officers will depend on whether U.S. Attorney MacDonald and the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division believe that a grand jury will find there is probable cause that any of the officers willfully violated 18 U.S.C. Section 242. That law makes it a crime for a person acting under color of any law (for example, a police officer) to willfully deprive a person of a right or privilege protected by the Constitution or laws of the United States. The question here for a grand jury would be whether Floyd was deprived the right to be free from unreasonable or excessive force by a police officer. Model jury instructions for the federal district courts of Minnesota state that in determining whether excessive force was used, jurors should consider “the need for application of force; the relationship between the need and the amount of force that was used; the extent of the injury inflicted; and whether a reasonable officer on the scene, without the benefit of hindsight, would have used as much force under similar circumstances.” In this case, it is clear that there was little if any need to use force, that even if force was somehow necessary the amount used was completely disproportionate, and that the injury inflicted was of the worst possible kind – death. As to the question of what a reasonable Minnesota police officer would have done in similar circumstance look no further than the Minneapolis Police Manual. It specifically prohibits the use of neck restraints where an officer is met only with “passive resistance.” “Passive resistance” is defined as “behavior initiated by a subject, when the subject does not comply with verbal or physical control efforts, yet the subject does not attempt to defeat an officer’s control efforts.” From the video, it certainly appears that, at worst, Floyd engaged in only passive resistance. As for how long an investigation may take before the Justice Department seeks an indictment, the case of Michael Slager may provide a roadmap. Slager, who was a police officer in North Charleston, S.C., shot a fleeing Walter Scott in the back and killed him on April 4, 2015. While Slager was indicted on murder charges by a South Carolina grand jury in June of 2015, it was not until May 11, 2016 – after a mistrial on state murder charges – that the Justice Department indicted Slager. Like the Slager case, there is a local investigation alongside the federal investigation. The Hennepin County Attorney may also want to file state charges. These would likely include first- degree manslaughter. The speed at which a federal case will move will in part depends on whether the Justice Department brings a case before the local prosecutors. But even in those circumstances, it is far from clear that the Justice Department could complete its investigation and seek an indictment before the fall, even with President Trump’s directive. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In 2014, Eric Garner was killed on Staten Island in what many are calling an eerily similar situation when Garner was placed in a chokehold by New York City Police Officer Daniel Pantaleo and ultimately died. This incident was also caught on video. A Richmond County jury declined to indict Pantaleo and after five years the Justice Department decided it did not have a strong enough case to prosecute. The comparisons to Garner might cause some to fear that the Justice Department may ultimately back off an indictment because of the similarities. I don’t think that the department should, and I don’t think that it will. There are key facts that distinguish the cases. Eric Garner was not handcuffed and was resisting the officers’ attempts to restrain him. That does not mean that he somehow deserved to die, but Floyd’s case seems far clearer cut and less subject to interpretation. In Floyd’s case, he offered no resistance and he did not pose a danger to anyone – he was handcuffed and on the ground, helpless, while a police officer forced the life out of him.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP No case is a sure thing and considerations of success and failure should always guide decisions before attempting to indict someone in a high-profile case. Fortunately, both President Trump and Attorney General Barr have shown themselves to be fearless in the performance of their duties. Based on what we’ve seen, I believe that the facts and the law are on their side and that they will move swiftly to deliver justice in this case. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY IAN PRIOR

 President Trump was right and justified Thursday to sign an executive order calling for new regulations to strip legal liability protections from social media companies that censor posts and engage in political conduct on their sites. I hope the president never has to take action against any social media company. The solution to the very real problem of social media company discrimination – which most often is directed against conservative views – is to end the discrimination, rather than for the government to intervene. However, President Trump and many conservatives have identified a serious problem. Twitter and some other social media companies want to be two things at the same time: common carriers where anyone can post comments, and news organizations that selectively fact-check some posts and determine which ones are accurate and which ones are not. Making such determinations is an editorial decision that is often very subjective. TRUMP SIGNS SOCIAL MEDIA EXECUTIVE ORDER, CALLS FOR REMOVAL OF LIABILITY PROTECTIONS BECAUSE OF 'CENSORING' Right now social media companies enjoy protection from liability under Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act for what is posted on their sites, because in most cases they allow people to post whatever they wish – as if they were posting on a giant virtual bulletin board. In contrast, news organizations can be sued for libel if they publish false information with “’actual malice’ – that is, with knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard of whether it was false or not,” according to a 1964 Supreme Court decision in the case New York Times Co. v. Sullivan. On average more than 500 million tweets are posted each day. You can see the enormous number tweeted on the day you read this here. It would be impossible for Twitter to review each of these tweets and fact-check them all before posting. Other social media companies face a similar impossible task. However, Twitter has selectively targeted conservatives – most recently President Trump this week – and has either taken down their tweets or labeled them as misleading and added a fact check, as was the case with two of the president’s tweets dealing with problems with mail-in voting. Ironically, the president’s tweets saying voter fraud can take place with mail-in voting were accurate. Twitter’s fact check claiming that the president’s tweets were factually inaccurate was itself inaccurate. What is crucial here is that by deciding to selectively review a tiny number of tweets on its site and running supposed fact checks on them, Twitter is exercising editorial judgment and deciding what people are told is true. Even Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook, told Fox News’ Dana Perino that social media companies should not act as the “arbiter of truth.” ZUCKERBERG KNOCKS TWITTER FOR FACT-CHECKING TRUMP, SAYS PRIVATE COMPANIES SHOULDN'T BE 'THE ARBITER OF TRUTH' President Trump’s executive order states that social media companies that remove or restrict content should be exposed to liability “like any traditional editor and publisher that is not an online provider.” Will Twitter now fact-check every tweet by former Vice President Joe Biden and every Democratic elected official in the nation? Will Twitter now fact-check every tweet by former Vice President Joe Biden and every Democratic elected official in the nation? Will it fact check every tweet critical of President Trump? Obviously not. But by selectively running a fact check (which was actually inaccurate) on Trump’s tweets, Twitter abandoned all pretense of being an unbiased common carrier.   Social media companies should be like trains that allow anyone to board. As common carriers they should allow any ideas to be transported on their platforms without selecting which ones are permitted. Once the companies start picking and choosing among the ideas, they should lose their status and liability protection as common carriers. WHAT'S IN TRUMP'S EXECUTIVE ORDER ON SOCIAL MEDIA? Telephone companies are appropriately designated as common carriers. You can call anyone you want and say anything you want without exposing the phone company to liability for what you say. While a caller can be held liable for what he or she says on the phone – such as making a death threat, or plotting a terrorist attack – the phone company cannot be held liable because it does not censor calls. President Trump’s executive order doesn’t restrict speech or require Twitter, Facebook or other social media companies to publish any particular speech. It focuses on whether the companies act as publishers exercising editorial control or simply as unbiased platforms for content created by users. The order also asks federal agencies to evaluate whether the companies are applying their terms of service in ways that do not match the published terms of service. There is plenty of evidence showing that social media companies treat ideas and accounts differently based on political and ideological affiliation. The executive order calls for the Federal Trade Commission and a consortium of state attorneys general led by the U.S. attorney general to examine whether the actual practices of the social media companies are deceptive. The president’s executive order is a shot across the bow of the major social media firms. The order is an attempt to address the longstanding concern of many on the political right that the liberal activist nature of most social media company employees and the companies themselves has unfairly damaged conservative ideas and accounts. The companies deny they act in a biased manner, but they have been caught doing so in the past. During the 2018 midterm elections Twitter was exposed for shadow-banning conservative accounts, thereby limiting their reach to a much smaller audience. This affected Republican officeholders and candidates, but was not applied to their Democratic opponents. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Twitter initially denied this, but was eventually confronted with enough evidence that it had to remove the “quality filter” it had imposed that was causing this problem. President Trump announced he was considering all options such as the ones in the executive order during a Social Media Summit at the White House last July that I attended. There are several other aspects of social media company operations not called for in the executive order that could come under scrutiny in the future. One is an investigation by the Federal Election Commission into whether unfair treatment of Republican accounts compared to Democratic accounts amounts to an in-kind contribution by the social media companies to the advantaged campaign. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Federal Trade Commission could also look at the potential monopoly of the public information space by a handful of social media companies. President Trump has been clear that he does not want to trade the control now exercised by the tech firms for the unsubtle hand of a government overseer. But the social media censorship of our shared public information space in a way that discriminates against some ideas is an intolerable situation. Let’s hope the social media companies take the hint and change their ways. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM HANSON

 As a young black man who spent a lot time running the streets of downtown Minneapolis, George Floyd’s terrible death Monday on those same streets really hurt. I grew up on those same streets where Floyd died this week. Minneapolis is not just where I grew up, it's a town where I poured my heart and soul into the sports, community and culture. I am a former Minnesota Viking and Gopher and in 2018 Mayor Jacob Frey awarded me the Key to the City of Minneapolis. GEORGE FLOYD CASE: MINNEAPOLIS POLICE CHIEF SAYS CITY'S 'DEFICIT OF HOPE' CANNOT BE COMPOUNDED WITH MORE TRAUMA, VIOLENCE It all feels so personal to me. In the aftermath of Floyd’s death, I was once again reminded of the reality many black men face as a result of a broken cop culture that has historically exonerated police officers who commit blatant hate crimes. And as a national spokesman for the Police Athletic League, I pray that we don’t let a handful of evil cops take away from the amazing things many law enforcement officers bring to communities across our nation. I must admit, it’s emotionally draining to write this often about unarmed black men losing their life at the hands of evil individuals who are supposed to be defending and protecting their fellow citizens. It’s even more draining to continue to watch polarization and identity politics being used to divide us following a brother or sister’s tragic loss of life. This is definitely a war -- I just hope we keep our eye on the actual enemy. If we take our eye off fighting the evil of racism to focus on politicizing identity, then we will continue to lose this spiritual war. According to Fox News, “The Justice Department said Thursday morning that it has made the federal investigation into George Floyd's death a ‘top priority’ and assigned experienced prosecutors to investigate the death of the Minneapolis black man. Floyd died after he was handcuffed by a white police officer.” That’s how we honor the loss of a fellow American brother. Seeing fabricated photos and posts from prominent black leaders like Ice Cube and others depicting the evil murderers of George Floyd as a racist Trump supporter is just not how we should proceed. And it’s certainly not how we are going to win this fight against the evil spirit of racism that is at the root of years of racial oppression and civil rights injustices. If we take our eye off fighting the evil of racism to focus on politicizing identity, then we will continue to lose this spiritual war. Most decent, God-fearing Americans cringe at the sight of a cop pressing his knee into the throat of a handcuffed man. White, black, green or purple. After watching Trayvon Martin’s killer avoid federal hate crime charges from the Obama administration’s Department of Justice, I began to really lose faith in our system. GEORGE FLOYD CASE: TWO MINNEAPOLIS COPS CAUGHT ON TAPE HAVE HISTORY OF CONDUCT COMPLAINTS When pro athletes kneel or protesters take to the streets demanding justice, the more tangible solution is something different. What’s needed is a full prosecution by local law enforcement as well as the DOJ enforcing federal hate crime laws. The sad reality is that, over our history, this has just not happened. The federal definition of a hate crime is: "An offense involving actual or perceived race, color, religion or national origin. Whoever, whether or not acting under color of law, willfully causes bodily injury to any person or, through the use of fire, a firearm, a dangerous weapon, or an explosive or incendiary device, attempts to cause bodily injury to any person, because of the actual or perceived race, color, religion or national origin of any person." Additionally, any offense committed against an individual because of actual or perceived gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or disability is also a hate crime. Despite the mainstream media’s attempt to spin when it comes to police brutality and hate crimes perpetrated against unarmed black men, the truth may not be what you expect. From Trayvon Martin to Freddie Gray to Michael Brown to Eric Gardner to Alton Sterling, no rogue cop or racially motivated citizen’s arrest was ever charged with a hate crime under the Obama administration’s Department of Justice. As shocking as all of this may sound to folks like Ice Cube and others, President Donald J. Trump’s Department of Justice became the first in over a decade to prosecute a police officer for a hate crime in 2018. At the time this also surprised me and seemed unlikely, as former Attorney General Jeff Sessions made a direct attempt to shield police officers from the Department of Justice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Then came AG Bill Barr, who wasted no time upholding justice for Americans of all races, colors and creeds. On his last day in office, Sessions signed a memo in an attempt to limit the DOJ’s ability to federally enforce cases that dealt with local law enforcement. His memo stated, “These guidelines are designed to ensure that consent decrees with state and local governments are narrowly tailored to remedy the alleged violations and are not used to extract greater relief from the state or local government than the Department could obtain through litigation. They are also structured to ensure that, where appropriate, responsibility is returned to democratically accountable state and local institutions.” This should not be a surprise, as Sessions was against reversing many of our nation’s most oppressive policies toward blacks, which included being adamantly against the passing of the historic First Step Act. This deepened his already well-established credentials of being perceived as an old school establishment racist. Under the direction of the Trump administration, Barr has not allowed partisan politics or racial bias to erode justice, as displayed by wasting no time to prosecute the recent lynching of Ahmaud Arbery as a federal hate crime. Following this week’s murder of George Floyd, the FBI is already investigating this tragedy. Now the nation needs to rally together to call on the Trump administration’s Department of Justice to quickly pursue hate-crime charges against the four Minneapolis police officers. Black men like myself shouldn’t have to look over our shoulders at cops. We shouldn’t have to worry about our black sons getting pulled over while driving to the store. And shall I mention that our main issues are not all black and white. The same pain we feel when a cop kills an unarmed black man is the same hurt we must feel with a black man kills another black man in the inner city. It’s simply the golden rule of loving thy neighbor as thy self. Since his terrible death, I’ve spoken with people who knew Floyd. He put out messages to black youth in Texas to stop killing each other. He was a security guard who always wanted to resolve issues, not invoke violence. It is sad and it’s not right for protesters to be igniting violence and looting in the name of a man who was so loving and peaceful. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP America needs to heal and we all need to do deep soul searching in order to come together as one nation under God. We must keep our eye on the real enemy if we are ever going to win the war on racism. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JACK BREWER

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Shep’s Barber Shop, just outside Harrisburg, Pa., became the epicenter of the movement to defy Gov. Tom Wolf’s heavy-handed economic shutdown. Fighting back tears at a rally, owner Brad Shepler delivered a warning far clearer than anything the governor has said in weeks: “You need to realize, we’re all losing our rights as American citizens. And we should all be afraid of that.” State officials threatened to revoke Shepler’s barbering license and fine him up to $10,000 per day after he reopened his business without authorization. This individual revolt — and countless others — came just days after eight Pennsylvania counties threatened to ditch Wolf’s haphazard reopening process to make their own decisions. Meanwhile, state lawmakers have passed bill after bill to reopen critical industries and reverse Wolf’s refusal to abide by transparency measures in the state’s equivalent of the Freedom of Information Act. JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO: CORONAVIRUS SHUTDOWNS ORDERED BY GOVERNORS AND MAYORS ARE UNCONSTITUTIONAL There are common denominators in the governor’s decisions: he makes them behind closed doors, and they hurt people. As a result, Pennsylvania is now in the throes of a second public health crisis, devastated by the predictable after-effects of mass unemployment and social isolation. Overdoses, drug-related deaths, domestic violence, domestic abuse, anxiety, depression, and suicide attempts are all spiking. Wolf’s home county has seen over three times more deaths from opioid abuse during quarantine than from COVID-19. Most tragically, Wolf refuses to come clean about Pennsylvania’s widely reported nursing home catastrophe. Nearly 70 percent of COVID-19’s death toll in Pennsylvania comes from these homes for the elderly. The Health Department, led by Secretary Rachel Levine, circulated a nursing home early response plan but never implemented it — then covered up its failure. The governor’s lack of transparency is compounded by his top coronavirus aide’s hypocrisy. Levine, having insider access to the rising death toll, quietly transferred her elderly mother from a nursing home to a hotel — even while the health department mandated those homes accept COVID-19 patients. Wolf campaigned promising “jobs that pay, schools that teach, and government that works.” His handling of this pandemic has produced the opposite: record unemployment, shuttered schools, and government failure. No wonder he is one of only five governors, all Democrats, to receive an “F” for his reopening strategy, according to an analysis from the Committee to Unleash Prosperity. The groundswell of opposition to Wolf’s repudiation of transparency is growing daily. In addition to demanding the resignation of Levine, state legislators have taken the governor to court to scrutinize the dubious waiver system he established to grant exemptions from his shutdown of so-called “non-life-sustaining” businesses. By keeping citizens in the dark, Gov. Wolf has forced Pennsylvanians to question the motives behind his every decision. From the beginning, his administration kept waiver records from the public, while granting them to the politically connected, like his former business, Wolf Home Products. The auditor general, a Democrat, is currently auditing the Wolf administration’s handling of the waiver process. Wolf has also earned resentment from the press corps after treating them like infants. The governor’s press conferences are a parody: Wolf stands before an empty press briefing room as his press secretary reads him pre-screened questions. Reporters have complained that their submitted questions were altered, calling the practice “unacceptable” and “disingenuous.” And follow-up questions are strictly forbidden. By keeping citizens in the dark, Wolf has forced Pennsylvanians to question the motives behind his every decision. The lesson is clear: Transparency is never optional — not even during a crisis. But instead of coming clean, Wolf has called those questioning his policies “cowards” and “deserters” and threatened to withhold federal stimulus money from counties that don’t comply with his shutdown order. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Fortunately, state lawmakers are showing no signs of caving. They immediately pushed back, sending the governor another sheaf of reopening bills. Perhaps they heard the cries of an onlooker from the barber shop rally who shouted, “We will not watch our freedoms wither and die.” Pennsylvania is showing precisely how citizens and their elected representatives can fill the leadership vacuum under a governor who has jettisoned any pretense of transparency and strayed far from his stated goals. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As elected attorneys general, we are the top law enforcement officers in each of our states. We take extremely seriously our duty of parens patriae – to protect, defend, and vindicate the legal rights of all of the citizens we represent. This duty rings true in times of crisis and uncertainty, especially during the unprecedented pandemic we face today. The coronavirus crisis has touched all of us. We have lost friends to COVID-19 and thousands of our constituents have been stricken with the illness. Countless businesses in our states have been shuttered and jobs there lost. Our brave doctors and nurses working front line shifts, treating their patients, have been put at great risk. And, increasingly now, we hear about culpability. We are learning more about who is responsible for this modern-day plague. All roads lead to a cover-up orchestrated by communist China. CHINESE STATE-RUN MEDIA CALL US THREATS OVER HONG KONG 'NOTHINGBURGER' Recently, we sent a letter to congressional leaders on both sides of the aisle. The letter has a very simple request that even in these hyper-partisan times we are hopeful that politicians of all stripes will get behind and support. An investigation would establish an official public record that would cut through the foreign propaganda and media spin. We asked Congress to investigate the Chinese government’s role in the coronavirus crisis and assess its culpability for this terrible pandemic. Press reports reveal that the Chinese government and Chinese Communist Party actively sought to suppress vital information about the coronavirus and its characteristics – particularly its ability to spread from human-to-human contact – for weeks or even months. They allegedly silenced whistleblowers and detained doctors who dared to speak out about what they were seeing in their hospitals and labs. They expelled western media who might have been able to see through their propaganda. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Other reports have even indicated that China compromised the World Health Organization, directing its response to this crisis by feeding it bad information and excluding contrary voices like those of its rival the Taiwanese government. In effect, they turned the world’s most important collaborative public health establishment into a megaphone for their own propagandistic proclamations. Furthermore, while all of this was going on, China appears to have taken steps to corner the world market in personal protective equipment (PPE) and life-saving medical supplies, ensuring shortages and dependence when the world was finally able to see through their lies and obfuscation. There have even been accusations that Chinese entities purposely shipped defective PPE and other equipment to foreign countries. These acts, if proven, are not only wrong, they are evil. And these allegations, if true, are not merely worrying, they are actionable. Some of us are considering legal action to hold China accountable for the profound damage done to our states and our citizens. The state of Missouri has already sued China, the Chinese Communist Party, and other related defendants in federal court. However, an all hands-on deck approach is needed when confronting an issue of this magnitude. Congressional hearings would help clarify truth from rumor, reality from hype, and fact from fiction. With their broad investigative powers, congressional committees could subpoena necessary witnesses, assemble relevant documents, and create a complete factual picture of how exactly the world was brought to its knees by this pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP An investigation would establish an official public record that would cut through the foreign propaganda and media spin. When, inevitably, the parties responsible for this crisis attempt to shift the blame, a free and open record — in addition to our legal actions— will help shine a light on the truth and facts. A century ago, Louis D. Brandeis wrote that “sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants.” These words still ring true today. Eric Schmitt is Missouri Attorney General. Alan Wilson is South Carolina Attorney General.

 We're going to state the obvious: Donald Trump tweets an awful lot. Many wish he didn't do it. He does it anyway. It's often his preferred mode of communication. Now, whether or not it's politically wise for him to do this, Donald Trump has an absolute right as an American to express what he actually thinks, even if every other person on Earth disagrees with him. When they used to tell you this was a free country -- and they often said that -- that's what they were talking about, the freedom of speech. TWITTER'S JACK DORSEY FIRES BACK AT ZUCKERBERG, DEFENDS FACT-CHECKING TRUMP TWEETS Well, sadly, it's become a much less free country recently. Power has become radically concentrated in far fewer hands than at any time in the past 100 years at least. And the people who wield that power have no interest whatsoever in your right to say something they disagree with. In fact, they're delighted to silence you if you try. They're not embarrassed to admit that they do this. They don't pretend anymore. Twitter, for example, now openly purges its users whose political views their executives don't like. It's bewildering, if you think about it, that they're allowed to do this because, like all the Big Tech companies, Twitter only exists -- its CEO is a billionaire -- only because Twitter enjoys key exemptions from federal law, exemptions that you don't enjoy, and we don't enjoy here at Fox News. It has those exemptions because Congress carved them out for the Big Tech companies, and that means Congress has the power to defend your free speech online. The White House does, too. And yet they've done absolutely nothing so far to help you. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Until Tuesday, Twitter returned the favor by leaving the commander-in- chief's Twitter feed alone. And then Trump criticized mail-in voting. The president tweeted that mail-in ballots could be "substantially fraudulent."As s a factual matter, that is true and we can prove it. As we told you Tuesday night, mail-in ballots have been linked to numerous cases of election fraud. People have been criminally convicted for it. So, it's really not up for debate. But this is an election year, and mail-in voting is now the central objective of the Democratic Party, and so you're not supposed to know any of that. On Tuesday Twitter placed a so-called "fact check" on the president's tweet. "Trump falsely claimed that mail in ballots would lead to a rigged election," Twitter announced. "Fact checkers say there is no evidence that mail-in ballots are linked to voter fraud." Now, again, as a factual matter, that is a lie. There's no other way to interpret it. But worse than a lie, it is a form of political censorship. The role of pushing back hard against censorship, was reserved for reporters. Their job was to safeguard the First Amendment, which is designed to protect the weak, not the strong. The weak are protected by the freedom of speech, and journalists are supposed to care about the weak, about the public -- their readers and viewers. So, who decided to do this, to censor it? Well, Yoel Roth has the Orwellian title "head of site integrity "at Twitter -- an irony-free zone where they don't understand that their titles alone are scary. That means he is one of the company's censors. And not surprisingly, Roth is a political activist and not an especially subtle one. In January 2017, Roth compared Kellyanne Conway to the Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels. That same day, he referred to the president's new staff just moving into the White House as actual Nazis and a lot more. You can look up his Twitter feed if you want, assuming he hasn't pulled it down by now. So, these are the people controlling what you're now allowed to think and say in America. They're authoritarians. If they're willing to censor the president, they will think of nothing at all of silencing you -- and they don't. They gladly do it, and no one pushes back. Traditionally, that role, the role of pushing back hard against censorship, was reserved for reporters. Their job was to safeguard the First Amendment, which is designed to protect the weak, not the strong. The weak are protected by the freedom of speech, and journalists are supposed to care about the weak, about the public -- their readers and viewers. They weren't supposed to be simply thugs hired to protect the powerful, but that's what they have become. Watch Don Lemon of CNN -- who, in his defense, often has no idea what he is saying -- try to bully Twitter into censoring ideas the authorities don't care for. Don Lemon, CNN anchor: Twitter wouldn't remove those tweets, and they wouldn't come on the show to talk about their decision to let this disgusting smear stand. People have been removed from Twitter for far less outrageous behavior. Come on, Jack Dorsey. Stop hiding behind the First Amendment for profit. Stop doing it. Do the right thing. "Stop hiding behind the First Amendment," says Don Lemon. In the annals of cable news that must be the most unintentionally hilarious line ever uttered by a script reader, as if exercising your God-given inborn right to speech and thought and conscience is somehow wrong. It's immoral. Don Lemon demands that you stop thinking for yourself. Fall in line, get on board, obey. Tow the party line, or we will hurt you. That's his message. And it's the mirror image of what journalists should be saying. There's only one reason we have a free press -- and that's to fight back against authoritarian power structures that demand we read from approved scripts. And now CNN is writing those scripts. It's terrifying. And all of a sudden, it's everywhere. Throughout April and May, YouTube, which is part of Google, took down any video that "explicitly disputes the efficacy of global or local health authority recommended guidance." If you dared to question the decrees of the politicians -- some of whom are impressive and wise, many of whom are dumb and making it up as they go along -- but if you criticize them, you are censored. And many were censored for doing that. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg recently explained why censorship isn't really bad. In fact, it saves lives. Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook: If information, if someone is spreading something that puts people at imminent risk of physical harm, then we take that down. We don't allow that on Facebook. There are also other misinformation that may not lead to physical -- imminent risk of physical harm, but still isn't the type of stuff we want to be spreading through our system. So this month, Facebook announced that it is expanding this effort. It announced the first 20 members of its new oversight panel. That panel will help decide which ideas can be expressed in public and which ideas must be thrown into the fireplace and forgotten forever. And you can imagine who's on the panel. It's a list of political activists and aggressive opponents of free speech. Stanford Law professor Pamela Carlin headlines the group. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Pamela Carlin -- look her up when you have a minute. What do you think she cares about more -- safeguarding your sacred constitutional rights or keeping Donald Trump from getting reelected in the fall? That's a rhetorical question, by the way. You know the answer. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 27, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 ‘If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black,” Joe Biden said Friday in an interview with Lenard Larry McKelvey, better known as “Charlamagne Tha God,” a co-host of the popular “Breakfast Club” radio show. Then all hell broke loose. Mr. Biden’s remark was offensive, demeaning and dumb. Yet insulting every African-America voter who has considered supporting someone other than the former vice president drew attention away from another disturbing problem: Mr. Biden often speaks as if English were his second language. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER For example, when Mr. McKelvey asked if he had an agenda for blacks who feel Democrats take them “for granted,” Mr. Biden said “Absolutely” and then launched a convoluted assault on basic sentence structure. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Mr. Biden: “What would I say? Remember when I said Biden can’t win? The primaries? I kicked everybody’s ass. Excuse me. I won overwhelming. I told you when I got to South Carolina, I won every single county. I won a larger share of the black vote than anybody has, including Barack. I increased the vote in Virginia overwhelmingly by 70 percent. Look, what people don’t know about me is I come from a state has the eighth-largest black population in America—the eighth-largest. I get 96 percent of that vote for the last 40 years. They’re the folks, as they say out my way, brung me to the dance. That’s how I got elected every single time and everybody’s shocked. I get overwhelming support from the black leadership, young and old. Every poll shows me way ahead and it’s not just—I hear this, ‘Oh yeah, old blacks are with Biden, but young aren’t.’ Look at the polling data. Polling data, let’s say it’s off by half. Come on, man. Give me a little break here,” and so on. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING KARL ROVE'S COLUMN IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

President of Freedomworks Adam Brandon joins Trace Gallagher to discuss the potentially negative impact of the stimulus bill on the U.S. deficit. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The current U.S. budget deficit could soon exceed a record $4 trillion. The massive borrowing is being driven both by prior budget profligacy and a hurried effort by the Donald Trump administration to pump liquidity into a quarantined America. The shutdown has left the country on the cusp of a self-inflicted economic collapse not seen since the Great Depression. Americans may soon have to service a staggering national debt of about $30 trillion — nearly $100,000 of debt for every American. TUCKER CARLSON: CNN, MSNBC ARE PEDDLING PANIC, MORAL JUDGMENT, NOT SCIENCE AND DATA, IN CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE Democrats and Republicans can blame each other, either for spending too much or for too little taxation, or both. But both sides will agree that managing such an astronomical debt requires several frightening choices.   One, Americans would be forced to live with permanent near-zero interest rates, or perhaps even negative interest rates. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER We are already seeing how the current low interest rates punish those who were thrifty and put away money in savings accounts. Negligible interest rewards those who borrow but forces savers to look for returns in volatile real estate or the risky stock market. In other words, there would be little interest paid out on the federal debt. The selling point for investors would be that the U.S. at least honors it bonds and debts and is safer than alternative global investments. America would become a permanent debtor that avoids paying much interest to anyone who lends it ever more money — on the cynical rationale that investors have no other safe place to put their money. Two, Americans, who are already taxed heavily at the local, state and federal levels, would simply have to pay even more. Top earners might pay a real tax rate of 60 percent to 70 percent of their incomes to government, with deleterious effects on incentives to create or earn further wealth. Gasoline prices are at astonishing lows, so some have advocated yet another federal fuel tax increase, a national sales tax or a wealth tax on the rich. The problem with constant increases in taxation is the ensuing culture of even greater spending that inevitably follows and the destruction of individual incentive. Three, the government could make draconian cuts in spending, focusing mostly on entitlements such as Social Security and Medicare, along with defense, where the bulk of federal expenditures are found. Cutting Social Security and Medicare is usually political suicide. In times of growing tensions with China, Russia, Iran and North Korea, it would equally be foolish to slash defense spending. Instead, expect some sort of reductions in Social Security benefits for high-income Americans, along with higher Medicare deductibles for everyone. We are postponing another rendezvous with reality. But as we near $30 trillion in debt, what cannot go on much longer soon probably won’t.  Four, the government could fall into the bad habits of the 1970s and simply expand the money supply, fuel inflation and pay down the debt with funny money. We would then likely experience the baleful consequences that a prior generation faced with stagflation and curative but staggeringly high interest rates during the Nixon, Ford, Carter and early Reagan administrations. Rather than fooling with interest rates and the money supply, a mixture of increased revenue and spending cuts seems wiser. Yet both are far harder to enact politically than just letting the Federal Reserve Board adjust national liquidity and interest. Five, the government could hope that new deregulation and more tax incentives might spur GDP growth of 3 percent or more per annum and thus “grow” our way out of deficits by radically expanding the economy. Such optimism is frequently voiced but rarely has prevented large budget deficits. A decade ago, the bipartisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, headed by former Republican Sen. Alan Simpson and former Democratic official Erskine Bowles, charted a pathway out of debt. The commission outlined a holistic plan of gradual cuts and revenue increases. Its wise recommendations found little to no political support. In the first two decades of the 21st century, the United States has faced three existential crises. The first was the 9/11 terrorist attack on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, which prompted a global effort to fight radical Islamic terrorism. The second occurred in 2008, when the U.S. financial system and stock market nearly collapsed. The third began earlier this year with the COVID-19 epidemic and a quarantine that reduced the economy to its most shaky state since the 1930s. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP During the first two crises, we snapped back the economy with low interest rates, increased government spending and larger annual deficits — and passed the greater long-term debt to another administration, another Congress and another generation of Americans. We are postponing another rendezvous with reality. But as we near $30 trillion in debt, what cannot go on much longer soon probably won’t. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

President Trump prepares action against China over Hong Kong; reaction and analysis from Missouri Senator Josh Hawley. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Remember the old public relations maxim: “There’s no such thing as bad publicity”? Try telling that to Beijing. Having loosed a pandemic, China finds itself (quite deservedly) deluged with bad publicity. Yet, oddly, the regime seems to think the best way out of their image nightmare is to make it worse. Well, alrighty then. If that’s their play, the U.S. ought to spend more time thinking about how we can help the Chinese Communist Party dig itself a deeper hole. DR. SYRA MADAD: CORONAVIRUS PROTECTION – AS COUNTRY REOPENS, THIS IS YOUR BEST DEFENSE The list of China’s self-inflicted wounds grows longer by the day. They failed to confine the epidemic in Wuhan. They allowed millions of travelers to carry the disease around the world. They failed to inform the world of the disease in timely fashion. They failed to cooperate with other nations seeking to understand the disease. They hoarded protective equipment. They spread lies (like blaming others for the outbreak) to deflect criticism. Then they started threatening some countries — like Australia — that announced plans to investigate Beijing’s handling of the outbreak. Global anger at China does not seem to be waning. Even countries that complain about the current U.S. administration will, in their next breath (or under their breath), complain even more about Beijing. Of course, China sees the U.S. as the big obstacle on its long march to become the world’s most dominant military and economic power. However, Beijing’s strategy has always been to “win without fighting.” Rather than directly bump heads with Washington, it seeks to find ways to undercut U.S. dominance, bend international organizations its way and draw off American friends and allies. The Trump administration has pushed back bluntly. It has slapped tariffs on Chinese goods and pressed for better trade deals. It has actively opposed China’s candidates for leadership positions in international organizations. And it has called out Chinese disinformation and lies disseminated during the pandemic response. The regime has demonstrated once again it cannot be trusted to uphold its commitments. And it has shown its willingness to bully and bluff to get its way. All of this creates a challenge for China, and a 16-page summary of the American strategy recently published by the White House shows the U.S. has no intention of backing down. The COVID crisis, in fact, seems to have steeled American resolve. To make matters worse for Beijing, that American resolve in spreading. Several countries have joined the U.S. in pressuring the World Health Organization (WHO) to readmit Taiwan as an observer. (Taiwan was kicked out of the organization in 2016 at Beijing’s insistence.) A number of countries have also demanded an independent investigation on both the WHO and Beijing’s influence on its leadership. The Chinese response to this has been to put on a brave face and act even more belligerently than usual. They have been more vociferous in their claims on the South China Seas and moved troops into contested regions of the border with India. Most troubling of all is the regime’s announcement that it will pass legislation that could significantly compromise the freedoms of the people of Hong Kong, gutting the commitments Beijing swore to uphold when it signed the “Basic Law,” marking the return of the island to China from Great Britain. If the law looks like what we expect, the deal of “one country, two systems,” will be effectively dead. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER China’s troubles with Hong Kong predated the COVID crisis. Demonstrations against Beijing’s interference in the governing of the island sparked massive demonstrations and even some violence. That news was overwhelmed by the pandemic. While it was always assumed the Chinese Communist Party would circle back and punish the people of Hong Kong for their upstart behavior, the fact that they’re doing it right now is interesting. It appears that Beijing wants to use Hong Kong as an example; by throwing its muscle around there, it hopes to remind the world not to mess with China and to demonstrate that those who dare to push back will pay a price. Yet, this round of aggression comes with a cost. The regime has demonstrated once again it cannot be trusted to uphold its commitments. And it has shown its willingness to bully and bluff to get its way. That will only make the world more wary of China. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The U.S. administration is absolutely right to take a strong stand and condemn the proposal for the new law. China will never stop its destabilizing actions unless the U.S. stands strong to defend its interests and work with friends and allies to mitigate the China challenge. In dealing with the Beijing bullies, the U.S. must stick to its strategy: when China does wrong, we need to call them on it and make them pay a price for their bad behavior. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

Former Deputy National Security Adviser K.T. McFarland reacts to Gen. Flynn unmasking controversy. A picture is starting to emerge about the abuse of power against the incoming Trump administration orchestrated by a cabal of outgoing Obama administration officials, House Democrats, the intelligence community and their allies in the media. According to Attorney General William Barr, “What happened to the president in the 2016 election and throughout the first two years of his administration was abhorrent. It was a grave injustice and it was unprecedented in American history.” Turns out the entire Russian investigation was a sham, and Obama administration officials knew it from the get-go. Senior intelligence officials testified before closed-door congressional hearings that there was NO collusion between the Trump campaign and the Russians. GREGG JARRETT: TRUMP ATTORNEY ACCUSES MUELLER OF 'MONSTROUS LIE AND SCHEME TO DEFRAUD' Yet Director of National Intelligence James Clapper, CIA Director John Brennan, FBI Director James Comey, FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, and House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff went on cable news shows day after day implying or saying outright to the American people that they had proof of collusion and that Donald Trump would never have been elected without Russian interference. Some even claimed Trump was a Russian asset and continued to do Russian President Vladimir Putin’s bidding from the Oval Office. As Barr concluded, “The law enforcement and intelligence apparatus of this country were involved in advancing a false and utterly baseless Russian-collusion narrative against the president.” The Trump-hating media gleefully repeated their claims. They quoted “anonymous sources” who told of treasonous wrongdoings by Trump and his associates. They served as the echo chamber for these baseless claims, ratcheting up their ratings and profits in the process. Even now, with the steady accumulation of evidence – and more to follow – don’t expect any of these people to come clean or admit their mistakes. Instead, they’re doubling down and coming up with new excuses to justify their actions. One you’re likely to hear more of in the days ahead comes from that fateful few days in late December 2016, when President Obama imposed sanctions on the Russians for election interference. The administration expected the Russians to retaliate on the eve of Trump’s inauguration, leaving the new president a U.S.-Russia crisis to greet his arrival at the White House. As I write in my book, “Revolution: Trump, Washington and ‘We the People,’” the Russian president’s response to Obama’s sanctions was classic Putin and most likely carefully choreographed from the beginning.   When the Russians didn’t retaliate, Obama directed the intelligence community to find out why, with the presumption that Trump must have cut a deal with Putin during the final days of the transition. At that time, the president-elect was in Mar-a-Lago. I was also there in my role as the senior national security adviser. My boss, National Security Adviser Michael Flynn, was vacationing in the Dominican Republic. This was what the FBI and Mueller prosecutors grilled me about over more than 30 hours and several interrogation sessions in the summer, fall and winter of 2017 and 2018. They were convinced there was a smoking gun somewhere, and that I was the middleman. They presumed that President-elect Trump directed me to tell Flynn to make promises to the Russians in exchange for not retaliating. They were hoping to seize on the Logan Act, an obscure, ancient and never enforced law dating back 200 years (a strategy that even the Justice Department admitted early on wouldn’t fly). I insisted over and over again that wasn’t the case, that Trump gave me no such order, yet they persisted. The Mueller prosecutors asked about a 60-minute period on Dec. 29 when I didn’t text, phone or email, suggesting that was when I must have met with the president-elect to receive my marching orders. I explained that the 60-minute gap was actually when I left my cell phone behind at my desk and took a walk with my husband along the beautiful Mar-a-Lago beach. What they never figured out, or never wanted to figure out, was that Putin probably played us all along. Putin didn’t retaliate against Obama’s sanctions because it wasn’t in his best interest to do so. He had far more to lose in perpetuating the bad relationship he had with the Obama administration into the new Trump administration. One of Trump’s campaign promises was to improve relations with Russia. Why would Putin jeopardize that by retaliating against a lame-duck president? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As I write in my book, “Revolution: Trump, Washington and ‘We the People,’” the Russian president’s response to Obama’s sanctions was classic Putin and most likely carefully choreographed from the beginning. Immediately after Obama imposed sanctions, the Russian foreign minister announced, as expected, that Russia would retaliate. Putin swooped in a day later to overrule his foreign minister. He announced he would rise above the “irresponsible ‘kitchen’ diplomacy” of Obama and wait for the new president before responding to the sanctions. Putin won three ways: He made himself look like a great statesman, he insulted Obama’s pettiness, and he could get brownie points from the new administration by avoiding an inauguration day crisis. Either the senior officials of the Obama administration, including Obama himself, were incompetent in analyzing Putin, or deliberately used it as their excuse for investigating and wiretapping Flynn and others. I will leave it for others to decide. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Russia hoax was all designed to prevent President Trump from doing what the American people elected him to do – drain the swamp. Why did the cabal want to stop Trump? Because they are the swamp. The American people have paid a very high price for the Russia hoax. Even if the investigation of the investigators uncovers the rot in the intelligence community, the ramifications of their actions will live on. By setting Americans at each other’s throats for three years, our adversaries, especially the Chinese, were able to exploit our divisions to their advantage. That is the real crime against the American people – the cabal distracted us from the growing strategic threat, so they could play nasty games against their political opponents. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KT MCFARLAND

President Trump attacks social media outlet over alleged bias; reaction and analysis from with FCC Commissioner Brendan Carr and John Yoo, former deputy assistant attorney general. After President Trump tweeted to raise concerns about states mailing all registered voters ballots, Twitter added a “fact check” label to those tweets Tuesday for the first time, stating that “there is no evidence that mail-in ballots are linked to voter fraud.” Besides setting a dangerous precedent that will no doubt infringe on free speech, Twitter isn’t the authority on elections – the Committee on House Administration is. Committee Republicans recently produced a report on the fraud that exists in certain instances of vote-by-mail. What most people don’t know about voting by mail is that there's a vast difference in states allowing voters to request an absentee ballot and what the Democrats in California are trying to do, which is the same thing that House Democrats tried to do with their political wish list disguised as coronavirus relief. ZUCKERBERG KNOCKS TWITTER FOR FACT-CHECKING TRUMP, SAYS PRIVATE COMPANIES SHOULDN'T BE 'THE ARBITER OF TRUTH' Democrats want to force states to mail all registered voters live ballots, whether or not voters request ballots. While this may seem like a good way to vote that allows everyone to stay home during the coronavirus pandemic, forcing states to use an entirely new vote-by-mail system comes with its own problems – especially less than six months before the presidential and congressional elections. How can you send every registered voter a live ballot in the mail when you don’t keep accurate voter registration lists? The National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) requires states to have a uniform, nondiscriminatory voter registration list maintenance program. This requirement was part of the NVRA because the drafters foresaw the way public confidence is undermined when these lists are not maintained properly. But many states have simply ignored or not had the resources to comply with this requirement, leaving states with inaccurate voter registration lists and certainly ill-prepared for voting by mail. Allowing states to send all of their recorded registered voters a ballot without making states update their lists of registered voters would unquestionably invite fraud into elections. Ballots would be mailed to addresses of individuals who have moved or passed away. The new residents may not be eligible to vote but could see the ballots in the mail and try to vote anyway.  At the beginning of May, California and Los Angeles County were required to remove 1.5 million inactive voters from their registration lists when a Judicial Watch lawsuit said Los Angeles County has more registered voters than citizens. You read that correctly – Los Angeles County has more registered voters than citizens. If Democrats can federally mandate a nationwide all-mail election in November, election officials will be sending out more live ballots than voters, which will lead to fraudulent ballots being returned. What Democrats are also not telling you is that California allows for ballot harvesting – meaning that any individual can pick up any number of ballots for any reason, completely unchecked. These harvesters picking up ballots don’t have to show an ID, they don’t have to be a citizen, and they don’t have to be eligible to vote. You expect Americans to believe that having someone who can’t vote picking up ballots won’t invite fraud in our elections? No one is keeping track of who is picking up thousands of ballots, so how do we know they’re being delivered? How do we know the harvesters aren’t altering votes or pressuring people on how to vote? Also, why are Democrats pushing to allow for ballot harvesting when all these mail ballots will supposedly have prepaid postage? If voters can mail ballots in for free, then they don’t need “ballot brokers” coming to collect their ballots, unchecked. This raises questions in my home state of Illinois, where the state Legislature just passed a bill to allow ballot drop boxes in Champaign County. These ballot boxes have no checks on who would be dropping off ballots or how many are turned in to these boxes, not to mention no supervision of the ballots once they’re dropped off. Practices like these raise many red flags and leave our election systems ripe for fraud. Democrats say vote-by-mail is our only option to make sure everyone can vote, but what about the Americans who are unable to easily vote from home? The Native American Rights Fund, an organization that provides legal assistance to tribes and individual Native Americans, outlined potential obstacles for Native Americans in an entirely vote-by-mail election, like issues with access to traditional mail services, a lack of broadband connectivity, and cultural communication barriers. Democrats, who blame everyone but themselves for suppressing voters, are now going to allow a practice that will discriminate against thousands? The fact of the matter is, transitioning to an all vote-by-mail election wouldn’t even be possible at this point. States without the vote-by-mail infrastructure are not equipped to transition to an all vote-by-mail election. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER A Bipartisan Policy Center review revealed that 34 states had fewer than 15 percent of their ballots cast by mail during the 2018 election, with many in the single digits. Washington Secretary of State Kim Wyman, whose state has been using vote-by-mail for many years, has said if states are not already at 60 percent of ballots or above being cast by mail they are unlikely to be prepared all-mail-in elections in November. States that have successfully implemented vote-by-mail did so over the span of several years with intense, focused statewide training for state and local officials who are actually conducting elections. A successful transition to an election by mail requires major technology and staff upgrades, managing resources between in-person and mail voting, adjusting ballot return deadlines, configuring prepaid postage, and setting realistic ballot processing expectations. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If states try now to implement an entirely vote-by-mail system and mail every voter on their outdated registration lists a ballot, they are inviting fraud into our elections. My message to Twitter: Before you decide to censor speech by throwing a label on the president of the United States – or any American – make sure you know the facts yourself. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. RODNEY DAVIS
 

Fox News senior judicial analyst Judge Andrew Napolitano weighs in on ‘The Daily Briefing.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The governors of all 50 states and the mayors of many large cities have assumed unto themselves the powers to restrict private personal choices and lawful public behavior in an effort to curb the spread of COVID-19. They have done so not by enforcing previously existing legislation but by crafting their own executive orders, styling those orders as if they were laws, using state and local police to enforce those so-called laws and – presumably when life returns to normal and the courts reopen – prosecuting the alleged offenders in court. It is hard to believe that any judge in America would permit a criminal trial of any person for violating a standard of behavior that has not been enacted into law by a legislature. SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: CORONAVIRUS COLLATERAL DAMAGE – HERE'S WHY WE MUST OPEN SMARTLY, SAFELY AND SOON We know this because under our system of representative government, separated powers and guaranteed liberties, only the legislative branch can craft laws and assign punishments for noncompliance. This is Constitutional Law 101. Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch has written that the executive branch cannot enforce a law that it has written. If it does, we will have approached tyranny. Have we approached tyranny already? During the past eight weeks, governors and mayors have closed most businesses, public venues and houses of worship, prohibited public assembly and restricted travel – all of which they have unilaterally decreed to be nonessential.  In his terrifying novel “1984” – which posits a future of total control of all persons by the government and total control of the government by one political party – George Orwell argued that he who controls the meaning of words controls the laws as well. That Orwellian truism has been manifested like never before here in America, where executive branch officeholders have used state and local police to restrain people from engaging in private and public behavior that they concede was lawful two months ago because today it is not deemed “essential.” Frankly, I am surprised at the ferocity of police enforcement and the lameness of police compliance. The police have taken the same oaths to uphold the same Bill of Rights – it’s not the Bill of Safety; it’s the Bill of Rights – as have all other officeholders. The police also know that it is unlawful for them to obey an unlawful order, particularly when they use force. The lockdown orders are all unlawful because none of them – none – has been enacted by a legislature, and all of them – all – interfere with fundamental liberties, each of which is guaranteed – guaranteed – by the Constitution. The government in America – state or federal – has no power and no right to determine what goods, services and venues are essential. Please don’t misunderstand me. I recognize the scientific value of personal efforts to control contagion. But under the Constitution, these social-distancing, wear-your-mask, shut-your-business, stay-at-home edicts constitute mere recommendations that should induce rational voluntary compliance, because the government in America is without lawful power to compel compliance. The governors complain about resistance. They need to know that Americans will resist efforts to interfere in behavior that remains as moral, natural, lawful and constitutional as it was 60 days ago. Last week, President Trump, sounding fed up with gubernatorial lockdown orders, declared that religious worship is essential – meaning, in his opinion, all houses of worship should be opened – and he offered that he was prepared to “override” any governors who disagreed with him. When he realized that he lacked any authority to override even unlawful gubernatorial decrees, he dispatched the Department of Justice to begin filing challenges to governors in federal courts and to argue that constitutional freedoms are being impaired by the states. I applaud this, but it is too little, too late. Where was the Justice Department when Catholic priests were threatened with arrest for saying Mass or distributing palms, and when rabbis were put in COVID-19-infested jails for holding funerals? At all these religious events, folks freely chose to exercise their freedom to worship; and to take their chances. These Justice Department interventions provoked the question: Who should decide what goods, services or venues are essential – the states or the federal government? The question is Orwellian, as the answer is: neither of them. The government in America – state or federal – has no power and no right to determine what goods, services and venues are essential. Those determinations have been for individuals to make since 1776, and those individual choices have been constitutionally protected from the feds since the Bill of Rights was ratified in 1791 and from the states since the 14th Amendment was ratified in 1868. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What is essential to the laborer or student or housewife may not be essential to the former Goldman Sachs partner who was elected governor of New Jersey, and who decreed last week, “It shall be the duty of every person or entity in this State ... to cooperate fully” with his orders; or essential to the ideologue who is mayor of the Big Apple and who, for all his professed liberality, threatened to close permanently – permanently – businesses and houses of worship that flaunt his guidelines. A duty is undertaken voluntarily or by nature, not by executive command, Gov. Murphy. And the government cannot take property away from its owners except for a legitimate public use and only for just compensation, Mayor de Blasio. Governors and mayors can make all the dictatorial pronouncements and threats that they wish. But they cannot use public assets to enforce them. And when they seek to use force, those from whom they seek it should decline the offer.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In America, we decide for ourselves what produces happiness. We have never delegated to the government – ever – the power to make personal choices for us. And some of us are willing to take chances and even do “nonessential” things. The essence of the freedoms for which we have fought since 1776 is the liberty to be ourselves. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO

Twitter hasn't wanted to spend money on fact-checking efforts and now is paying the price; Fox News media analyst Howard Kurtz reports. Twitter purported Tuesday to “fact check” two tweets by President Trump in which the president pointed out – accurately – that mail-in ballots present substantial risks of election fraud. Below the president’s tweets, Twitter added a disclaimer: “Get the facts about mail-in ballots.”  The disclaimer states that “there is no evidence that mail-in ballots are linked to voter fraud,” and links to articles – including pieces published by The Washington Post, CNN and NBC – calling Trump’s claim “unsubstantiated.” I strongly disagree with Twitter. ZUCKERBERG KNOCKS TWITTER FOR FACT-CHECKING TRUMP, SAYS PRIVATE COMPANIES SHOULDN'T BE 'THE ARBITER OF TRUTH' ​In 2007, during a spirited debate over photo ID legislation while I was in the Texas Legislature, a Democratic lawmaker from Dallas objected to the bill on the grounds that it allowed voting by mail to proceed without photo identification. The legislator said: “Vote by mail, that we know, is the greatest source of voter fraud in this state. In fact, all of the prosecutions by the attorney general – I shouldn’t say all, but a great majority of the prosecutions by the attorney general occur with respect to vote by mail.” As the official now charged with prosecuting election fraud in Texas, I can say unequivocally that the legislator was right: going back more than a decade and continuing through the present day, around two-thirds of election fraud offenses prosecuted by my office have involved some form of mail-ballot fraud. These prosecutions include instances of forgery and falsification of ballots. One man pleaded guilty after forging 1,200 mail-in ballot applications, resulting in 700 suspected fraudulent votes in a 2017 Dallas election. He was identified after a voter, whose ballot he harvested, snapped a photo of him on her cellphone. “Authentic” signatures are also collected from voters, either under false pretenses or by experienced harvesters who confidently gain compliance from voters, as illustrated in a video that surfaced during the 2018 primary in the Houston area. The anonymous video appears to show how easily a ballot application and signature were collected from a voter by a campaign worker in less than 20 seconds. After providing her signature, the voter asked the worker: “Is this legal, what you’re doing?” The worker replied: “Yes, ma’am, we’ve done 400 already.” In South Texas, a former U.S. Postal Service employee was convicted of bribery in a federal prosecution in 2017 for selling a list of absentee voters to vote harvesters for $1,200. Once mail ballots go out, harvesters show up at a voter’s door and engage the voter to provide “voting assistance.” The variations are endless, but a common practice involves giving the voter the impression that the harvester is an election official. Whatever the case, successful vote harvesters leave with a voter’s signature and a ballot that is either blank, voted in the way the harvester wants, or that can be modified (or disposed of) later. TWITTER EXEC IN CHARGE OF EFFORT TO FACT-CHECK TRUMP HAS HISTORY OF ANTI-TRUMP POSTS, CALLED MCCONNELL A 'BAG OF FARTS' Skilled vote harvesters appear friendly and helpful. They may engage the voter in reassuring political discourse while assisting the voter in filling out the ballot. One fraudster was convicted of unlawfully “assisting” elderly nursing home residents – including an Alzheimer’s patient –complete mail ballots. Twitter’s head of site integrity, Yoel Roth, has attacked President Trump and his team as ‘ACTUAL NAZIS” and smeared Trump voters as supporting a “racist tangerine.” These instances are just the tip of the iceberg. Mail ballot fraud has been documented across the country. In fact, the Heritage Foundation has helpfully assembled a searchable database of over 1,000 instances of election fraud resulting in some form of plea, penalty or judicial finding. Many of those cases involving abuse of absentee ballots. Indeed, one of the most infamous instances of election fraud in recent memory – the 2018 contest for the 9th Congressional District in North Carolina – involved large-scale fraud conducted by ballot harvesters. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER President Trump is right to decry California’s or any other state’s plan to send every registered voter in the state a mail ballot ahead of November’s election. The potential for abuse by professional ballot harvesters – much like what happened in North Carolina – is high. The risk of abuse, which has been documented and explained numerous times, somehow escaped mention in Twitter’s “fact check” of President Trump’s tweets. Perhaps that omission owes less to a lack of “facts” and more to the biases of Twitter’s own fact-checkers. For example, Twitter’s head of site integrity, Yoel Roth, has attacked President Trump and his team as ‘ACTUAL NAZIS” and smeared Trump voters as supporting a “racist tangerine.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Whether or not Twitter ultimately decides to acknowledge the real facts about mail-in voting, I will continue investigating and prosecuting all forms of election fraud, including fraud by mail-in ballot. Moreover, I strongly urge that Twitter reconsider its selective – and apparently ideologically driven – “fact check” of President Trump’s statements about mail balloting in favor of a more objective, fair, accurate and evidence-based approach.

Woman calls cops on black birdwatcher after dog dispute. By now you've seen the video of that white Central Park lady in New York City who, when asked by a black birdwatcher to leash her dog, called the cops on him. That was ugly. She seemed fixated by race. You could say that's part of identifying someone to police. But it sounded more like using race to gin up a false allegation. Along with horribly manhandling her poor dog, the woman became the prime example of a person quick to complain to the manager – the dope who makes a scene about nothing. And not much of a dog owner. NYC WOMAN IN VIRAL CENTRAL PARK VIDEO IS FIRED: 'WE DO NOT TOLERATE RACISM' It backfired. She lost her job. And her dog. Is there satisfaction to be found in this? Maybe. She seems the type who no doubt has dished out the grief she's getting now. And her mistake isn't small. If this hadn't been captured on video, the black man could’ve been arrested and she could've lied some more. Shots could have been fired. Instead, the phone video saved the man and ruined the woman. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER So, is this proportional? She's a jerk. An oddball. Maybe a bigot. She apologized profusely. So why not forgive her? Because that’s what the birdwatcher did. Of her apology, he said: “If it's genuine and if she plans on keeping her dog on a leash in the ramble going forward, then we have no issues with each other." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Not bad. If he can do it, so can you. And if you don't, then you're kind of being a judgmental person embracing outrage because it feels good. So don’t be the bully, be the birdwatcher. And remember, we all have bad days. Lucky for us, those days never get filmed. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 27, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

 Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden told an African-American talk show host last week: “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black.” It was not a one-off remark. After strong condemnation, including from some fellow Democrats, Biden attempted to walk back his statement, suggesting he was trying to be funny. Biden has made other demeaning comments about minorities for many years. They are part of a pattern. HARLEMITES SOUND OFF TO LAWRENCE JONES ON BIDEN 'YOU AIN'T BLACK' COMMENTS: 'TRYING TO MARGINALIZE US' One of the definitions of “pattern” is: “a combination of qualities, acts, tendencies ... forming a consistent or characteristic arrangement.” In his self-defense, Biden frequently says, “Look at my record.” OK, let’s look. Biden claims the NAACP has supported him every time he has run for office. Not so, says current NAACP president, Derrick Johnson: “We want to clarify that the NAACP is a nonpartisan organization and does not endorse candidates for political office at any level.” Biden’s “record” of putting down minorities is also part of his pattern. In 2007, speaking of Barack Obama, Biden told Jason Horowitz of The New York Observer: “I mean, you got the first mainstream African-American who is articulate and bright and clean and a nice-looking guy,” he said. “I mean, that’s a storybook, man.” THE LATEST FROM FROM FOX NEWS ON THE 2020 PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN Last August, while speaking to the Asian and Latino Coalition in Des Moines, Iowa, Biden associated black people with poverty: “Poor kids are just as bright and just as talented as white kids.” In 2006 while contemplating a run for president, Biden said, “You cannot go to a 7-Eleven or a Dunkin’ Donuts unless you have a slight Indian accent.” There’s more in Biden’s record. The Trump-Pence campaign has compiled a list of similar statements. In 1977, Biden worried about the results of certain desegregation policies: “Unless we do something about this, my children are going to grow up in a jungle, the jungle being a racial jungle with tensions having built so high that it is going to explode at some point.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER 1993, Biden described “predators” unworthy of forgiveness who must be locked away from society: “[U]nless we do something about that cadre of young people — tens of thousands of them, born out of wedlock, without parents, without supervision, without any structure, without any conscience developing ... because they literally have not been socialized ... [A] portion of them will become the predators 15 years from now, and ... we have predators on our streets that society has in fact, in part because of its neglect, created…  [W]e don’t very well know how to rehabilitate them at that point. That’s the sad truth. You’re looking at the fella who is one of the primary architects of the sentencing commission.” It was President Donald Trump who pushed sentencing revisions through Congress and won praise from African-American leaders. Biden has repeatedly praised racist Alabama Gov. George Wallace and bragged about receiving an award from him: “I think the Democratic Party could stand a liberal George Wallace — someone who’s not afraid to stand up and offend people, someone who wouldn’t pander but would say what the American people know in their gut is right,” Biden said in 1975. “[S]ometimes even George Wallace is right about some things,” Biden said in 1981. In 2003, Biden delivered a eulogy for one-time segregationist Sen. Strom Thurmond: “I was honored to work with him, privileged to serve with him, proud to call him my friend.” In 2010, Biden delivered a eulogy for a former KKK Exalted Cyclops, the late Sen. Robert Byrd: “He was a friend, he was a mentor and he was a guide.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In 2019, Biden bragged about working with Sen. James Eastland: “Even in the days when I got there, the Democratic Party still had seven or eight old-fashioned Democratic segregationists. You’d get up and you’d argue like the devil with them. Then you’d go down and have lunch or dinner together.” That’s the Biden record. Now let’s see him defend it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

Defense Secretary Mark Esper provides an update on the federal government's response to the coronavirus Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  With coronavirus response stimulus spending approaching $2.5 trillion and a projected budget deficit of $3.7 trillion this year, it is inevitable that Congress will soon dust off its scissors and begin the exercise of budget cutting. The first place lawmakers are likely to look is national defense. That would be a mistake. Before engaging in another round of budget battles and debt-limit standoffs, Congress ought to look back a decade to the last time the country tried to get serious about our spending problem. If fiscal hawks were the winners of the last budget battle (a debatable point) that gave us sequestration and budget caps, our national defense infrastructure was without question the biggest loser. CORONAVIRUS 'DEBT BOMB': REPUBLICANS CONCERNED ABOUT MILITARY FUNDING Here are a few lessons for those years the green eyeshades ought to keep in mind as they strike back at federal spending. Defense cuts do not result in defense reform Budget cuts have rarely, if ever, led to the necessary and important objective of reforming the Pentagon. The cuts are seldom applied in a strategic fashion, and so result in indiscriminate and incoherent applications that lead to a weakened force. Under financial strain, Pentagon leaders spend all their efforts on how to say alive rather than figuring out how to get healthier. Unable to maintain its readiness and sustain the operational tempo levied by its political masters in the aftermath of the Great Recession, the military paid the price in the form of training and operational mishaps and, tragically, deaths. According to one report, annual accidents in the Navy’s aviation fleet increased 82 percent between 2013 and 2017, with 133 service members killed in accidents involving Navy jets. The effects of budget cuts and caps contributed to the Trump administration’s objective of “rebuilding the military.” The rebuild isn’t just about dollars – it’s about reforming the enterprise for 21st century warfare. It remains unclear whether the military has indeed been rebuilt, but reducing military budgets in the aftermath of COVID-19 will certainly reverse the recovery our military has enjoyed over the past three years. Strengthening the force and modernizing its platforms requires sustained investments over at least six years. Starving the pump after priming it inevitably leads to lost investments and a hollow force. Be wary of solutions that promise strategic results for pennies on the dollar Even more so now than during President Barack Obama’s administration, it is fashionable to promise that new technologies will transform the way the military fights at a fraction of the price. This may be true in the future, but it is not yet the case. Trading an aircraft carrier today for a PowerPoint slide that promises a new technology tomorrow is a recipe for defeat. This is true when defense budgets are growing at a modest rate; it is doubly true when the military is stretched and hungry for resources. If you are going to reduce military spending, then change your strategy While it is common for policymakers to advocate spending less on defense, it rarely results in a president asking the military to do less. In fact, the opposite is usually true: the military will be asked to do more with less. Whether it was defeating Al Qaeda and ISIS, deterring Iran and Russia, operations in Libya, or pivoting to Asia, the years of budget-cutting did not see a reduction in military operations. Instead, they led to an overtaxed force with degraded equipment unable to meet the demands of the commander in chief. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It is, of course, understandable that a president would prefer not to change his strategy based on fiscal considerations. After all, our enemies and adversaries don’t take a knee while the U.S. pauses investing in its military. The lesson here is the enemy has a vote. During the years of budget caps and sequestration, our adversaries – including China and Russia – exploited the opening with remarkable speed. As U.S. military deterrence degraded, we found ourselves confronting near-peer competitors capable of beating us in a fight. President Trump’s national security strategy, with its emphasis on great power competition – particularly with China – was clear-eyed about these developments. It employed a strategy aimed at arresting these trends. Failing to adequately resource the military would abandon that strategy and undermine the most significant national security contribution of President Trump’s first term. Which leads to a final lesson from our last attempt to reign in federal spending on the backs of the military: Only the commander in chief can protect the military from death by a thousand budget cuts The president has the ability to continue rebuilding our national defense infrastructure and keeping the American people safe by requesting military budgets that sustain his strategy and by making clear in word and deed (via the veto pen) that he will not tolerate congressional mischief. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Failure to take these actions will give tacit approval to Congress to take the military’s money and run. Unfortunately, early indicators suggest President Trump may allow just that. If the commander in chief can’t find his voice and pen, history may end up repeating itself. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ROGER ZAKHEIM

 Former federal appellate Judge J. Michael Luttig makes some excellent points regarding Judge Emmet Sullivan’s erratic performance in the Flynn case, writing in the Washington Post. I respectfully disagree with him, though, that the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals should, at this stage, find Sullivan has demonstrated such bias that the case should be reassigned to a different judge. That would deprive Sullivan of the opportunity to explain himself, while needlessly extending the proceedings, further prejudicing Michael Flynn. GREGG JARRETT: TRUMP ATTORNEY ACCUSES MUELLER OF 'MONSTROUS LIE AND SCHEME TO DEFRAUD' Gregg Jarrett: Trump attorney accuses Mueller of 'monstrous lie and scheme to defraud' While Luttig is understandably worried about the public reputation of the court, the constitutional priority here is Flynn’s due-process rights. If, as I expect, Sullivan cannot defend his recent actions, the D.C. Circuit should either directly grant the Justice Department’s motion to dismiss, or order the lower court to grant it. The Court of Appeals’ order gave Sullivan 10 days to respond to Flynn’s mandamus petition. That is prudent. Sullivan is a highly experienced judge. John Gleeson, the former judge and prosecutor whom Sullivan wants to bring in as his adviser, is also well versed in criminal law. To my mind, they have both been swept away by the heated politics of the moment. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Sullivan, in addition, is clearly livid about putting in what may be wasted effort on the case, and no doubt feels ill-used by Flynn’s reversal of course — which happened only after Sullivan elicited from Flynn reaffirmations that he was guilty and was not seeking to withdraw his plea. The 10 days give Sullivan an opportunity to count to 10 and do his duty. No one is suggesting that he needs to agree with or approve of the Justice Department’s decision to dismiss the case. He must, however, accept that this is the Justice Department’s call to make. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Sometimes, the shoe is on the other foot: A judge will exercise his or her discretion in a way prosecutors believe is profoundly wrong but that is not effectively reviewable. Our justice system is rightly the envy of the world, but it relies on discretion in many instances; within wide bounds, discretion is the authority to make decisions with which reasonable minds disagree — often passionately. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. We hope you had a happy Memorial Day weekend. It's possible you have spent, along with millions of others, months trapped indoors per government order because of the coronavirus. So, getting outside makes all the difference -- grilling a hamburger in the fresh air, hitting the park, walking on the beach for a couple of hours. It's essential. All of us needed it. Nature is medicine. Happy, balanced people understand that intuitively. You can't just sit on a couch all day barking at other people on social media. Your soul will rot if you do that. CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWN PROMPTS WOMAN TO ATTEMPT TO PULL OUT OWN TOOTH And unfortunately, it's too late for a lot of people at CNN, and they haven't even been trapped inside for months. For reasons that no one in authority has ever really explained, cable news yappers have been classified as essential workers from the very first day of lockdown. And by the way, that includes us. It also includes the partisan political activists on the other channels. They didn't lose their jobs. They have not been quarantined. If anything, they are thriving in the midst of this disaster. They feel more essential than they ever have. Your suffering has been the best thing to happen to them since impeachment, when they got to spend a full month pretending to know where Ukraine is. So, you can imagine their rage when they saw you outdoors this weekend, enjoying time with your family. The fact that you disobeyed them drove them insane. Here is CNN: Reporter: These were not the images health officials were hoping to see this Memorial Day, party goers ignoring social distancing rules packed this pool in Missouri over the weekend. Reporter: Beaches, boardwalks, pools packed with many people who are not wearing masks, who are not socially distancing. Dana Bash, CNN chief political correspondent: Even as health experts warn that if they don't social distance, there will be a spike in coronavirus cases within the next two weeks. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Reporter: But the question about masks. Take a look. There isn't a single person on this beach wearing one. Reporter: Scenes of crowded vacationers on a boardwalk in Ocean City, Maryland and at Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. Can you imagine? People enjoying time outdoors with their kids. They should be as unhappy as we are at CNN. Now, this being CNN, a lot of people didn't actually hear any of that. Most CNN viewers are hustling through airports trying to make a flight. That's where the network traps the bulk of its audience and the sound is often down. Producers thought of that though, diabolical as they are. So they made sure to reinforce their message with graphics on the screens. "Crowds across U.S. ignore guidelines, sparking fears of spread," read one. "Memorial Day crowds spark fear of new outbreaks," read another. And then there was this one: "Americans flock to public places as death toll nears 100,000." What exactly does that mean? CNN never explained. You should be terrified. That was the point, so no explanation was necessary. The partisan political activists didn't lose their jobs. They have not been quarantined. If anything, they are thriving in the midst of this disaster. They feel more essential than they ever have. Over on MSNBC, the usual collection of retired CIA analysts and assistant professors of gender studies was terrified. They feared that somewhere out there in America, there might still be people who believe in more than shopping and vacations. Horrifying! It's possible they fretted that people like this, dangerous religious extremists, might somehow find each other and come together to pray. Not pray to Tim Cook or the Google twins in Silicon Valley or even to Barack Obama, but pray to something called God. And that cannot be allowed. Unidentified male: The virus is not religious, it won't respond to prayer, I'm afraid. It loves congregations. Nicolle Wallace, MSNBC host: Aggressive reopening in defiance in some instances of public health warnings from his own CDC and his own advisers. And on the other side, Democrats who have seemingly hitched their fortunes to science and data.  Ali Velshi, MSNBC host: Regardless of how that plays with separation of church and state, and even if the president has no authority to issue such a decree, Trump's insistence on a rushed reopening flies in the face of what public health experts continue to advise that this is not a time to become complacent. There you have it. Jeb Bush's dimwitted spokeswoman is now rebranded as an eminent epidemiologist and she wants you to know -- and she expects you to believe -- that the Democrats put these lockdown orders in place based on "science and data." Okay, we'll take the challenge. What "science and data" are you talking about exactly? We will wait as you rifle through your papers and abstracts, Dr. Wallace. That could take a while because, in fact, there is still no science or data at all. CNN and MSNBC are not bringing you science and data. They're peddling panic and reckless moral judgment, and it's having an awful effect on this country. After two months that these lockdowns have done very much to halt the spread of this virus. Sorry. We wish it were otherwise. You hate to think of all those people suffering for no reason, but it's true. States that locked down early and aggressively are no better off today on average than states that never locked down at all. That's a fact. Those are the data that you're talking about. And by contrast, there's an awful lot of science and data that going outside is vital to your health and has been for a hundred years. We've known that. Exercising outdoors, getting vitamin D from the sun, this makes you healthier and less vulnerable to coronavirus. The virus also spreads far less easily outdoors than it does indoors. Again, this is not speculation; it is fact. The largest study of this subject ever done took a look at 318 separate coronavirus infection clusters, places where the virus spread outward to other people. What did it find? It found that at 317 out of 318 clusters -- that's 99.7 percent -- the infection spread indoors, not outdoors. Indoors. And indoors is where Dr. Science and Data on MSNBC claims you must remain. So no, CNN and MSNBC are not bringing you science and data. They're peddling panic and reckless moral judgment, and it's having an awful effect on this country. Footage from a Staten Island grocery store showing a woman attacked by other customers for not wearing a mask illustrates the results of the propaganda. You hate to see Americans treating each other like that, but multiply that by an entire country and you get a sense of what the relentless flow of lies has done to people's minds. And now we have science and data on the subject. A new survey by the Census Bureau found that more than one-third of all Americans now show signs of anxiety, depression, or both. Now, you'd think the most fearful people would be the ones most at risk, and that's people over 80. But just the opposite turns out to be true. Younger people are more miserable. The younger, the more miserable. In fact, the most miserable group of all is Americans under 30. And that group -- look at the science and data -- face virtually no risk of dying from this virus. None. The people on television have lied to them and it's really wrecking their lives. Meanwhile, the people on television themselves are just fine. They don't seem afraid. Andrew Cuomo's brother works at CNN. He had the virus awhile back. He didn't bother to quarantine when he had it. He told you he was, but he didn't. He got in his car and drove to his second home and wandered around with no mask on. Then he went back on television and shouted at you for not wearing a mask. In Michigan, over this past weekend, Governor Gretchen Whitmer's husband decided to violate his own wife's orders by traveling across the state to use his boat. Hey, it's Memorial Day. When the marina told him they could not put the boat in the water, Gretchen Whitmer's husband let them know that his wife was the governor. "Don't you know who I am?" He got caught, of course. People really resent that kind of behavior from their leaders, and they should. And when confronted, at first Gretchen Whitmer -- Governor Whitmer -- tried to claim it never happened. She dismissed the whole thing as an internet hoax. But it wasn't a joke. She was lying. Now, she is saying it was all some kind of joke. Yes, pretty funny. But if you really want to know what the people on television think of you and think of their own prescriptions for you -- and if you want to know whether all the huffing and puffing and the moralizing, the judging you is real, watch this clip. It's from MSNBC and it says it all. Katy Tur, MSNBC anchor: Are the people there just not worried about it, Cal? They're not worried about their own personal safety. Cal Perry, MSNBC reporter: I haven't met anybody who is. I think people felt like the Supreme Court made the decision here in Wisconsin that it was time to open up. But you can see here, just around, nobody is wearing them. Nobody is -- Unidentified male: Including the cameraman. Perry: There you go, including the cameraman. Yes. Unidentified male: Half your crew is not wearing them. Tur: Striking images. Busted! He turns around to hassle some guy in a Packers jersey -- look at that guy, he is not wearing a mask -- and the guy in the Packers jersey calls him out and says your cameraman is not wearing a mask. Dumbo. You fraud. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP They are frauds. Remember that the next time they tell you you're immoral. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 26, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Psychiatrist Dr. James Rachal speaks with Harris Faulkner during 'America Copes Together Virtual Town Hall.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  I got the text from my college roommate, Noah, at the height of the lockdowns. He lives in Amsterdam, and moved his wife and three kids there last year for his job. I had just asked him how they were holding up with quarantine, especially living in a foreign country with no family around. His words, his response, are important — especially for those struggling during the age of coronavirus. “I went to Germany two weeks ago for work and was so anxious!” he said. “I don’t think I knew what to call it and am now mature enough to admit it: fear, anxiety, control.” DR. RASHID CHOTANI: CORONAVIRUS VACCINE AT WARP SPEED – WILL IT BE READY IN 2020? I could almost hear the sigh of relief through his fingers as those words popped up on my phone. Liberation. Freedom. Release. I think we can all learn something from Noah. See, what he admitted to me is something anyone who is struggling with anxiety during this time needs to admit to themselves. And here’s why: You are never going to be able to have control over something until you name it. The exercise of naming something gives us power over it in a unique way. That may seem odd at first, but if you think about it it’s rooted in truth. It’s been there since the beginning of time. In the Judeo-Christian creation story, man exercised the power and responsibility given to him by God by naming the animals. It served as an inherent ranking system of sorts. Similarly, we exercise a form of power and control over our anxiety and fears by naming them. By calling what’s going on inside us what it really is, we can then start the process of addressing it. It’s not that different from what we see with addicts. You’ve probably heard it a thousand times, but it bears repeating here: The first step of the 12 steps is admitting you have a problem. Why? Because you can’t work on something you don’t acknowledge is there. The first step to addressing what’s going on — the first step toward relief — is calling what’s going on inside of you by name. I was recently talking to two friends who had never really experienced panic attacks or anxiety before in their lives. They began describing to me what was going on: Racing hearts. Sweating.  Thoughts they couldn't get rid of.  Thoughts they knew, deep down, aren’t rational but that kept popping up.  Paralyzing fear. How were they dealing with it? By trying to grit it out and force those feelings to go away. And it wasn’t working. At all. In a way, I had to chuckle. Not because it was funny, but because I, too, remember what it was like to experience these things, not understand what was going on, and then try to grin and bear it only to find myself feeling helpless. So I calmly told them it sounded like they were suffering from anxiety. I could almost see the lightbulb go on for them. Their eyes got a little bigger and their faces got a little brighter. “You’re right,” they both said. That then allowed them to take the next step to get the help they needed. They’re not alone in their feelings. During these last few months, calls to suicide prevention hotlines have spiked by as much as 800 percent. That represents numerically what many of us are experiencing anecdotally: The coronavirus pandemic and the subsequent measures to curb it have caused a lot of fear, panic and anxiety. For many of you, these may be newer feelings. I get that. I was once where you are. And as some parts of the country begin opening up, that may actually be causing more, not less, anxiety within you. But I'm here to tell you this: The first step to addressing what’s going on — the first step toward relief — is calling what’s going on inside of you by name. Only by properly naming it are you going to be able to fully address it. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Let me be clear: Naming it doesn’t mean your struggles will end. I have been battling anxiety and OCD my entire life. But it wasn’t until I was able to name what was going on in me five years ago that I began to win some of those battles. Maybe the better way to put it is: In the war for my mental health, I was fighting a losing battle until I was able to actually name the enemy. There will be days where anxiety wins. But once you understand your opponent you can actually fight back. That looks like talking to a doctor about what’s going on, maybe taking medicine, or using mindfulness techniques to calm your mind. Maybe it’s all three. Whatever weapon you use, at least by being open and honest you can know where you need to be aiming it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP May is mental health awareness month. What better time to become aware of your own mental health struggles than now. For some of you this will be a temporary battle, while for others this is the start of a longer war. But wherever you fall on that spectrum, you need to realize that calling those struggles what they are is not a sign of weakness, but a sign of strength. It’s how you become someone who has control over their anxiety, not someone who anxiety controls. And that, friends, is the path to relief. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JONATHON M. SEIDL

Fox News medical contributor Dr. Marc Siegel supports calls for Missouri Memorial Day weekend partiers to self-quarantine after not social distancing. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In the absence of an effective therapeutic or vaccine for COVID-19, the best weapons in our arsenal to combat it are our behavior and sense of responsibility. We are five months into the biggest health care crisis of the 21st century with confirmed cases of coronavirus disease in over 212 countries and territories around the world and no end in sight. Some countries, like China and New Zealand, have been able to suppress the outbreak while others, like the United States, are still struggling to do so. The reported number of confirmed or presumed cases in the U.S. is now over 1.5 million, but the actual number is likely five to 10 times higher. SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: CORONAVIRUS COLLATERAL DAMAGE – HERE'S WHY WE MUST OPEN SMARTLY, SAFELY AND SOON Many states were able to “flatten the curve,” meaning they have effectively reduced the number of new COVID-19 infections and the resulting health care system interactions by imposing social distancing measures like shelter-in-place orders. Besides not overloading the health care system all at once, flattening the curve actually bought us time to bring online the tools, resources and infrastructure we need to keep the virus in check: ramping up diagnostic testing so that any person who needs to get tested can, regardless of symptoms; building out a contract tracing workforce and surveillance systems for tracking; and preparing for future peaks and valleys that are inevitable without a vaccine. Flattening the curve was made possible by people's behavior. But the goal wasn’t to just accomplish this and then go about our daily business. The virus doesn’t have an on or off switch. Rather, to achieve any sense of normalcy, we must be able to control the virus. And that requires the continued cooperation of every single person. Our individual behaviors have an impact on the trajectory of this pandemic. One person has the potential to ignite new chains of transmission. There’s still a long way to go before we put COVID-19 behind us. No government, no state and no country is out of the woods. While the verdict is still out on many of the key questions related to COVID-19, one thing is certain: this is a highly transmissible virus. And other key risk factors such as distance, time, environment and activity can influence a person’s risk of contracting COVID19. There’s still a long way to go before we put COVID-19 behind us. No government, no state and no country is out of the woods. Suppression of the virus requires widespread testing, isolating the infected, the ability to conduct contact tracing, quarantining the exposed and ensuring adequate health care capacity. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Our best protection is to change the way we behave. That means complying with public health recommendations such as keeping at least six feet from others, covering your mouth and nose with a face cover when in public, avoiding close contact with people who are sick, covering coughs and sneezes, and washing hands often. There will be flareups and hotspots so we must continue to be vigilant. As more states begin to ease restrictions, our behavior could mean the difference between life or death.   CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 John Dowd, one of the lead lawyers who represented President Trump during Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian collusion, said Tuesday that the special counsel engineered a perjury trap for Trump in the exact same way that James Comey’s FBI invented a trap for former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn.  “Mueller’s scheme was the same one captured in the (newly released) FBI set-up notes pertaining to Flynn. They knew they had nothing, but using their official power they created and perpetuated the facade of an investigation,” said Dowd. In an extensive interview on Tuesday, Dowd explained to me how his commitment of cooperation and transparency in dealing with Mueller was eventually turned against the president, as the special counsel “misled” Trump’s legal team in order to manufacture a crime where none existed. JENNA ELLIS: MICHAEL FLYNN'S JUDGE – 3 POSSIBLE REASONS HE HIRED A DEFENSE ATTORNEY According to Dowd, Mueller learned early in his investigation that there was no evidence of Trump-Russia collusion to influence the 2016 presidential election. He admitted it during a meeting with the president’s lawyers on March 5, 2018. So, Mueller shifted to a legally contorted interpretation of obstruction of justice in order to keep his investigation afloat.  On Tuesday, Dowd elaborated on how the special counsel deceived the Trump team: “As I look back, we had the most perfect trusting relationship with Mueller based on his word and handshake, which held throughout. No paper. Word was solid. They received everything they asked for without a hitch or page missing, including the most intimate notes of conversations with and by POTUS (President of the United States). Every witness they requested testified truthfully. No lying. No grand jury testimony. Mueller affirmed all of this in our March 5 (2018) meeting. How could there be a whisper of obstruction under these circumstances?”   Despite no evidence of an underlying crime, Mueller insisted that the president be interviewed by the special counsel. Dowd knew it was a trap. Mueller had done it to Flynn and others. He was clearly angling for obstruction of justice and hoping to ensnare the president in the equivalent of a perjury trap if he consented to be interviewed.  But obstructing what? Mueller readily acknowledged that there was no underlying crime. Moreover, Trump had encouraged every witness connected to his campaign and the White House to testify. He voluntarily produced more than a million pages of documents. The special counsel’s investigation had proceeded unimpeded.    As Mueller persisted, Trump’s lawyer realized that he had been conned all along. On Tuesday, Dowd was unsparing in his scorn for Mueller and his unscrupulous tactics:    “That is when I knew he had lied to me in our original meeting (June 16, 2017) and every meeting thereafter. Robert Mueller —‘D.C.’s great man’ — completely and deliberately misled us in order to set up a perjury/false statement trap for POTUS. It was a monstrous lie and scheme to defraud.” Dowd shared with me numerous documents and letters supporting his accusations against Mueller. They paint a vivid picture of a special counsel determined to damage the president with an investigation bereft of any credible evidence.  “They acted like crybabies who were offended that someone dared to criticize them, so they instinctively labeled it obstruction,” Dowd told me last year. In the March 5, 2018, meeting, the special counsel suggested that maybe Trump’s firing of Comey (Mueller’s longtime friend, partner and ally) might constitute obstruction of justice. This was especially ludicrous since both Comey and deputy FBI director Andrew McCabe had testified that no one had obstructed the bureau’s investigation and that the probe had continued uninterrupted after Comey’s departure.    Dowd patiently explained to Mueller that the firing had been an exercise of presidential authority under the Constitution and could not, by definition, establish obstruction. Even Comey had confirmed this. Trump had sacked the director for repeated violations of FBI regulations in his mishandling the Hillary Clinton email scandal and on the recommendation of the deputy attorney general, as well as several former attorneys general and deputy attorneys general from different eras and both political parties.       Yet, Mueller would not relent. This led to an angry confrontation between the special counsel and Dowd that is recounted in my book, "Witch Hunt: The Story Of The Greatest Mass Delusion In American Political History" (page 222, Chapter 5):   Mueller: I have to look at obstruction. Dowd: You want to look at obstruction in the firing of Comey? I’ll tell you who our first witnesses will be: the attorney general, the deputy attorney general and the White House counsel. They all urged the president to fire Comey. He was off the rails in his handling of the Clinton email case.  Mueller: We may pursue a grand jury subpoena to compel the president to testify.  Dowd (pounds his fist on the table): You’ve got nothing! Go ahead! I can’t wait for you to try. You’ve got no leg to stand on. Jay Sekulow, another of President Trump’s lawyers, attended that meeting and confirmed to me this account of the heated exchange, which was also reflected in his handwritten notes.  At the same meeting, Mueller became so desperate that he broached the absurd idea of how Trump’s public criticism of the special counsel might be construed somehow as an obstructive act. Dowd felt that Mueller and his subordinates were now living in an alternative universe where their version of the law bore no resemblance to statutes, Supreme Court decisions and accepted constitutional law.  “They acted like crybabies who were offended that someone dared to criticize them, so they instinctively labeled it obstruction,” Dowd told me last year. He added, “It was insane.”  One of the most insightful documents Dowd shared with me recently was a letter to Mueller dated Feb. 16, 2018, in which Trump’s legal team argued persuasively how the FBI’s counterintelligence investigation was predicated on Russian disinformation secretly fed to ex-British spy Christopher Steele, who composed a phony anti-Trump “dossier” that was paid for by the Hillary Clinton campaign and Democrats.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Just last month, more than two years after Dowd’s letter, declassified documents were released proving that Kremlin-sponsored disinformation drove the collusion case. Comey and his confederates deliberately exploited what they knew to be untrue and discredited information.  They used it as a pretext to spy on the Trump campaign and investigate the president. This led to the illegitimate appointment of the special counsel, Bob Mueller, who launched an investigation in search of a crime that never occurred. As Dowd correctly stated in his letter, the special counsel appointment was “void” because it was the product of corruption.  On Tuesday, Dowd called Mueller’s investigation and report a sham. “They knew there was nothing there.” Dowd said that Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein also knew it and is “just as guilty.”  Dowd said he hopes that U.S. Attorney John Durham, who is currently investigating the Russia hoax, would hold all of them to account for their rampant corruption and dishonesty. “Their three-year investigation was all phony,” he observed.          CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Trump’s attorney concluded our conversation with these words:  “They knew there was nothing to investigate. People subverted the system of justice. One corrupt act after another. It’s staggering. The lies were monstrous. It was all pretense and fraud. Mueller should not walk. Rod Rosenstein should not walk.” And neither should James Comey, Andrew McCabe and disgraced ex-FBI agent Peter Strzok.      CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREG JARRETT

Former CEO of BP Lord John Browne reminds everyone that the supply-and-demand imbalance started before coronavirus hit the world, but when the virus started to spread, it halted demand, causing inventories to fill up storage. Former Vice President Joe Biden is continuing to move from the left, to the far-left, to the radical fringe in a desperate effort to capture the enthusiastic support of the followers of self-described socialists Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., and Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y. Nowhere is this more true than in Biden’s dangerous positions on energy issues. If Biden defeats President Trump in the November election and sticks to his pledge to dramatically change energy policies to move toward the radical Green New Deal, the American people will suffer. We can all expect to face disruptive energy shortages, big energy price increases, an increased dependence on foreign countries outside our hemisphere to meet our energy needs, and a massive increase in unemployment in the U.S. energy industry. The latest example of Biden’s irresponsible leftward lurch on energy policy is his recently announced promise to overturn President Trump’s approval of the Keystone XL pipeline – a pipeline that would safely transport up to 830,000 barrels of Canadian crude oil to Nebraska, from where it would be sent by pipeline to U.S. refineries on the Gulf Coast each day. BIDEN COMMITS TO RESCINDING TRUMP'S KEYSTONE XL PIPELINE PERMIT IF ELECTED With the coronavirus pandemic understandably dominating the news, the Biden pledge to kill Keystone XL hasn’t received anywhere near the attention it deserves. And it is only one of several actions to endanger our energy security that Biden has pledged to take under pressure from Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez, who are heading up the Biden campaign’s environmental policy committee. Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez would like to outlaw fossil fuels – oil, natural gas and coal – after just a few years. Never mind that this would create an energy, economic and employment disaster for our country. Biden’s decision to put Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez in charge of formulating his energy policy is like putting two vegans in charge of overseeing all U.S. meat production.  The Keystone XL pipeline should not be controversial. The 1,210-mile oil pipeline would be just one of the many pipelines that keep America running. Natural gas and oil crisscross our country in over 2.6 million miles of pipeline. That’s enough to get to the moon and back 10 times! Buried pipelines are out of sight and have an outstanding safety record. Without them, we’d have to move from a 21st-century lifestyle back to the 19th century. Biden’s decision to put Sanders and Ocasio-Cortez in charge of formulating his energy policy is like putting two vegans in charge of overseeing all U.S. meat production.   The Keystone XL pipeline needs State Department approval because it crosses into the U.S. from Canada. Six comprehensive reviews by the department over a decade found Keystone XL could be built and operated in an environmentally safe manner. State environmental reviews along the route came to the same conclusion. A State Department study commissioned during the Obama administration determined the pipeline would create 3,200 temporary construction jobs directly, 42,000 additional jobs indirectly, and generate over $2 billion in wages and hundreds of millions of dollars in property taxes. It would boost the U.S. gross domestic project by an estimated $3.4 billion annually. Keystone XL should have begun construction in 2011. The same Obama State Department study concluded it would not contribute significantly to climate change. And remember, the Obama administration praised itself for doing the most ever to combat climate change. One could say “the science is settled.” Obama should have trusted the advice of his own administration’s experts and given the pipeline the green light, but it was an election year. Mitt Romney, the Republican presidential nominee, was within two points of Obama in the polls. Romney had enthusiastically supported the Keystone XL pipeline and Obama needed the progressive base, so the president punted. Obama didn’t cancel the project altogether. Clearly, he understood Keystone XL’s economic benefits. But a delay bought him valuable time leading up to his reelection bid. After winning reelection in 2012, Obama should have moved the project forward for the good of the nation. Instead, he delayed another four years. Finally, in 2016 Obama denied all the necessary government permits for Keystone XL, citing “climate change,” in direct contradiction of his own State Department’s conclusion. The economic benefits (jobs, tax revenue) and national security benefits (energy independence) no longer mattered. Obama was cementing his legacy as a green president. Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton supported Obama’s decision. And since she was heavily favored to win the presidential election in 2016, Keystone XL seemed doomed. However, Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump tweeted: “If I am elected President I will immediately approve the Keystone XL pipeline. No impact on environment & lots of jobs for U.S.”  And true to his word, President Trump signed an executive order five days after his inauguration allowing the Keystone XL pipeline to cross into the U.S. from Canada. Keystone XL is now under construction, but its political baggage endures. Radical environmentalists have proclaimed it a symbol of their opposition to fossil fuels. And now Biden has bowed to their irrational demand to stop construction of the pipeline. Would President Biden tear down the pipeline’s construction at taxpayers’ expense? Our close ally Canada would not appreciate that. And Canada is not going to stop producing oil. So what would Biden accomplish by blocking Keystone XL? Instead of sending the oil to the U.S. through the Keystone XL pipeline, Canada could continue sending oil here via truck and rail – a more dangerous and costly shipping method than pipelines. Canada could also ship more oil to China or elsewhere in Asia via oil tankers – again, a more costly and dangerous mode of transportation. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Losing our northern neighbor’s reliable, inexpensive oil to China or elsewhere in Asia would be a foreign policy nightmare, but if Biden wants to continue the Obama-Biden tradition, foreign policy nightmares are to be expected. And if we wind up importing more oil from the Middle East to make up for the loss of the Keystone XL pipeline – and losses in domestic oil production created by other Biden policies – that will worsen greenhouse gas emissions and put our national security in the hands of unstable regimes not always friendly to the U.S. One thing is for sure: stopping the Keystone XL pipeline will not magically end our use of oil and other fossil fuels. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Supporting Keystone XL was a winning issue for Trump in 2016 and it can be again this year. His policies that have brought our country more jobs, a stronger foreign policy, a stronger economy, greater national security and energy independence have all made America great again.  Biden is foolish to attempt to make Keystone XL a political issue. America needs energy. America needs jobs. Our nation doesn’t need more Obama-Biden posturing and holding up vital energy projects to create a phony green legacy that will hurt the American people.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DANIEL TURNER

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. America must safely and quickly open up again. President Trump is working tirelessly to do just that. The costs due to this invisible enemy have been profound — but we cannot refuse to follow our Constitution during this time. Our Constitution is the roadmap to the American Dream, even in a time of crisis. In its preamble, we are reminded that We the People know how to keep our neighbors safe, while protecting our rights and liberties. We've been defending our welfare and securing the blessings of liberty for ourselves and for our posterity for over 240 years. Securing our American Dream requires understanding that our founding documents are essential. ELIZABETH AMES: COROANVIRUS 'NEW NORMAL' – DON'T BELIEVE ALL THE PREDICTIONS. HERE'S WHY Our Founders wrote the Declaration of Independence as the first legal document in our nation’s history, establishing and recognizing that individual rights come from God our Creator — not our government. In recognizing this truth, America established the first system of government whose mandate was not to preserve power for civil leaders, but to preserve rights for the individual. Unfortunately, some Democrat governors are refusing to follow this roadmap, and are instead trying to turn our American system on its head. In a time of crisis, they want to increase power for themselves instead of protecting liberty and freedom for the people. Working as designed, our Constitution gives specific, limited powers to government, restricted further by separating those powers among the branches of the federal government and among federal, state and local leaders. Our Constitution ensures that no public official ever have absolute power to become tyrannical. All public offices are under the Constitution and have only such powers as it designates or is appropriately legislatively afforded. Governors in places like Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania seemingly refuse to acknowledge the limits of their state executive powers and forget they are the holders of public trust. It is not for them to decide whether to trust the American people and our Constitution at this moment — they are required to. Their prime mandate by which every other action must be tested is to preserve and protect our individual rights. Yet we are witnessing a far different exercise of powers across the country. For example, in Michigan, the governor ticketed a 77-year-old barber for cutting hair. In defending the imposition of criminal sanctions, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer explained her “executive orders are … not optional.” The barber’s response, “The government is not my mother.” 
      From left, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, President Trump, Wisconsin Gov. Tony Evers and Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf
       He’s right. Whitmer’s power is not without limits. The state legislature is challenging her orders and the Michigan court will judge if Michiganders’ rights and liberties have been abridged. In Wisconsin, Gov. Tony Evers sought to extend the stay-at-home order without legislative approval.  This action was deemed unconstitutional by the Wisconsin Supreme Court last week. Our Constitution was meant to guide us in times of crisis, not be suspended.  The court ruled that the executive branch “cannot confer on itself the power to dictate the lives of law-abiding individuals as comprehensively as the order does without reaching beyond the executive branch's authority." The court placed the responsibility for future lawmaking on the legislative branch, “where it belongs.” The Wisconsin court was correct to recognize the separation of powers and our rule of law, even amid a national crisis. Our Constitution is not suspended in a time of crisis. Also last week, a judge in Oregon tossed out restrictions on the governor’s ban on churches gathering for worship, an order that also invalidated the entire stay-at-home order. Constitutionally, it was the correct ruling. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In Pennsylvania, as President Trump stated from Allentown, “You have areas of Pennsylvania that are barely affected and they want to keep them closed. Can’t do that.” Ad-hoc rules are confusing and maybe even unconstitutional – Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf would be wise to work with the legislature before the judiciary intervenes. Americans will not accept arbitrarily and capricious rules to dictate our lives. The separation of powers built into our system is designed to prevent this kind of overreach. Our Constitution was meant to guide us in times of crisis, not be suspended. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Thankfully, we have a president who knows why our Constitution is essential to the American Dream, our prosperity and our future. Because following the Constitution is always essential, we can pursue our American Dream with the blessings of liberty for ourselves and future generations. President Trump cherishes this beautiful promise of America, as do the millions of people across the nation who will not consent to tyranny. We urge all governors to recognize the limits of their power and act now to preserve liberty and freedom, even in times of uncertainty. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM JENNA ELLIS CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM JOHN PENCE John Pence (@JePence) is a senior adviser to the Trump 2020 campaign. He is an alumnus of The College of William & Mary and holds a law degree from the Indiana University Maurer School of Law and a business degree from New York University.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. COVID-19 has already killed thousands of nursing home residents in New York. An estimated 10,000 or more, double what the state reports. It’s hard to know what’s worse, the dying or the lying. Under criticism for forcing nursing homes to admit COVID-19 patients, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo is trying to shift the blame to President Trump. “Don’t criticize the state for following the president’s policy,” Cuomo said at his Saturday news conference. The governor points to a Trump administration statement issued on March 13. Sorry, Governor, but you’re twisting what the statement said. The administration recommended nursing homes should admit patients even if they were coming from a hospital battling COVID-19, not that patients with COVID-19 themselves should be admitted. SEN. JOHN BARRASSO: CORONAVIRUS COLLATERAL DAMAGE – HERE'S WHY WE MUST OPEN SMARTLY, SAFELY AND SOON To the contrary, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention was emphatic about the dangers of allowing COVID-19 to invade a nursing home. On March 18, the CDC stated that “once COVID-19 has been introduced into a long term care facility, it has the potential to result in high attack rates among residents, staff members, and visitors.” The agency warned “it is critical that long-term care facilities implement active measures to prevent introduction of COVID-19.” One week later, on March 25, Cuomo’s Health Department mandated that nursing homes accept COVID patients and barred homes from requiring COVID tests for admission. Facilities had to fly blind, not knowing which incoming patients endangered residents and staff. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As soon as the mandate was announced, the national association of nursing home doctors protested that Cuomo’s policy posed “a clear and present danger to all of the residents of a nursing home.” The Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths, a patient advocacy group, urged Cuomo to change course. But the state’s health commissioner, Howard Zucker,  doubled down, as deaths soared, and instead began fudging the death statistics to conceal the carnage.  At the outset of the pandemic, New York reported how many nursing home residents died from COVID-19, whether they died at the home or after being hospitalized. That’s standard. But as the toll escalated, the state Health Department quietly shifted to reporting only deaths at the homes, omitting those who succumbed after going to a hospital. It’s likely 10,000 nursing home residents have died in New York from COVID-19, about double what the Cuomo administration is reporting. That estimate has also been put forward by health care think tank American Commitment. Cuomo bragged last week that New York ranks 34th in per capita nursing home deaths. It’s a phony number – another whopper. Many mistakes have been made so far during this pandemic. Mistakes are inevitable, and we should all be working together to rectify them and plan for a better response next time. But the evidence suggests New York’s decision mandating nursing homes take COVID patients wasn’t just bungling  It’s about money. Two other states started to impose a similarly lethal policy and quickly pulled back, as deaths rose. State health officials consistently put the interests of the hospital industry ahead of the needs of the public. That’s the painful lesson of this nursing home debacle.  New York stuck with the lethal policy until May 10, way too long. Why? Hospitals inundated with COVID-19 patients insisted on clearing out the elderly and sending them to whatever nursing homes had empty beds. The state Health Department willingly complied, nursing home residents  be damned. In New York, the Health Department works for the hospital industry, not for patients and families.  The Greater New York Hospital Association (GNYHA) bundles millions of dollars from the hospitals and funnels the money to New York politicians, including Cuomo and the state Democratic Party’s housekeeping committee. Hospital interests give more and hold more sway in Albany even than the real estate industry or Wall Street. Often it’s GYNHA’s president, Ken Raske, who gets a prized seat at Cuomo's table at political dinners. The state Health Department, in return, does the hospital industry’s bidding, tolerating hospital infection rates worse than the national average and hiding outbreaks of deadly diseases like Candida auris at hospitals, when the public has a right to know.   CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP State health officials consistently put the interests of the hospital industry ahead of the needs of the public. That’s the painful lesson of this nursing home debacle. New Yorkers need a Health Department that doesn’t sell out to the highest bidder. And a state health commissioner who tells the truth. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BETSY McCAUGHEY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In a Tuesday op-ed for The New York Times, Susan Rice chalked up Republicans placing  blame for the coronavirus on China as them simply playing “the China card.” Rice, who was Barack Obama’s national security adviser, writes: “Desperate to obscure the reality of more than 90,000 American deaths and 36 million unemployed amid Mr. Trump’s utterly incompetent handling of the pandemic, Republicans have no better strategy than to play the China card.” IAN PRIOR: THE UNTRUSTWORTHY SUSAN RICE, ONE OF MANY 'BAGHDAD BOBS' IN THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION Accusing people of “playing the (fill in the blank) card,” of course, is an attempt to reduce their arguments to nothing more than cagey political ploys — and, Rice is wrong to use it here. After all, China does deserve a lot of blame for the situation that the world is in right now. A U.S. intelligence report found that in January, China deliberately hid the severity of the coronavirus crisis (and the danger it presented to the rest of the world) in order to selfishly hoard medical supplies before other countries knew how badly they would be needing them. This deception deprived the United States and the rest of the world of both critical information and precious preparation time. China is indisputably responsible for this pandemic becoming more disastrous than it would have been otherwise. That’s not, of course, to say that the American government has handled all of this perfectly. President Trump was among those to underestimate this crisis, and there are things his administration could have done differently. The entire Democratic Party was laser-focused on impeachment as this crisis was building, so it’s absurd for them to try and peddle a narrative that they were any wiser about what was coming.   In fact, when I saw Rice’s suggestion that Republicans should be taking “responsibility” for some of their own mistakes and miscalculations in this crisis, I thought this was something she and I could agree on — if her entire piece hadn’t amounted to her doing the exact same thing she was accusing Republicans of doing. While she hypocritically hits Republicans for “playing the China card,” her whole column is nothing more than her playing the Trump card — refusing to acknowledge any mistakes or miscalculations by members of her own party. Think about it: The entire Democratic Party was laser-focused on impeachment as this crisis was building, so it’s absurd for them to try and peddle a narrative that they were any wiser about what was coming. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As late as March 10 — just one day before Trump suspended travel to and from Europe — New York City Mayor Bill DeBlasio was on MSNBC saying the coronavirus presented “very little threat” to most people, and that we shouldn’t be too worried about it. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo messed up when he made the deadly decision to force nursing homes to accept coronavirus patients. Neither of these Democrat officeholders was mentioned in Rice’s piece. The point is, there is plenty of room for criticism of U.S. officials’ response to the crisis — but it is objectively, deeply incorrect to dismiss criticism of China’s actions as nothing more than illegitimate, self-serving subterfuge. It was wrong for Rice to have suggested otherwise, and it was disgusting of her to do so while playing plenty of political games of her own. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We’re always going to have political disagreements in this country, but being furious at China for its role in this crisis shouldn’t be one of them. Political differences should never get in the way of us joining together as Americans to stand behind those things that are indeed objective truths — and China’s irresponsible behavior is, certainly, one of them. We are so divided over so many things already. Let’s not stoke division on the issues on which we should clearly be able to easily unite. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KAT TIMPF

 While American forces were overrunning Iraq in 2003, there was one man Saddam Hussein repeatedly counted on to beclown himself with false and public proclamations of Iraqi military superiority and victory over the United States. That man was Mohammed Saeed al-Sahaf, the Iraq information minister more commonly known as “Baghdad Bob.” Americans haven’t heard from Baghdad Bob in nearly two decades, but we have been treated to a similarly consistent liar in former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations and National Security Adviser Susan Rice. Rice’s official role as America’s Baghdad Bob began in 2012, when she went on multiple national television programs and lied to the American people about the Benghazi attacks, claiming that they were the result of a protest against an American-made video and not a premeditated act of terror. Her comments have since been completely debunked as lies. VAN GORDON SAUTER, EX-CBS NEWS PRESIDENT: 'LIBERAL LEANING' MEDIA PASSES ITS TIPPING POINT Rice followed up her Benghazi disgrace in 2014 when she justified trading Bowe Bergdahl for five Taliban prisoners by claiming that Bergdahl had served “with honor and distinction” and was “captured on the battlefield.” This, of course, turned out to be yet another Rice falsehood; Bergdahl was later court-martialed and convicted of desertion and misbehavior before the enemy. Now, three years after leaving government, we are still learning of a new Susan Rice lie. In March 2017, Rice told Judy Woodruff of PBS that she “knew nothing” about the allegation by Rep. Devin Nunes, R-Calif., that members of the Trump transition team had been “swept up in the surveillance of foreigners at the end of the Obama administration.” We now know from Rice’s Jan. 20, 2017, CYA email to herself that she was not only aware of the investigation and surveillance of retired Army Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, her successor as national security adviser, but that she was actively involved. Despite Rice’s pattern of lying on major national security incidents, she does not deserve all the blame. Ironically, I take her at her word that she was directed to write the CYA email by Obama’s White House counsel. Ultimately, Rice was one of many Baghdad Bobs for Big Brother Barack Obama’s Orwellian Autocracy. In reality, it was the Obama administration that was chipping away at our republic and the rule of law.   Too harsh? Well, for the past three years we have been listening to brutal takes from Democrats and their media surrogates such as: “Trump is failing at governing but winning at authoritarianism,” “Trump, Barr are turning U.S. into a banana republic,” “An unchained Donald Trump poses a threat to the US republic,” and “Like a dictator, Trump keeps chopping away at democracy.” But, in reality, it was the Obama administration that was chipping away at our republic and the rule of law. It was Obama that expanded the NSA’s warrantless surveillance program in the United States and it was his Director of National Intelligence James Clapper who lied about it before Congress. It was also Obama’s CIA led by John Brennan that spied on the Senate Intelligence Committee as it was preparing its report on the CIA’s detention and interrogation program. Like Rice and Clapper, Brennan lied about it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Not satisfied just spying on Americans and the Senate Intelligence Committee, Obama’s Orwellian Autocracy “spied on reporters by monitoring their phone records, labeled one journalist an unindicted co-conspirator in a criminal case for simply doing reporting and issued subpoenas to other reporters to try to force them to reveal their sources and testify in criminal cases.” And finally, it was the Obama administration that colluded with the Clinton campaign to open the baseless Russia investigation into Donald Trump and his campaign. Therefore, it is not surprising that on the last day of the Obama administration, just two days before the Wall Street Journal published the bombshell “U.S. eyes Michael Flynn’s links to Russia” based on “people familiar with the matter,” that Rice would send a CYA email to herself in order to create a record for posterity that the Flynn investigation was done “by the book.” (As many know, the term “by the book” was a trigger to speak in code to fool the antagonist in “Star Trek II: The Wrath of Khan”). CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is also not surprising that when her involvement was suspected, Rice resorted to the Obama national security team’s favorite tactic – lying to the American people. No matter how hard Democrats and many in the mainstream media try to portray the Durham investigation, the Flynn revelations or other criticisms of the Russia investigation as “conspiracy theories,” the fact is that it was the Obama administration that frayed the edges of our Republic and the Trump administration is bringing that to light. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY IAN PRIOR

Fox News media analyst Howard Kurtz reacts to former CBS News chief Van Gordon Sauter's indictment of the big broadcast networks. About 35 years ago I was sitting at lunch next to Jeane Kirkpatrick, a onetime Democrat who became a foreign-policy adviser to President Reagan and later U.S. ambassador to the United Nations. She was lamenting what she called the “liberal leaning” media. As the president of CBS News, I assured her it was only a “liberal tilt” and could be corrected. “You don’t understand,“ she scolded. “It’s too late.” VP PENCE: THIS MEMORIAL DAY, OUR FREEDOMS ARE CHERISHED EVEN MORE Kirkpatrick was prophetic. The highly influential daily newspapers in New York, Washington, Los Angeles and Boston are now decidedly liberal. On the home screen, the three broadcast network divisions still have their liberal tilt. Two of the three leading cable news sources are unrelentingly liberal in their fear and loathing of President Trump. News organizations that claim to be neutral have long been creeping leftward, and their loathing of Trump has accelerated the pace. The news media is catching up with the liberalism of the professoriate, the entertainment industry, upscale magazines and the literary world. Recent arrivals are the late-night TV hosts who have broken the boundaries of what was considered acceptable political humor for networks. To many journalists, objectivity, balance and fairness—once the gold standard of reporting—are not mandatory in a divided political era and in a country they believe to be severely flawed. That assumption folds neatly into their assessment of the president. To the journalists, including more than a few Republicans, he is a blatant vulgarian, an incessant prevaricator, and a dangerous leader who should be ousted next January, if not sooner. Much of journalism has become the clarion voice of the “resistance,” dedicated to ousting the president, even though he was legally elected and, according to the polls, enjoys the support of about 44% of likely 2020 voters. JENNA ELLIS: 3 POSSIBLE REASONS FLYNN JUDGE HIRED DEFENSE ATTORNEY This poses significant problems not only for Trump but for the media’s own standing. If Trump prevails in November, what’s the next act, if any, for journalists and the resistance? They will likely find Trump more dangerous and offensive in a second term than in the first. More important, how will a large segment of the public ever put stock in journalism it considers hostile to the country’s best interests? Unfortunately, dominant media organizations have bonded with another large segment of the public—one that embraces its new approach. Pulling back from anti-Trump activism could prove commercially harmful. On the other hand, how would the media respond to a Joe Biden victory (beyond exhilaration)? Will Biden be subjected to the rigor and skepticism imposed on Trump? Will he get a pass because he is a liberal and “not Trump”? The media’s protective coverage of the sexual-assault allegation against Biden is perhaps a clear and concerning preview to how his presidency would be covered. CONTINUE READING AT WSJ.COM Van Gordon Sauter was president of CBS News from 1982 to 1983 and again in 1986.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  More than 600 doctors wrote to President Trump asking him to help end the coronavirus-related shutdown aimed at slowing the spread of the disease. These medical professionals want the country to reopen as soon as possible, calling the shutdown a “mass casualty incident” with “exponentially growing health consequences.” I am a doctor as well as a U.S. senator, and I agree. ELIZABETH AMES: CORONAVIRUS 'NEW NORMAL' – DON'T BELIEVE ALL THE PREDICTIONS. HERE'S WHY We cannot allow the cure to be worse than the disease. We closed down our country in order to bend the curve and make sure we had adequate medical resources. We have accomplished that goal in many places across America. We need to open smartly, safely and soon. The health of the nation depends upon it. As a result of the lockdowns, people have been forced to postpone important diagnostic and preventative medical procedures. Patients continue to put off doctor visits that could detect life-threatening problems like cancer and heart disease. Many hospital emergency rooms have been eerily empty as patients stayed away if their symptoms were unrelated to coronavirus. National headlines call attention to a deepening crisis in mental health care. Loneliness, family upheaval and financial pressures can increase stress, anxiety and unhealthy behavior. A San Francisco-area trauma center reports a year’s worth of suicide attempts in just the past four weeks. The risk of abuse goes up. This includes spouse abuse, child abuse and substance abuse. It is all going on today behind closed doors all across our country. Pediatricians worry that since children are not in school or day care, a significant numbers cases of child abuse are not being detected or reported. We must acknowledge that taking away people’s livelihoods, social supports and educational opportunities has a real negative impact, not just on individuals and families, but on entire communities.   Unemployment has proven and significant side effects on the health of American families and communities. In 2012, I released a study detailing the link between unemployment, regulatory overreach and negative health outcomes. The study found that increased unemployment leads to a rising number of hospitalizations, illnesses and premature deaths. Massive unemployment tracks with a rise in heart disease and a decrease in life expectancy. This is the underreported but alarming story of COVID-19’s collateral health damage. For every coronavirus death avoided, how many more people will die from the health consequences of a prolonged lockdown? Simply put, sidelining people indefinitely has long-term health consequences. We must acknowledge that taking away people’s livelihoods, social supports and educational opportunities has a real negative impact, not just on individuals and families, but on entire communities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Rural hospitals have seen few if any cases of coronavirus but have been financially devastated by the pandemic. Dedicated nurses and doctors have faced furloughs and layoffs as all non-emergency services have been shuttered for months. In the Senate, I have spearheaded the fight to give rural hospitals the support they need to survive this crisis. As states start to reopen and summer begins, the American people are rightly questioning the rationale for extending the shutdown. They have a right to ask tough questions of their state and local leaders. Risk is part of our daily lives. As we open our communities, we must do it consistent with public health guidelines. One size does not fit all. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As we put the emergency phase of coronavirus behind us, people must be free to weigh information and reach their own conclusions. We should not pretend that Washington, D.C., or state governments always know best. The point is clear: Keeping states shut down will wreak havoc on the health of our society. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SEN. JOHN BARRASSO

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  President Trump recently announced Operation Warp Speed, an initiative aimed at achieving a completed vaccine for the novel coronavirus by the end of 2020. Not only does the president want the vaccine to be tested and ready by the end of the year, but also for it to be made available for distribution and administration – all in an affordable way. The plan, which is to start manufacturing the vaccine while it is being tested for immune response, efficacy and safety, is ambitious. As the president has acknowledged, this will be a risky and highly expensive endeavor – his experts consider it a Herculean task. ELIZABETH AMES: CORONAVIRUS 'NEW NORMAL' – DON'T BELIEVE ALL THE PREDICTIONS. HERE'S WHY Is it feasible to have millions of doses available by the end of 2020? The short answer is yes. But the success of this plan hinges on other, more complicated questions. Will these doses be able to actually be used? And can we successfully launch mass vaccination campaigns to immunize the entire population, or will the vaccine initially be used for hospital and front-line workforces? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Under normal conditions, the process to develop a fully finished vaccine that can be widely administered takes between 10 to 15 years at a cost of up to $5 billion. To ensure safe and efficacious vaccines, it is essential to implement robust and reliable characterization tools across discovery, development, production and quality control. But COVID-19 has changed everything in a dramatic way – including the way in which we develop vaccines. Since China shared coronavirus genomic sequencing data with the world in January, things have moved very quickly. With this information in hand, along with previous experience in vaccine development for SARS, MERS, Zika and influenza, researchers were able to use the same manufacturing process and technology, substituting the genetic code for the novel coronavirus. This enabled us to move the first COVID-19 vaccine into clinical trials within just a couple of months. With the pandemic causing havoc, the Food and Drug Administration has agreed to speed up the regulatory process by allowing the clinical trial phases to be combined together. Traditionally, laboratory and animal studies take three to six years and clinical studies with human subjects (Phase I, II, & III) require around six years if everything goes smoothly. The proposed plan is to combine Phase I and II trials together by tracking both safety and immune response in a much smaller population. Phase II trial participants will be followed into Phase III and tracked to see if the vaccine prevents community infection. This strategy will save years, and a vaccine can be available to the general population in around 18 months. But just because it’s possible doesn’t mean it’s safe. One vaccine alone will not be sufficient; my hope is that, with vaccine candidates for COVID-19 in various stages of development globally, multiple vaccines will be developed and approved.  By combining the clinical trials to fast-track advanced development, we risk rushing the vaccine to the market – potentially with serious unforeseen consequences. What if there are significant side-effects that aren’t observed until later? This would be devastating, not only because it would affect all the other vaccines, but also because it would add fuel to a small but very vocal segment of the American population that is against any and all forms of vaccination. Though a safety test might be accomplished in as little as three months, the vaccine would then need to be given to hundreds or thousands of people at the core of an outbreak to determine the vaccine’s efficacy in protecting its recipients. That could take at least a year. Furthermore, there is always a possibility that the vaccine does not provide lasting immunity, either because people's immunity wanes quickly or because the virus mutates; RNA viruses like SARS can mutate due to external pressures and evolve. Thus, a perfect vaccine would need to have the antigen that produces immunity against all strains of the virus. One vaccine alone will not be sufficient; my hope is that, with vaccine candidates for COVID-19 in various stages of development globally, multiple vaccines will be developed and approved. One thing for sure: If all goes well, we will have a vaccine next year to fight the second wave and not before. In the interim, we will have to rely on safe practices to protect ourselves against the coronavirus and implement stringent testing, tracking and tracing protocols. There’s no way around it; the world urgently and desperately needs a vaccine. We are in a state of pandemic with over 4.5 million people infected and over 300,000 deaths globally. The U.S., even with restrictions and lockdowns, currently has close to 1.5 million cases and we are expecting close to 100,000 deaths by June 1 and 140,000 deaths by mid-August. Fortunately, science and technology are constantly evolving – and COVID-19 has served as an accelerator. As Carveth Read wrote in 1898, “it is better to be vaguely right than exactly wrong.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I am extremely optimistic that this horrible crisis will yield the highly innovative solutions we need. But to make this happen, we need to follow the science and data we have available and implement a phase-in and phase-out policy. And we must continue observing social distancing, wearing masks and maintaining good hand hygiene – anything we can do to help control transmission. A pandemic is no time for complacency. We will have a functional vaccine eventually. Until then, stay vigilant, safe, strong and united. And above all, stay hopeful. This, too, shall pass. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. RASHID CHOTANI

 So much for Amy Klobuchar. Joe Biden’s team is reportedly vetting the popular Minnesota senator to be his running mate. Klobuchar’s standing in her own critical toss-up state and her political compatibility with Biden make her an excellent pick. But, but her chances have suddenly plummeted. Her problem: she isn’t black. JUSTIN HASKINS: BIDEN'S SOCIALISTS — LOOK WHO THE SO-CALLED MODERATE HAS ADDED TO HIS CAMPAIGN A recent op-ed in the Washington Post authored by seven female black activists demanded Biden choose an African-American woman as running mate. They wrote, “we resurrected Joe Biden’s campaign,” and “We are here to collect.” In the wake of Biden’s offensive claim to radio host Charlamagne tha God that, “if you have a problem figuring out whether you're for me or Trump, then you ain't black," those voices will get even louder. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Even Charles Blow, the New York Times’ famously Trump-hating columnist, rebukes Joe for the “cavalier” remark, and also acknowledges that Biden has often misrepresented “his relationship with the black community.” Biden, wrote Blow after the latest goof, “repeatedly lied… about marching in the civil rights movement … that he was arrested in South Africa trying to see the imprisoned apartheid leader Nelson Mandela” and so on. The presumptive Democrat candidate has to repair the damage done with the black community, but that isn’t the only challenge for his running mate. Because of Uncle Joe’s inability to survive most interviews without doing himself injury (See: Charlamagne tha God), Democrats’ prospects will rely to an unprecedented degree on his VP pick. It’s a tall order, and even more so since many people don’t expect Biden to make it through an entire four years. Many will look at the VP candidate as our likely next president, should Democrats win. That raises the bar and, of course, is catnip to those hoping to run with Biden. Indeed, the prospect of possibly becoming the first female president of the United States has attracted a veritable stampede of contenders. Some 35 women have been mentioned as in the mix, which makes the recently concluded Democratic primary, with its 27 contestants, look tame by comparison. Until the Charlamagne da God episode, the leading VP propsects were Klobuchar, Sens. Elizabeth Warren and Kamala Harris, former Georgia state Rep. Stacey Abrams, and Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. But Biden’s most recent flub will push him to choose a black partner. That narrows the field to Harris, Abrams and Val Demings. Demings is a second-term congresswoman from must-win Florida. She is a former cop who served as chief of the Orlando Police Department. Demings actually is what Biden sometimes has pretended to be, the first in her family to go to college. Her husband is also a police officer, and currently serves as mayor of Orange County. Traditionally, Democrats have looked to deflect “soft on crime” characterizations from Republicans, and from that aspect Demings would be a sound choice. But these days, liberals routinely categorize law enforcement as racist. Since Biden has had to apologize for his authorship of the 1994 “tough on crime” bill, teaming up with a cop could revive past misgivings. Biden has boxed himself in. To have any chance in November, he has to hold onto the black vote.  Demings, however, won plaudits from liberal Democrats by serving as an aggressive impeachment manager during the Senate trial of President Trump. Abrams chairs the Sore Loser Club, of which Hillary Clinton is the charter member. Abrams ran for governor of Georgia in 2018 and lost by 55,000 votes; she still refuses to concede. The ambitious former state legislator (she has predicted she will be elected president by 2040) has made a career out of charging “voter suppression,” which her Democrat colleagues have dutifully echoed. There is no indication that Republicans prevented blacks in Georgia from voting; indeed, turnout was the highest ever, including among the African-American community. But Abrams has used these allegations as a rallying cry, and the left-wing media adores her. This clique is pushing her for the VP slot, writing fawning articles that breeze over her credentials or policies and instead glorify her as a “runway super model” and super hero. Choosing Abrams would excite progressives but could alienate some of those blue-collar workers who are critical to Biden’s Electoral College prospects. Harris competed with Biden during the primaries and famously attacked him during the first debate. She criticized the former VP for having worked with segregationist colleagues in the past and for having opposed busing. It was a shocking onslaught, given Biden’s close ties to Barack Obama, the nation’s first black president. Harris’ presidential campaign never caught fire. Her organization was weak, as was her message, which devolved to slogans like, “Dude Gotta Go.” Also, Harris came under scrutiny for her past work as a district attorney and then attorney general in California. In the second round of debates, Hawaii Rep. Tulsi Gabbard charged Harris with putting “over 1,500 people in jail for marijuana violations and then laughed about it when she was asked if she ever smoked marijuana.” Like Demings, Harris’ main credential for the job – her law and order past - is a mixed blessing. Each of these candidates will boost Biden’s appeal to minority voters, but each risks losing some other critical Democrat constituents, like progressives or moderates. None has the standing or approval ratings of Warren, who is Democrats’ top pick, and none fits as well with Uncle Joe as Klobuchar. Nonetheless, Biden has boxed himself in. To have any chance in November, he has to hold onto the black vote. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Unlike past Republican candidates, Trump is campaigning aggressively for that vote, reminding African-Americans that he delivered on criminal justice reform, has put considerable money and effort into Opportunity Zones in minority neighborhoods and has supported Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Polls show he has gained with blacks; Biden cannot afford to see those numbers climb. The race in the essential toss up states is close; as Charles Blow wrote, “Biden has a good chance to beat Trump … if Biden doesn’t blow it.” What are the odds? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LIZ PEEK

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Nearly 39 million Americans have filed for unemployment, as of May 21, since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak, pushing unemployment closer to levels not seen since the Great Depression. So far, Congress has allocated over $239 billion in stimulus checks and unemployment benefits to help. Congressional Democrats want to go further. The HEROES Act, which the House of Representatives passed last on May 15, would usher in a second, more generous round of COVID-19 relief. Yet right now, many Americans are making more money staying home than they would by returning to work. In the rush to alleviate the economic strain caused by the pandemic, the government risks creating a permanent unemployment system that will hamstring our economic recovery in the coming months. SEN. MARTHA McSALLY: IN CORONAVIRUS FIGHT TO WIN AGAINST COVID-19 WE MUST DO THINGS AFRAID With the CARES Act, the government has essentially begun paying people to remain unemployed. Signed into law by President Trump in March, the law authorized $1,200 payments to millions of individuals with annual incomes below $75,000 and married couples with annual incomes below $150,000. CARES also created a $600 a week federal supplement to state unemployment benefits, which will expire on July 31. Thanks to the CARES supplement, 63 percent of workers nationwide now earn more on unemployment than they would if they returned to work. All told, nearly 93 million workers typically make less each week than the "maximum weekly unemployment benefits" provided by the CARES Act, according to an American Action Forum analysis. Such generous unemployment benefits could make it harder for states to open their economies. Every state will start to do so in some form by Memorial Day. Their economies could be open in name only, if businesses can't get workers to rejoin the workforce. After qualifying for a small business loan, the owner of Hoffman Car Wash in Albany, N.Y., told The Wall Street Journal that he could afford to bring back furloughed workers at their pre-crisis wage of $13 an hour. Those workers are currently making around $23 an hour on unemployment, which could discourage them from returning. Between the unemployment boost and free health insurance, the HEROES Act would essentially pay people to stay home through early 2021.  In Kentucky, the CARES unemployment benefit disincentivizes 75 percent of workers from seeking employment. Last month, NPR shared the story of a Harlan, Ky., coffee shop owner whose workers requested that she lay them off so they could receive unemployment checks. The HEROES Act would give many people even more of an incentive to avoid returning to work. The bill would issue a second round of $1,200 stimulus checks and extend the $600 per week unemployment supplement through Jan. 31, 2021. It would also let people who lost their jobs between March 1 of this year and Jan. 31 of next year stay on their employer-sponsored health plans, with the federal government paying the premiums. Typically, unemployed workers who wish to remain on their old employer-sponsored plans must pay the premiums themselves, under the terms of a federal law called COBRA. Between the unemployment boost and free health insurance, the HEROES Act would essentially pay people to stay home through early 2021. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Congress doesn't need to fund such generous benefits packages for so long. At the onset of the coronavirus outbreak, it made sense to pay people to stay home to help "flatten the curve." But as the economy begins to reopen, there's no reason for so many workers to remain at home. Congressional Democrats seem determined to give them one. There are ways to help those who are unemployed without destroying the incentive to work. For example, rather than spending hundreds of billions of dollars on COBRA premiums, the federal government could encourage those who have recently lost their jobs to purchase short-term, limited-duration health plans. Because these plans are not subject to ObamaCare's many cost-inflating mandates, they're orders of magnitude cheaper than conventional employer-sponsored plans. Their longstanding purpose has been to protect people between jobs. Sadly, regulations in nearly half of the states limit the availability of these plans. Eleven states have banned them outright. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Instead of continually renewing the $600 per week unemployment supplement, Congress could begin phasing it out — or follow Georgia's lead by allowing certain workers to receive a reduced federal benefit once they've returned to work. Congress's initial wave of stimulus made sense, as a means of forestalling economic collapse. But trillions more in spending risks preventing the economy from starting up again. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SALLY PIPES

President Trump and first lady Melania Trump attend a Memorial Day ceremony in Baltimore, Maryland. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. One conversation with my grandfather nearly 20 years ago altered my understanding of him, his generation and what real success looks like for future generations. With all that we are undergoing during the COVID-19 outbreak, we could benefit from remembering his lesson now. I’d just graduated from college when we began our tradition of having lunch together once a week. The date— Sept. 17, 2001 — is unforgettable, since the world was still reeling from the attacks that had occurred one week earlier. My grandfather and I spent most of that lunch commiserating over the great sadness of what had happened and the uncertainty of what might happen next. As we began our goodbyes, my grandfather shared that earlier that morning he had instructed his financial adviser to make a significant investment in two companies: Boeing and American Airlines. SEN. MARTHA McSALLY: IN CORONAVIRUS FIGHT TO WIN AGAINST COVID-19 WE MUST DO THINGS AFRAID I was stunned. Could he not see what was about to happen? The entire market would drop (it fell more than 7 percent that day and 14 percent by the end of the week) and no individual stocks would be more negatively impacted than airlines. With all the gravitas of a 23-year-old with a degree in finance, I asked, “Grandpa, why would you do that? You’re going to lose your money.” He calmly took a sip of his iced tea. “Do you know why they refer to my generation as The Greatest Generation?” I awaited his answer. “John, it’s not because we survived the Great Depression. All humanity attempts to survive even the most difficult of experiences. It’s not because we served in World War II, either. Who wouldn’t respond and step forward if their country, their very way of life, were under attack? And it’s not because we came home and built the most productive society in the history of the world. “They call us the Greatest Generation because we never forgot all the lessons we learned along the way. You see, the Depression taught us to value the little things, to live within our means and to never take anything for granted. The war taught us what real evil looked like, what real sacrifice looked like, what real heroism looked like. “All of these experiences and lessons prepared us not only to work together to create the world we live in today, but to prioritize the good of society over individuals.” My grandfather wasn’t worried about short-term losses in a stock portfolio. His experiences had taught him to play the long game, invest in a way of life he had fought for, and rest well, confident the best days remained ahead. That conversation remains etched into my ethos now, more than 20 years later. Because the Greatest Generation’s conception has much in common with the situation we find ourselves in now, we should hope that we can enjoy benefits growing out of these difficult days, too. The collapsing markets and soaring unemployment witnessed by my grandfather evolved into the practice of appreciating the little things, living within their means, and taking nothing for granted. Likewise, we have the opportunity to shift into this mindset for the long haul, instead of shifting back to the over-scheduled, over-extended, avaricious society we found ourselves in before we were rocked by shelter-in-place orders. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That generation’s battle against real evil showed what sacrifice and heroism looked like. Today, in the midst of the pandemic, we’ve witnessed first responders and health care professionals risking their health to provide care for strangers. We’ve witnessed those on the front line of growing, transporting and stocking our food, regardless of the potential hazard, as the essential part of society they’ve in fact always been. There has been plenty of evidence of real heroism. Undoubtedly, these are difficult days. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And although the journey forward remains unclear, the Greatest Generation reminds us that what defines a society during adversity is not only how they respond in the midst of it, but whether they afterward apply the lessons they’ve learned from it. Let’s not just get through these days together, but become far better in the days to come because of it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JOHN O'LEARY

 Imagine making the phone call to the parents of a 22-year-old U.S. Marine in your command who died only hours before? It’s dreadful. Something I had to do as a commander in Ramadi, Iraq, more than once – it ripped me from the inside-out and no class teaches you how to do it right. You just hope that you do.   Being the parents who receive those calls is even worse – but that is something I can only imagine.  Something few have to experience.  Something I wish no one had to endure.  During this Memorial Day weekend, I think back to the middle of February when I sat in the theater of the Marines’ Memorial Club in San Francisco, Calif. It seemed small to me.  A venue that sat over 300 people, but not ordinary people – people I can only describe as extraordinary. Our Gold Star Families.  JANE HORTON, JOE KENT: CONGRESS, IT'S TIME FOR A LASTING MEMORIAL TO THE GLOBAL WAR ON TERROR The first time I sat in that hall it seemed huge. I sat quietly, my mind drifting as it usually does during events that I have been a part of so many times, trying to numb myself to the emotion that overwhelms me. My way of coping, I suppose. Funerals of fallen Marines. Memorial services of our nation’s heroes.  I’ve always tried to tune out the reality of those days to get through them without breaking into a thousand pieces.  The theater was dimly lit and warm and I thought back to when I was a child. How everything around me seemed bigger than it was.  If you’ve ever gone back to visit your childhood home or school, you know what I’m talking about.  Thirty years later, they seem small – nothing like you remember. The castle you grew up in is now a cottage.  I felt like that kid when first invited to attend the California Fallen Heroes Gold Star Honor and Remembrance. Why? Why did a room was filled with moms and dads, sisters and brothers, husbands and wives, and friends seem tiny to me?   Moms like Dianne Layfield, who I have come to know well. Her son, Marine Lance Cpl. Travis Layfield, served in my battalion. He was killed in Ramadi on April 6, 2014. Dads like Kevin Graves, whose son, Army Specialist Joey Graves,  21, died in combat in Baghdad, Iraq, on July 25, 2006. Their kids, along with the other 96 fallen service members were remembered this year.   The service has been held for 15 years at the Marines’ Memorial Club. It’s organized by the East Bay Blue Star Mom’s Chapter and always goes above and beyond what it takes to remember and honor the sacrifice of hundreds.  As warriors, we take an oath and serve, and fight, and kill.  But our families do not sign up for this. “I hope there is a day that we never have to do Gold Star events.” Lt. Gen. Jan C. Huly said to me later that day.  I knew he meant it but could see the apprehension in his face. Huly, a retired Marine commander who led thousands of troops during his 37-year career, knew it was only wishful thinking.  He serves as the president and CEO of the Marines' Memorial Association & Foundation.  War and loss and sacrifice have become a part of American culture. We are a nation that accepts that everything we enjoy in life has been fought for, and at times, those freedoms mean sending young men and women – our finest, who sacrifice themselves willingly – to war. As warriors, we take an oath and serve, and fight, and kill.  But our families do not sign up for this – they remain the ones who have to swim in the violent wake of war and endure the personal loss of those whom we fought beside.   Thankfully, recognition and commemoration have also become embedded into our culture, thanks, in part, to organizations like the Marines’ Memorial Club, so we have a place in which everyone’s sacrifice is remembered.  During the ceremony, a U.S. Marine staff sergeant in full dress blue uniform walked solemnly lighting white candles in glass hurricanes. One candle for each service member honored that day. As each one is lit, the chaplain leads the attendees in a low chorus, saying in unison, “A grateful nation acknowledges your sacrifice and prays for your peace.” Each time a name is read, the chorus repeats. It is repeated 98 times that morning.  The sad, reverent tone heard in the timbre of the voices of each parent.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Dianne, or “Momma D,” as we lovingly refer to our surrogate mother, rose from her seat when Travis’ name was called. I instinctively placed my hand on her back for support.  It was then I knew why the room had become smaller.   Being a part of something like that made me feel small – but also loved. Something that warriors who no longer have the fog of war to distract them from everyday life are unexpectedly surrounded by – our amazing Gold Star Families. These people were no longer strangers to me, and they had allowed me to become a part of their families. People who have lost so much yet continue to love us so much despite living their lives without their own sons or daughters.  I drove home, eight hours in silence, and thought about the previous days. Americans can never be reminded enough that although thousands have died in service to their country, the families that raised them to be heroes remain. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Our ethos of honor, courage and commitment are not reserved only for those who wear the uniform, but for our Gold Star Families as well. They give honor to those who sacrificed, they remain courageous to continue moving forward and they demonstrate a commitment to each other to stay connected and strong. This is what Memorial Day means to me – the connection to those who continue to live their lives while, at the same time, honoring the sacrifices and spirits of those who made the ultimate sacrifice to ensure our way of life as Americans.  For those who know this type of loss – every day, is Memorial Day.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SCOTT HUESING

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. There won't be a recovery from coronavirus in the U.S. unless we reopen schools now. If children can't go to school, parents can't go to work. TRUMP SAYS SCHOOLS IN US SHOULD BE OPENED 'ASAP' We're told schools must be closed to keep kids safe. But they're not in danger. According to CDC data, children under 18 make up only 2 percent of cases and 0.6 percent of hospitalizations. Children under 14 make up just 0.02 percent of deaths. Now, the media misinformation machine is fear-mongering about a new mystery disease that affects children. Dr. Anthony Fauci cited this when pushing back on Rand Paul's demand to reopen schools this year. But we're talking about a handful of cases which are almost always treatable. How offensive to try and frighten parents about the safety of their children! A more serious argument for school closures is that while children may not get sick themselves, they can infect others. But do they? We are constantly told to follow the science and the data. Well, here it is. One study found, "Even if children do get infected, they are less likely to transmit the disease to others than adults. We have not found a single instance of a child infecting parents." CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER They lecture us about contact tracing. Well, they did it for a boy with coronavirus. They found that even though he came into contact with 172 classmates and teachers while symptomatic, he didn't transmit the disease to any of them. Not one out of 172 people. In Switzerland, the country's head of infectious disease says scientists, quote, "now know that young children don't transmit the virus." And because of all of this France, Israel, Germany, Greece, Portugal, South Korea and many other countries have already begun letting their children back into schools. Two weeks after Denmark reopened their schools, a scientist in the Department of Infectious Diseases at Aarhus University said, "There are no signs whatsoever that the partial reopening has caused the biggest spread of infection." Any leader anywhere in America who is not planning to reopen schools now -- not in the next few months, not in the fall, but <em>now</em> -- is a data denier and a science denier. Get on with it and reopen schools now before you do even more needless damage. Yet still, the schools here are closed, even in states where bars and restaurants are reopening. Where in all of this is our own CDC, by the way? Why do we have to rely on scientists from Switzerland, Denmark, Iceland? Yet another reason for the bungler-in-chief, useless Dr. Robert Redfield, to go. Meanwhile, the mental health toll on children grows by the day, as does the loss of learning. All of it is hurting the poorest areas most, especially those in remote parts of the country, with unreliable internet and the poorest families. Any leader anywhere in America who is not planning to reopen schools now -- not in the next few months, not in the fall, but now -- is a data denier and a science denier. Get on with it and reopen schools now before you do even more needless damage. But once we reopen schools and businesses, we can't have stupid regulations stifling the recovery. Masks, fine. But what's this unscientific nonsense about compulsory temperature checks? Totally pointless. You'll miss most people with coronavirus and catch many who don't have it. These completely arbitrary social distancing rules -- 25 percent occupancy, 33 percent, 50 percent. What's it even based on? Only one or two people allowed in an elevator at one time? Good luck trying to reopen New York like that or any downtown business district, frankly. This over-prescriptive regulation is typical of the infantilizing mindset of our technocratic ruling elite. If you boss people around with arbitrary rules, they'll resist. But ask people to behave responsibly with common sense, and they will. That's also why liability protection for employers who do the right thing is an essential part of any recovery package. My next point: End this unjustified climate of fear. Thanks to media misinformation, too many Americans wrongly fear they are at risk from this virus. That's a disaster for the recovery because it stops people from getting back to real life. Obviously, the best way to reduce public fear is a vaccine and effective treatment, and the Trump administration has done incredible work to speed up progress on both. But we urgently need the federal government -- perhaps even the wretched CDC can do something useful for a change -- to mount a scientific, data-driven information campaign to explain to Americans how low the risks really are for most people. Two more things: The shutdown is decimating countless businesses, even whole industries. People might be getting ready to go back to a job that doesn't exist anymore. We've been a strong advocate of skills training on "The Next Revolution," and we've championed Ivanka Trump's efforts to give our workers the tools they need to succeed in the 21st Century. Her work now will be even more important for the recovery, especially if it's accompanied by a huge new loan program to help people transition from unemployment to start their own business. That really would be a transition to greatness. And I'll just end with this thought. One of the things I'm most proud of in my career is helping to set up national citizen service in the U.K., kind of non-military national service. I think something like that can make a huge difference here in America right now. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP People are looking for ways to help with the huge unemployment numbers. This would be a great way to bring the country together and unite people of different backgrounds. It would help in this moment, but would also be a fantastic legacy for the future. Adapted from Steve Hilton's monologue from "The Next Revolution" on May 24, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM STEVE HILTON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Now that the nation has begun reopening, we are seeing a raft of predictions about the coming “New Normal.” Not surprisingly, forecasts from our doom-and-gloom political class are overwhelmingly downers. Sports games will take place without fans. Elbow bumps will replace the warm handshake. Happy hour crowds at restaurants will be replaced by half-empty dining rooms. TUCKER CARLSON: THERE'S NO EVIDENCE CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS SAVED LIVES. MASS QUARANTINES MAY HAVE KILLED PEOPLE Friendly cashiers at our neighborhood markets will be forever encased behind plexiglass barriers.   Facemasks will be the must-have fashion accessory, not only for fall, but beyond.  One prediction heard repeatedly is that the New Normal may consist of recurring contagions followed by lockdowns, kind of like the periodic brownouts experienced by California and third world countries. It is said that COVID-19 will alter not just our habits, but also our politics. We’re told by pundits on both sides that the gargantuan federal relief spending brought on by the crisis means that expanded government control over our lives is inevitable, especially in sectors like health care. In tomorrow’s not-so-brave New World, customs and culture, will change forever. We should be skeptical. In fact, the nation has lived through a succession of New Normals. People also agonized over the New Normal in the period following World War I and the 1918 Spanish Flu – even if they didn’t use that term. Yet the disillusionment of that era ultimately gave way to the Roaring Twenties. Unfortunately, that exuberant New Normal didn’t last. Just when it seemed safe to party like it was 1929, the Jazz Age slammed into the Great Depression and, eventually, the Second World War. In the 1970s, inflation and energy scarcity were supposed to be the New Normal. But, thanks to changes in government policy including stabilization of the dollar, those disastrous conditions were supplanted by Reagan era prosperity. In the late 1990s, we were told that the New Normal was “the new economy.” Stocks of tech companies, however improbable their business models, “could only keep going up.”   The dot-com bust and the financial crisis of 2008 ended this magical thinking. Faster than you could say “red is the new black,” belief in progress through wealth creation and growth were suddenly passé. The New Normal was supposed to be “secular stagnation” – professor-speak for a perpetually stagnant economy — and a ‘woke’ nation that rejected private sector ‘greed’. During that downbeat era, no one could have imagined that, just a few short years later, Americans would elect a president who was the most unapologetic champion of capitalism since Ronald Reagan. By the time 2020 rolled around— before the coronavirus hit the country in the solar plexus—capital creation and growth were back.  Secular stagnation seemed destined for extinction.  Based on past performance, today’s prognosticators will likely be no better than their predecessors at predicting what the post-contagion world will look like. Yes, people may be initially reluctant to resume their old activities. But there’s no telling how long this reluctance will last, or whether health security measures like temperature checks will become a permanent part of life, like the added airport security after 9/11. Nor should the left or the right automatically assume that the post-pandemic New Normal will feature an even larger, more powerful Washington.  Fears of the inflationary potential of continued money printing, shared by even some on the left, may help foster some fiscal restraint. The pandemic is also different than past disasters like the 2008 financial crisis or, for that matter, the Great Depression: Unlike those catastrophes, it is not perceived as a private sector offense requiring entirely new bureaucracies to remedy “market failure.” The virus may have kicked off the crisis. But the lion’s share of suffering that followed has been a consequence of the “social distancing” responses imposed by the federal and state governments. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER However well-intentioned, those actions have resulted in a loss of freedom never before experienced by Americans. Citizens were suddenly forced into lockdowns that in some parts of the country seemed excessive and inexplicable. They are being deprived of access to schools, parks and other public services paid for by their tax dollars. Forced to sustain substantial financial hardship, many have become enraged by local officials on tax-funded salaries, who have lectured them or otherwise shown little or no concern.  The need to “flatten the curve” is widely appreciated and understood. Yet there is no telling how the trauma of this “black swan” loss of liberty will reverberate through the collective psyche of Americans — and what black swan results it may produce in the coming election. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is natural in uncertain times for people to look to authorities to provide the illusion of certainty.  And pundits seeking self-validation are always happy to oblige. However, if there is one lesson that we can draw from history, it is ‘beware of experts peddling New Normals,’ especially during an election year.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. For socialists and those who lean that way, pandemic time is boom time. Washington is printing and spending money like never before and both parties support sending cash to businesses and the unemployed. JIM BRESLO: CORONAVIRUS IN LOS ANGELES – THESE DRACONIAN RESTRICTIONS DON'T MAKE SENSE Rent and mortgage payments are being deferred, "Medicare-for-all" is getting a second look and support is growing for a program that would take the nation across the economic Rubicon — a guaranteed basic income. Seldom is heard those cautionary words of yesteryear, “moral hazard.” A time of great need and fear is shattering any stigma about being on the dole. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER A logical conclusion is that politics will follow culture and Bernie Sanders- and AOC-types will call the shots in America. Unless ­Republicans and conservatives get on board, they will be consigned to history’s dustbin. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Perhaps. But pay attention to another potential reaction to the pandemic. Think of it as the revenge of the nonessentials. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

 Memorial Day is the most solemn of our national holidays. It is meant to be a time for Americans to remember, with appropriate displays of gratitude and honor, those who have died while fighting our country’s wars. We must be especially careful this year, in the absence of large public gatherings, and amid all the fears, frustrations and losses from the global pandemic, that the true meaning of this national holiday not be lost. The grievous trials of the past three months cannot be allowed to diminish the realization of how blessed we have been by the willingness of every generation of Americans thus far to risk everything dear to them to preserve the precious gift of freedom. Indeed, if we allow ourselves genuinely to remember this all-important fact, the most unusual circumstances of Memorial Day 2020 might even enhance its meaning. EMILY COMPAGNO: ON MEMORIAL DAY I REMEMBER MY MILITARY FAMILY AND ALL WHO HAVE PAID THE ULTIMATE SACRIFICE The first observance of this holiday, originally known as “Decoration Day” because it called for the placement of flowers on the graves of the war dead, came in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War.  We still observe this particular ritual, but also remember the dead with parades, and with ceremonies and commemorative addresses at national cemeteries or battlefield shrines attended by hundreds and sometimes many thousands of people. It was my good fortune, one year ago, to be present for the Memorial Day observance at the Normandy American Cemetery high above Omaha Beach, the five-mile stretch of sand hallowed forever by the thousands of our countrymen who died there in one of the opening events of D-Day in June 1944. Last year marked the 75th anniversary of the invasion of Normandy and the beginning of the liberation of France and the rest of German-held Western Europe. Two weeks ago marked the same anniversary for the end of World War II in Europe. Later this summer, we will commemorate the defeat of Japan and the end of the war in Asia and the Pacific 75 years ago. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER These special anniversaries seemed poised to bring an additional measure of notice, and of poignancy, to Memorial Day 2020 — that is, until the coronavirus crisis captured the nation’s attention as few developments since 1945 have managed to do. All of our country’s wars have, though perhaps in varying degrees, put at issue the ideas and the way of life that Americans have consistently claimed to value.  Our freedom here at home, as well as the freedom of those denied it around the world, has been the cause for which hundreds of thousands of our countrymen across the generations have made the ultimate sacrifice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We honor the dead because of the debt we owe them, but also as a way of recommitting ourselves to the kind of sacrifice too often necessary to preserve our cherished way of life and the ideals upon which it is based. As Abraham Lincoln put it in his immortal Gettysburg Address in 1863, with thousands of Union war dead looking down upon him from the new national cemetery he was helping to dedicate: “It is for us the living . . . to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced.” To the degree that, in this fallen world, the work of securing our freedom is never finished, Memorial Day is still meant to be an occasion for renewal as much as remembering. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY THOMAS H. CONNER

 President Kennedy once said, “A nation reveals itself not only by the men it produces but also by the men it honors, the men it remembers.” Thankfully, our Navy has always been blessed to have strong men and women with exceptional courage who are willing to serve and stand in the gap to defend America whenever our liberty is in jeopardy. Memorial Day is a special day for all Americans. It is where we, as a nation, as a military, and as a Navy, honor and remember those who gave their lives so that we might live in freedom. We remember the courage of sailors like Hospital Apprentice First Class Fred Lester, who gave his life 75 years ago to save the Marines under his charge. During a harrowing firefight on the island of Okinawa, Lester crawled across exposed terrain to pull a wounded Marine to safety. Despite sustaining fatal gunshot wounds in the process, he calmly continued to render aide to wounded Marines until he succumbed to his injuries. NEWT GINGRICH: ON MEMORIAL DAY, WE HAVE A DUTY TO HONOR AMERICANS WHO DIED DEFENDING OUR COUNTRY We also remember the tenacity and grit of sailors like Chief Shannon Kent. As a cryptologist, she worked off the grid to protect our freedom after 9/11. Kent deployed alongside our special forces countless times on dangerous missions in the Middle East. A quiet professional, she silently broke barriers for women, proving time and again that nothing could limit one’s service. She was no doubt a warrior. While most of us cannot understand the grief of families that have lost loved ones defending our nation on the frontline, our hearts should break for them. Since the American Revolution, more than 43,000 sailors and one million service members have given their lives in service to this country. And across the United States this Memorial Day weekend, we pay homage to America’s finest men and women who paid the ultimate sacrifice. These individuals came from every state and territory. They represented every race, creed and religion in our country. They joined the U.S. military at different times and for different reasons. But all became part of something larger than themselves. Remember those who answered the call of their nation, led a life of consequence and took action to support a cause far greater than oneself.   Those sailors, Marines, soldiers, airmen, and Coast Guardsmen did not wear the cloth of the nation for accolades. They did it because they chose to answer their nation’s call - no matter the cost. As we celebrate Memorial Day this year, I encourage you to remember those who carried our freedoms on their shoulders. Remember those who answered the call of their nation, led a life of consequence and took action to support a cause far greater than oneself. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Remember those men and women who ran into harm’s way and paid the ultimate price. While we have sailed in heavy seas before, by drawing on the memory of those that have gone before us, we can and will do it again. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 It’s a strategy that has been adopted by virtually every U.S. presidential candidate in modern history: During the primaries, candidates appeal to their base, but after capturing a party’s nomination, campaigns move to the political center to win over undecided voters. But in this unconventional cycle, Joe Biden is being forced to throw conventional campaigning to the wind. Instead of positioning himself as a centrist, Biden is choosing to move further to the left than ever before to satisfy the demands of Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont and his radical base of dissatisfied progressives and “Bernie bro” socialists who hate the Democratic Party establishment almost as much as they do free-market capitalism. On May 13, Biden and former political rival Comrade Bernie announced the creation of several “unity task forces,” which will work together to help reshape the agendas of the Democratic Party and the Biden presidential campaign in six key areas: climate change, criminal justice reform, education, economic growth, health care and immigration. JOHN JAMES: HEY, JOE BIDEN, I'M BLACK ENOUGH TO THINK FOR MYSELF About 40 percent of the members of these task forces were handpicked by Sanders, a self-described socialist, and they serve as a who’s who list of some of the nation’s most socialistic policy wonks and activists. Co-chairing the Climate Change Task Force is Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., the leading voice behind the Green New Deal, the most radical, dangerous, destructive policy proposal in modern American history. The Green New Deal — which some analysts say would cost more than $90 trillion — would not only destroy the vast majority of the U.S. energy industry and force every American to purchase more expensive, less-reliable wind and solar energy, it would also impose a slew of new progressive and socialist policies that have absolutely nothing to do with climate change, like free college tuition and basic income programs. Also serving on the Climate Change Task Force is Varshini Prakash, one of the co-creators of AOC’s Green New Deal and the co-founder of the socialist Sunrise Movement, an organization that leans so far to the left that it protested against House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., for not adopting enough of the group’s radical climate proposals in 2018. Serving on the Economy Task Force is Ohio State professor Darrick Hamilton, a key Sanders adviser and one of the nation’s leading voices for a federal jobs guarantee, which the American Action Forum estimates could cost $6.8 trillion to $44.6 trillion over 10 years. Radical professor Stephanie Kelton is also a member of the Economy Task Force. Kelton is the former senior adviser to Sanders’ presidential campaign and the face of the Modern Monetary Theory movement in the United States. According to MMT supporters like Kelton, national debts and deficits don’t matter so long as the government has the power to print its own currency and control the economy through a massive bureaucratic structure. The very same democratic socialists who Biden argued were too radical for U.S. voters are helping to create policy for his campaign, That’s why Kelton supports printing trillions upon trillions of dollars to pay for far-left ideas like the Green New Deal and a federal job guarantee, rather than raising taxes, which MMT advocates often see as a tool to control economic decision-making and punish undesirable businesses, not a necessary part of paying for government services. Co-chairing the Health Care Task Force is Rep. Pramila Jayapal, D-Wash., one of the leaders of the far-left Congressional Progressive Caucus and the sponsor of “Medicare-for-all" legislation that is even more expensive and far-reaching than Sanders’ single-payer plan — as hard as that might be to imagine. Although it’s not uncommon for presidential candidates who have won their party’s nomination to bring in members of other campaigns in the run up to a general election, it’s highly unusual for a presidential candidate to agree to have his or her campaign platform dramatically altered by former political rivals in such a public and remarkable way just months before Election Day. And it’s an especially surprising development in the case of Biden, who beat his more socialistic and progressive party opponents by positioning himself as the party’s lone electable “moderate.” Now, the very same democratic socialists who Biden argued were too radical for U.S. voters are helping to create policy for his campaign, and they’ll even reportedly serve as members of his presidential transition team, where they’ll have significant input over key policies and help Biden choose members of his cabinet. The reason for Biden’s shift to the far left is entirely due to the work of Sanders, who has used his bully pulpit in the progressive and socialist movements to force Biden into agreeing to this ridiculous arrangement. The Democratic Party’s voters and leaders decided months ago that they didn’t want a socialist candidate representing them in what might be the most important election of the past half-century. But true to form, Comrade Bernie doesn’t care what people actually want, only what he deems to be good for them, which, in this case, is another toxic dose of socialism. The only one who should be happier than Sanders about the new “unity task forces” is President Trump, who will be able to use Biden’s shift to the left to show voters in key swing states that the Biden administration would be far from moderate when it comes time to actually govern. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER A vote for Biden is a vote for bringing socialist radicals into the White House, and it seems hard to believe that this will sit well with blue-collar Democrats in states like Wisconsin and Michigan. So, as bizarre as it might sound, by pushing the Biden campaign closer to progressive and socialist policies, Sanders has actually become a political asset for Trump. Some might be tempted to write off these task forces as little more than political theater, but if it’s true that Biden isn’t planning on listening to any of the recommendations produced by these committees, then he would have been better off leaving the party’s socialists out in the cold from the very start. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The only thing that could alienate the far-left wing of the Democratic Party more than stomaching a Biden nomination would be to disingenuously promise them a seat at the table only to yank it away before any meaningful changes are adopted. It seems apparent, then, that Biden has every intention of moving further to the left than he already has over the course of the present election cycle. It’s a decision that could cost him the election if the American people — who rightfully remain skeptical of socialism — realize that the campaign of Mr. Moderate Joe Biden has become a quasi-socialist wolf in sheep’s clothing, however reluctant the transformation might have been. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JUSTIN HASKINS

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Today is Memorial Day in America. There is a day in November when we honor all those who have served in the uniform of the United States, but today is the day when we honor all those who paid the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. Among the fallen, most were laid to rest in the land they loved, others lie beneath white crosses in military cemeteries around the world, and others’ final resting place is known only to God. To all of them, we owe a debt of gratitude we can never repay, and this year especially, we feel the profound gratitude to our heroic fallen and their families. What we observe as Memorial Day began as Decoration Day three years after the end of the Civil War, when Americans honored fallen soldiers by decorating their final resting places with newly bloomed flowers and that “dear old flag they saved.” EMILY COMPAGNO: ON MEMORIAL DAY, I REMEMBER MY MILITARY FAMILY AND ALL WHO HAVE PAID THE ULTIMATE SACRIFICE As their commander-in-chief observed while dedicating one such resting place in Gettysburg, Pa., “it is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this” – for Americans can claim the distinction of being a freedom-loving people only if we love and cherish the memory of all those who gave their all for our freedom. It is remarkable to think that in every generation Americans have risen up and been willing to pay the ultimate price for our nation — from Bunker Hill to Belleau Wood, from San Juan Hill to Saipan, from the Coral Sea to Kandahar. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Today American soldiers, sailors, airmen, Marines and Coast Guard are deployed around the world, standing guard for our freedom, and they continue to risk their lives for our sake and the sake of our way of life. For all they have done, our fallen and their families deserve the tributes that will be recited on this day of days, but on this Memorial Day, perhaps we feel loyalty to their memory and gratitude for their service just a little more deeply, for it comes at a momentous time in the life of our nation, when all of us have been reminded just how precious our freedom truly is. From the outset of the coronavirus pandemic, the American people have made great personal sacrifices to protect the health and safety of our nation. In a very real sense, the American people have been willing to voluntarily forfeit aspects of their personal freedom to protect the lives and safety of their family, their neighbors and people they’d never met. While our doctors, nurses, health care workers and first responders rendered care for our families as if they were their own, the American people stayed home from school, from work and from worship. Some closed down a business that took a lifetime to build. They have canceled weddings and graduations. They have foregone seeing parents, grandparents and loved ones. This Memorial Day, the American people have just come through a lot. And while we grieve the loss of more than 98,000 Americans, because of the compassion and cooperation of the American people, tens of thousands of families have been spared the same heartbreaking loss. And while we grieve the loss of more than 98,000 Americans, because of the compassion and cooperation of the American people, tens of thousands of families have been spared the same heartbreaking loss. And now, all 50 states have begun to reopen in a safe and responsible manner. Even while continuing the practices that will keep our families and communities safe, we are going back to our places of work and worship. We are venturing out to stores, restaurants and the great outdoors. After going without what we once took for granted for so long, we are beginning to reclaim our freedom, which may be what makes this Memorial Day that much more special. Today we feel a greater sense than ever before just what a blessing it is to live in freedom and how much we owe to those who fought and died to give us this free country. After a time of great hardship for millions of Americans, this Memorial Day we do well to honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. Now more than ever, we will remember and honor all the men and women throughout the generations who defended our freedom at the cost of their lives. We will also remember the families of the fallen for whom every day is Memorial Day and assure them that our nation will never forget or fail to honor their loved ones. And as we remember those who paid the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom, we will also remember and pray for all those serving today in the Armed Forces of the United States. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is Memorial Day in America. Their duty was to serve; our duty is to remember, and as our nation begins to safely and responsibly reclaim the freedoms at the heart of our way of life, let us all do our duty this day to remember and honor the memory of all who served and died for our country and our freedom. God bless them all and God bless America. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICE PRESIDENT MIKE PENCE

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In September 2005, I was preparing for a “routine” A-10 combat mission in the skies over Afghanistan. Suddenly, our two planes were re-tasked to aid a team of U.S. special forces under hostile fire in a canyon in the south. Engines racing, we thundered down the runway and lifted off. When we reached the canyon, the departing A-10 pilot told me where to find my target: look for a particular tree near a curve in the rocky terrain. I made contact with the controller on the ground in charge of calling in the airstrike; he used a pocket mirror to shine the sun in my eyes so that I could see his location. SEN. MARTHA MCSALLY: CORONAVIRUS WILL BE DEFEATED BY HEALTH CARE HEROES – WE MUST GET THEM WHAT THEY NEED U.S. troops and insurgents were intermixed along the canyon walls, making the risk of friendly fire high. I found the target, and just as I set up my plane to start a deep dive to fire my 30 mm gun, my entire electronic cockpit display failed. Called the Heads-Up Display, or HUD, it was the screen that showed all the aircraft’s critical flight and navigation information. It was also what I used to fire my weapons with total precision to hit my target. It was dead. And no amount of procedural checklist efforts could bring it back. For as long as I had been flying the A-10, pilots were told that our entire HUD would probably never fail. Portions might degrade, but the whole display would most likely not go dark. But mine had. I now had a choice: end the mission, wait at a high altitude with low fuel as another combat pair headed my way, risking that the U.S. troops on the ground would be over-run by insurgents, or make my attack run using essentially World War II tactics and math calculations that I had to write on a board strapped to my thigh. I knew immediately that my mission was more important than my fears. I lined up my plane, told the controller on the ground I was coming “in hot,” and began my dive toward the ground and the target, flying at speeds of up to 350 miles per hour.  I had about four seconds to make corrections on the final attack. Doing things afraid isn’t about being reckless or cavalier. Doing things afraid is an intentional, deliberate process of learning how to confront fear and then moving forward in spite of it. My choice that day is the same choice that millions of Americans have suddenly faced due to the COVID-19 pandemic: the choice to do things afraid. Each day, doctors, nurses, custodians, EMTs, grocery store workers, truck and delivery drivers, farmers and ranchers, warehouse and food processing workers, small business owners, and so many more have been asked to do their jobs afraid. Doing things afraid isn’t about being reckless or cavalier. Doing things afraid is an intentional, deliberate process of learning how to confront fear and then moving forward in spite of it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER On my flight that day, I was fortunate; I had the benefit of years of training and the support of an entire ground crew. I felt the nauseating fear of failure, but I knew I must find the confidence to push through it, overcome, and do what was needed. Today, as a nation, we need to give that same confidence and courage to those who serve others and are potentially putting themselves at risk, and to those who have lost jobs and businesses during this economic turmoil. Our support takes many forms, from ensuring that they have the best protection for their personal safety; to increasing testing, especially for those in high-risk environments; to finding ways to provide vital financial support for small businesses in need – and not special favors for well-connected special interests. Those of us in government have a heightened responsibility to be problem-solvers, not problem creators. Each of us needs to keep following safe health practices as our country reopens. And we need to keep our situational awareness: the original bad actors who placed all of us in this position are the Chinese communist leaders, who punished their own citizens for speaking out and decided to conceal the truth of COVID-19 from every other nation in the world. Let us unite and remember that, not partisan squabbling. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The many unknowns surrounding COVID-19 may make it feel as if our national HUD has failed. We are in uncharted territory and conditions may be challenging for some time. But in the last few months, I have seen so much courage, so many people who, despite the risks, have chosen to “do things afraid” for the higher good. What ultimately happened in the Afghan canyon? Under the watchful cover of my wingman, I hit my target. He followed me, and, together, we launched five more strikes to keep our fellow Americans alive. The entire special forces team was safely extracted that night. We all succeeded that day, thanks to preparation, grit, and no small amount of prayer. I am confident that in the coming months, our county can do the same. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SEN. MARTHA McSALLY

 This Memorial Day as we honor all of the men and women who have given their lives to defend our great nation, we as well as hundreds of other families of the fallen are hopeful that the American people and those who represent us on Capitol Hill will not just talk about honoring the fallen, but take action. Service members, families of the fallen, and veterans are uniting to reach out to their members of Congress to support the creation of a lasting memorial to The Global War on Terror (GWOT) on the national mall. House Resolution 5046, the Global War on Terrorism Memorial Location Act, seeks permission to commission the GWOT Memorial on one of three sites near the Korean, Vietnam, and World War II memorials. REP. BRIAN MAST: MEMORIAL DAY AND MY FALLEN FRIENDS SHOW US HOW TO THRIVE AFTER CORONAVIRUS There is truly no other place to put a memorial that gives those who have volunteered to fight, bleed and die for us, the honor, respect, and memorialization worthy of their sacrifices. The GWOT is our nation’s longest war and our only war fought by an all-volunteer military. The GWOT began in response to the attacks against our nation by Al Qaeda terrorists on September 11, 2001 and continues to this day in over fifteen countries. Over 7,000 service members have made the ultimate sacrifice fighting in the GWOT for our nation. Our spouses, SPC Christopher David Horton who was killed in Afghanistan in 2011 serving as a sniper, and SCPO Shannon Kent, who was killed in Syria in 2019 serving as a cryptologist, were two of them. Despite the length of this war and the wide geographic breadth of this fight, less than one percent of the nation has served in the military since the war began. The 19-year war has largely been sustained by most service members deploying multiple times over the course of their careers, creating a unique generation of warriors who survive war, return home to prepare for more war and deploy again until they reach the end of their time in service or are killed in action. As a byproduct of this war’s length, it has become a family affair for many of us. Joe Kent met his late wife Shannon training for war between his eighth and ninth deployments, she was between her fourth and fifth deployments. Joe deployed again while she was pregnant with their sons and she deployed again in 2018 to give her life fighting ISIS in Syria alongside three other Americans, Jon Farmer, Scott Wirtz and Ghadir Taher, all of whom had spent most of their adult lives at war or training for it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER To many Americans outside the military community, I’m sure our lifestyle sounds unique, but it is not. There are many couples and families like us, there are many parents in uniform who have proudly watched their sons and daughters join our military and deploy to war. This war is not just the business of professional armed services, it is also a multi-generational family affair. This is a tribute to our nation, we know that America and our freedoms are worth fighting and dying for. An unintended byproduct of the all-volunteer force is that the American people have become disconnected from the wars fought in their name. Because of this disconnect between the American people and wars, our elected officials have also become distant from the wars that they fund and oversee and the immense amount of sacrifice behind them. The American people honor and trust their military -- but it has become its own small subculture within our nation of few who bear the brunt of sacrifice. Building a lasting memorial on the national mall in Washington to the GWOT would serve as a tribute to all who have served our nation and all who have paid the ultimate sacrifice, while also connecting the American people and our elected officials to our nation’s longest war. The GWOT is far from over and deserves the attention of the American people and leaders. Placing the monument within the very fabric of our nation’s seats of power and the monuments of our founders embeds this war in the hearts of all Americans and hopefully reminds our leaders that this war is still being fought and deserves their support and attention. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We ask that our elected leaders and the people of America help us get this sacred mission accomplished. It is the least we can do for the few who have sacrificed so much over so many years. Congress, please pass the Global War on Terrorism Memorial Location Act. Joe Kent is the Gold Star Husband of SCPO Shannon Kent.

 The sad chapter of Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s failed Russia investigation has been over for more than a year, but only now are Americans starting to get a fuller picture of what went on. The partisan witch hunt that we all saw unfold was a disgrace to our country and the chickens are now coming home to roost. When a failed coup against the president takes place, questions must be asked and there must accountability. Remember that scores of Democrat politicians, journalists and deep state actors guaranteed a slam dunk case of Russian collusion against President Trump and his campaign.  When the Senate returns in June, Judiciary Committee Chairman Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., will hold a vote to authorize subpoenas for individuals I call “Obamagate’s Most Wanted” – those involved in the FBI’s infamous Russia hoax investigation. Graham’s comprehensive witness list includes fired FBI Director James Comey, former Director of Central Intelligence John Brennan, and former Director of National Intelligence James Clapper. ANDREW McCARTHY: UNMASKING MICHAEL FLYNN — HERE'S WHAT THE FBI WAS REALLY UP TO Indeed, most of the cast of characters associated with Obamagate that we’ve been hearing about for years now should be called in to testify about the targeting of Trump and his campaign beginning in July 2016. Tens of millions of Americans want to know about the phony Steele Dossier, the fraudulent FISA warrants, and why the Obama-Biden law enforcement and intelligence agencies were politicized with the goal of destroying candidate and then duly elected president of the United States Donald Trump. Two people who are not on the list – former President Barack Obama and former Vice President Joe Biden – shouldn’t rest easy, because the facts must be followed wherever they lead. Thanks to Acting Director of National Intelligence Ric Grenell, former National Security Adviser Susan Rice’s recently declassified and highly inflammatory email of Jan. 20, 2017, already puts the ordeal squarely inside Obama’s Oval Office. Let’s remember the clarion call from the likes of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and disgraced Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff, D-Calif., that no one is above the law, not even the president of the United States. By definition, this means that former presidents and vice presidents are also subject to the laws of the United States.  The American people are tired of double standards and the two sets of rules we’ve all seen on display for so long. Obama and Biden must not receive any preferential treatment, period. The disgraceful targeting of former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn is a prime example of a member of the Trump team being held to a different standard than Obama and Clinton associates. In years past, the mainstream media would be having a field day covering all these unfolding stories regardless of politics, but not in the age of Trump.  Despite overwhelming evidence to support the Justice Department’s decision to drop the bogus charges against retired Lt. Gen. Flynn, District Court Judge Emmet Sullivan is apparently allowing politics to get in the way of the rule of law. The situation has gotten so serious that Flynn’s attorney, Sidney Powell, filed a writ of mandamus with the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia last week seeking Sullivan’s removal from the case. If Flynn were on the Obama or Clinton team, Sullivan would have driven a final nail into the coffin of this case long ago. In addition to Graham’s probe, Senate Homeland Security Committee Chairman Ron Johnson, R-Wis., also held a vote to issue a subpoena for testimony and documents for Blue Star Strategies. Blue Star is a firm that represented the crooked Ukrainian gas company Burisma when Joe Biden’s son Hunter sat on its board of directors.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The former vice president was the Obama administration’s point person on Ukraine when the younger Biden was installed on the scandal-plagued company’s board. This sweetheart arrangement reeks of corruption and Senate Democrats are desperate to keep it covered up. But the time for talk is over; it’s time for answers about this clear conflict that the Obama administration turned a blind eye to. The ongoing Freedom of Information Act litigation effort of Citizens United – the organization I lead – also bore fruit recently on questions surrounding Burisma and Hunter Biden. We forced the State Department to turn over emails of senior official George Kent that indicate former U.S. Ambassador to Ukraine Marie Yovanovitch was not telling the truth in her sworn testimony about her knowledge of the Biden-Burisma deal during the Democrat’s sham impeachment last year. A criminal referral should be sent to Attorney General William Barr without delay. In addition to all these public investigations moving forward, we must not forget that U.S. Attorney John Durham is actively running a criminal investigation into the origins of the crumbled Russia hoax. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In years past, the mainstream media would be having a field day covering all these unfolding stories regardless of politics, but not in the age of Trump. Sadly, wide swaths of the Fourth Estate have chosen sides, and the silence in many cases is deafening.  However, failing to cover these investigations simply because they don’t fit the preferred narrative will not make them go away. Justice is coming. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE

The founder of Ravi Zacharias International Ministries on his new book, ‘The Logic of God.’ Three short months ago, I received an encouraging text from my friend Ravi Zacharias. Now, as if in a blink of an eye, he has passed away. Along with countless thousands, I grieve. When he wrote, he was reeling from excruciating back pain but wholly unaware of the cancer diagnosis that would soon follow. Despite his suffering and his onerous schedule, he shared that he was praying for my brother, Rush, who had just been diagnosed with cancer. Ravi was a unique Christian apologist and evangelist -- a giant in his field. No one presented the Gospel more cogently and winsomely than he. Though gone from this Earth, his legacy and his indispensable ministry, Ravi Zacharias International Ministries, or RZIM, will continue in the abundantly capable hands of his wife and ministry partner, Margie Zacharias; their three children, Sarah Zacharias Davis, Naomi Zacharias and Nathan Zacharias; and so many other amazing Christian apologists. LAUREN GREEN: REMEMBERING RAVI ZACHARIAS -- CHRISTIAN LEADER'S DEATH MARKS THE END OF AN ERA I first became aware of Ravi before I was a believer and when I was still struggling with doubts. I watched in awe as he explained during a television interview Christianity's basic truths in a way I had never heard. He exuded a confident mind tempered by a humble heart. I remember thinking to myself, "Wow, I'd like to see any Christian skeptic listen to this man and dare claim that intellectuals can't be Christians, or that Christians can't be intellectual." He was so obviously a deep thinker and gifted communicator. This brief exposure to Ravi was one of the pivotal seeds planted on my path to faith in Christ. Ravi's faith journey began when, at age 17, he found himself in a New Delhi hospital recovering from a suicide attempt. Someone read him Jesus' words in the Gospel of John: "Because I live, you will also live." At that moment, he immersed himself in prayer, promising God that if he were to leave the hospital, he would vigorously pursue truth. Upon discovering the truth of the Gospel, he spent the rest of his life fulfilling that pledge. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Ravi had a heart for defending the faith against challenges and taking the Gospel to unbelievers. He firmly believed that we are called upon to love the Lord not only with all of our heart, soul and strength but also all of our mind, as Jesus instructed. Contrary to cynics who dismiss Christianity as anti-intellectual, Ravi knew Christianity's truth claims could withstand the scrutiny of rigorous intellectual inquiry, and he devoted his life to demonstrating it. He knew you couldn't argue someone into the Kingdom of God, but he recognized that certain questions plagued doubters and that answering those questions was often an important step in removing obstacles to faith. He took seriously the Apostle Peter's admonition: "But in your hearts revere Christ as Lord. Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks you to give the reason for the hope that you have. But do this with gentleness and respect" (1 Peter 3:15). Unlike some, Ravi didn't ignore the last part of Peter's teaching. He always approached doubters with grace. It is sheer joy to watch internet videos of his many question-and-answer sessions with university students. In every encounter, Ravi treated skeptics as he would a lifelong friend whose eternal destiny was his driving concern. You could see God working in these exchanges, which were never contentious and were always overflowing with good cheer. One hallmark of Ravi's ministry is his credo that when anyone asks a believer a question about the Christian faith, the believer must focus on the questioner as much as the question. "I have reminded myself over the years to never forget that behind every question is a questioner and behind every questioner is a network of assumptions, hurts, struggles and often prejudices," wrote Ravi. The purpose is never to win a debate or humiliate the questioner. It is to offer the questioner a rationale basis for our faith in Christ. We must try to understand that person's mindset and tailor our response to meet him where we find him. As brilliant as Ravi was, he knew that even the best of finite human minds could not fully comprehend the infinite mind of Christ. He marveled at the story of Jesus explaining the Scriptures to men on the road to Emmaus in one of His resurrection appearances as "their hearts burned within them." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEW APP "Who would not like to interview Jesus Christ?" asked Ravi. "It is not possible to live without asking questions -- and what better source for the answers than the one who claimed to be the Way, the Truth and the Life? If one could only be face to face with Him from whom life comes, whom to know means Truth and to follow means direction, how delightful would be those moments when the most confounding questions of life are raised." Ravi is now face-to-face with His Savior, who he can approach directly with any remaining questions. As I contemplate this glorious scene, it warms my heart that Christ will meet the wonderful Ravi Zacharias saying, "Well done, good and faithful servant." Amen. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID LIMBAUGH

 Judge Emmet Sullivan is now a one-man circus as judge, prosecutor and defendant in the same case. After the D.C. Circuit Court last week ordered Judge Sullivan to provide his reasoning in writing for not granting the Justice Department’s motion to dismiss in the Michael Flynn prosecution, the judge has taken the highly unusual step by hiring a defense attorney to respond for him. Odd, given that judicial officers provide their rationale for rulings in writing routinely as part of their job, providing the legal authority they relied upon. This is done precisely so that the record is preserved for a higher court to review upon appeal. ANDREW McCARTHY: UNMASKING MICHAEL FLYNN – HERE'S WHAT THE FBI WAS REALLY UP TO  But Sullivan didn’t render a final judgment that is now being appealed in the regular course of proceedings. He’s been ordered to “show cause” — to explain his actions — which puts him in the awkward situation of defending himself before the appellate court. So why can’t Sullivan answer now for himself? Three possible reasons come to mind: First, he could be concerned that any response will be used against him in disciplinary action or some adverse consequence. Being in a defensive posture may require defense counsel. Article III judges are lifetime appointments, but still subject to some disciplinary measures under the Code of Conduct for United States Judges, which provides the ethical and judicial conduct federal judges must adhere to. There already appears to be sufficient evidence just in the public record of Sullivan’s actions in the Flynn case that he has violated several of the canons, including that judges should uphold integrity and independence of the judiciary, avoid the appearance of impropriety, and that a judge should perform the duties of the office fairly, impartially and diligently. Sullivan could face private or public censure, or request for his voluntary retirement. One could also argue that he is engaging in unethical political activity by allowing amicus statements against the motion to dismiss when he previously denied amicus 24 times in this same case, citing the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. So why allow it now, against Flynn? I’m sure the appellate court wants to know. Michael Flynn deserves a speedy resolution and an impartial judge, like every person in our justice system. Second, perhaps Sullivan just doesn’t have a solid rationale. Hiring a high-profile defense attorney could help bolster his position and help him come up with a back-end explanation that perhaps he had planned to create after hearing “arguments" from his appointed amicus. Judge John Gleeson was ostensibly going to help with that, so now Sullivan is doubling down by engaging a defense attorney to help him. As I’ve previously written, there is not any genuine legal argument an amicus could provide that would justify a judge ordering the prosecutor to continue their case when they have moved to dismiss (even after a plea has entered), especially on the clear bases the government provided in their motion. The bizarre trajectory of this case began as political and is continuing to be political, rather than just. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER  If Congress were doing their constitutionally vested oversight responsibility of the judicial branch rather than using it for purely political purposes, this is an example of a case meriting impeachment inquiry. Not because the House should side with any politically charged bias, but because Judge Sullivan certainly may not. Federal judges may be removed from office upon impeachment and trial in the Senate. Fifteen prior federal judges have been impeached and of those, eight resulted in convictions and removal. Third, Sullivan could be bribed, is threatened, or is fulfilling a political promise. There is no evidence that I’m aware of to lean toward this possibility over any others, but it’s one explanation for the bizarre behavior, especially from a judge who by all reports had a record that wasn’t particularly noteworthy for being so political and blatantly disregarding the law prior to the Flynn case. It’s also not unheard of, and with everything else we already know about the setup, cover-up, and railroaded prosecution, it’s possible. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Also, with the onerously politically biased statements already on the record from Sullivan and now dragging this on further by appointing an amicus, he appears to have some vested interest in the outcome of this case beyond his constitutional judicial role. What is his end game here? I’m sure the appellate court is interested in knowing that, too. But whatever Judge Sullivan’s reasons, Michael Flynn deserves a speedy resolution and an impartial judge, like every person in our justice system. Further, the American public deserves to know, and the D.C. Circuit correctly ordered Sullivan to respond. The fact he apparently feels he needs to be represented by defense counsel in doing so just adds another eyebrow-raising factor into the story that doesn’t seem to make any sense. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JENNA ELLIS 

 If you are aware of the work I do, likely you know I am committed to bringing awareness to the needs of our United States service members and veterans, and to the selfless individuals and organizations dedicated to getting those needs met. Perhaps not as well known, however, might be why I hold that commitment. Besides being a patriot who fiercely loves my country, with infinite gratitude and respect for those who risk or sacrifice their lives for everything this country stands for, including my freedom, I have two personal reasons: I hail proudly from a strong military family and my firsthand experience visiting our deployed U.S. troops in Kuwait and Iraq in 2009. My dad was a commander in the U.S. Navy with three daughters -- you can imagine the tight ship that was our family household! REP. BRIAN MAST: MEMORIAL DAY AND MY FALLEN FRIENDS SHOW US HOW TO THRIVE AFTER CORONAVIRUS Before I could go out with friends I had to get my room “ready for inspection,” and a good chunk of our family bonding time besides the kids’ activities were definitely all the chores we did. Which I loved. 
      John Compagno, U.S. Navy commander in a photo from 1977
       He was a pathologist at the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology (AFIP), and I was born at Oak Knoll Naval Hospital where he was the Blood Bank Director at the time (with no shortage of vampire jokes). I remember the day I realized it was not “normal” at my school to carry lunch in a specimen bag …His impeccable standards, insatiable intellectual appetite, and never-ending work ethic blessed us all. The larger family picture is that my whole family has served in uniform. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER My relatives fought overseas and far away in all the wars and all the conflicts from Sicily and England and France and Germany and the Pacific Theater and the Philippines to the Sudetenland Resistance. They died all over the European battlefields – from Flanders Fields to the Russian Front. American forces -- and British and Italian. My grandfathers and uncles. All my great uncles and all my great-great uncles. Great indeed. And they -- my family -- are a part of history, just like all who serve, and all who have died on our behalf. My great-great-uncle Joseph Lorenz was a Private 1C in the U.S. Army. He was a member of the American Expeditionary Force, Rainbow Division, and died fighting in World War I in France. 
      Great great uncle Joseph Lorenz, U.S. Army Private 1C, WWI, ca. 1917
       He is buried in Suresnes, where the cemetery keeper rubs his tombstone with sand to ensure the letters remain legible, and places flowers at the gravesites, sending Polaroid photos of this gesture of respect to remaining family annually on Memorial Day. While convalescing after his first injury and amputation, but before he died, Uncle Joe was well enough at one point to send a letter home via a Red Cross nurse – oh, how those nurses played such an instrumental role in those soldiers’ and their families’ wellbeing. His sister, my great-great aunt Luella Lorenz Cochran, served in the U.S. Army Nurse Corps in World War II as a field nurse anesthetist on the front lines. 
      Great great aunt Lorenz Cochran, U.S. Army Nurse Corps, WWII
       One world war later, she visited her brother’s grave in Suresnes while deployed, writing home how she “hated to say goodbye to [her] soldier brother,” whom she had described as “lovable” and so “easy going.” During World War II, there were nine members of her immediate family in the Armed Services: Army, Navy, Air Corps, and Marines. Later in life, after her honorable discharge as a first lieutenant and after she earned her Master’s degree from Fordham University under the G.I. Bill, she responded to a question whether she still “waves the Flag” with: “Yep, but not for me or those who wave it with me, but for you.” When I think of her service, I think of the comfort she must have brought to all those soldiers in the field hospitals, some of whom undoubtedly shared their final earthly moments with her at their bedside. Some of you history buffs may know President Coolidge allocated $5 million in 1929 for the Gold Star Mother Pilgrimage, a temporary U.S. government program that paid the travel expenses to the gravesites for mothers and widows whose sons and husbands had died overseas as members of the American Expeditionary Forces during the war. In 1930, my great-great grandmother Rosa (after whom I am named, along with four other Roses in my family) traveled on the USS America along with 350 other Gold Star mothers to visit their children, buried in foreign soil. 
      Great great grandmother Rosa Lorenz at her son's grave at Suresnes Cemetery in France, part of the Gold Star Mother Pilgrimage in 1930
       The same week my Uncle Joe was first injured, so too was his brother in law injured in the same war: My great grandfather William Bertsch underwent a frightening battle injury in France. 
      Great grandfather William Bertsch, after his injury recovery, assigned to a POW camp because he spoke German, WWI ca.1918
       Born in 1895, he served in the U.S. Army 1912-1946 and saw action in Veracruz, Mexico, through World War I, and on through World War II, finally retiring from the U.S. Army Air Corps after a lifetime of service. His WWI Purple Heart was awarded after a shell exploded under him near Jaulgonne, throwing him up in the air and shooting shell fragments throughout his face – and he lay in a coma for one month. An additional trauma occurred for his family, however. His wife Rose -- Joe and Lou’s sister -- received a telegram at home in Dayton, Ohio, that he was presumed dead, as he was missing after the terrible conflict; he was unconscious and could not identify himself. It was a full month later that Rose learned she was not a widow! Despite his impressive military decorations, we are especially proud of his Commendation Medal, awarded after he saved a drowning woman in the Mad River in Dayton. We have many valorous battle stories in our family. I am equally proud of my great-great cousin Anton Lorenz, who served in the U.S. Navy as a cook. He was part of the Asiatic Fleet’s 1920s Yangtze River Patrol, and we have photographs of his historical ship. 
      Great-great cousin Anton Lorenz, U.S Navy Cook, 1925
       He was present during another epic historical moment as well: On December 7, 1941, he was stationed at Pearl Harbor. He was one of the survivors. He, too, served his entire career for our country and retired as Chief Commissary Steward. Some in our family made history during my lifetime. My second cousin once removed, Chris Baker, and his wife Angie were both U.S. Navy P-3 and EP-3 pilots supporting Operation Enduring Freedom (and raising five children!). 
      Second cousin once removed Chris and Angie Baker, U.S. Navy Lieutenants, 2003
       Since they were in different squadrons they never knew exactly where each was operating at any given time. They compared logbooks at one point and realized they were both flying over Afghanistan on the same night. As he likes to say, “I’m glad she didn’t shoot me down!” My great uncle Ray Wolverson served in the U.S. Army, fighting first in North Africa under General Patton’s command, then on to Sicily and up through mainland Italy, ultimately earning a Bronze Star. And those are just a few of our family stories! Given my history, it should come as no surprise that I grew up wanting to serve in the U.S. Air Force. My goal was to be a fighter pilot and then a test pilot for NASA. I went to Space Camp and Aviation Challenge, the Air Force Academy’s Summer Scientific Seminar, and secured any related internship I could find – and was told again and again I was too small to be a fighter pilot. Refusing to listen, I entered USAF ROTC at the University of Washington and enjoyed it for two years. When it came time to commit, I was told once more I was still too small – so I headed over to the law department. The closest I came, one might argue, was on my 2009 USO tour throughout Iraq and Kuwait, when I was a National Football League (NFL) cheerleader with the Oakland Raiders. Along with four other NFL cheerleaders, we spent a little over two weeks with deployed U.S. troops in that region. After we hitched a ride in a C-130 into Baghdad, I was able to meet one of the pilots on the tarmac: A woman shorter than I was! And there I was in my Raiderette uniform, and she in her pilot flight suit – apparently I was just a bit ahead of my time. We spent most of our time at Forward Operating Bases (FOB), taking Black Hawks from one to the next (which eternally spoiled me – it’s pretty hard getting into a normal car after that). 
      My USO Tour, U.S. Army Sadr City FOB all-nighter, June 2009
       It blew me away how isolated these soldiers were –and how young they were. And I was humbled and impacted by the reasons they shared for their signing up, which included family hardship and desperation. The primary reason for our being there was to boost morale and show them how America cared – to give these brave soldiers a bit of home, a bit of normalcy, in their chaotic world. We spent hours with them at all these different FOBs. One night, at the U.S. Army FOB in Sadr City, the Black Hawk scheduled to pick us up was diverted for a Med-Evac. So we spent most of the night at the concrete building that served as their urban FOB, and we all stayed up together, talking and playing games in the inner courtyard, laughing. It was one of my favorite nights on the trip -- and ever. The Commanding Officer, Lt. Col. Tim Karcher, told us he had three daughters at home, so he wasn’t going to sleep either until he knew we were safely and soundly out of there. It was like family that night. Later that same month, after we left Iraq, those men drove over an Improvised Explosive Device (IED). Lt. Col. Karcher lost his legs, and Sgt. Timothy David lost his life. It was 28-year old Sgt. David’s fourth tour of duty in Iraq and sixth tour of duty total. He was younger than I was.  Returning to my family history for a moment: The reason I know all of these stories is that my mom is a genealogist. But as she says, she’s a family storyteller. And she describes that across all her decades of research and interviews, the war story is the same: These are not numbers. Every life is unique, every loss grieved. Families and loved ones never recover from the loss of their loved ones. It is those left behind that still feel the anguish, while the fallen rest in peace.­ CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Their memories, their legacy, and their honor live on through knowing and sharing their stories. That’s why my mom ensured we know them – and why I’ve shared a few with you today.  In memoriam for all who have made the ultimate sacrifice. They are never forgotten.

 By its very nature, Memorial Day is a time for nostalgia – a sentimental longing for the members of our military who died too young and too soon. What could they have done with their lives had they lived decades longer? Could some have changed history with new inventions, or new discoveries in science and medicine? Undoubtedly some would have become great teachers, elected officials, doctors, business leaders, and filled hundreds of other professions and trades. And no doubt many would have become parents, bringing children into the world who could have accomplished great things as well. REP. WARREN DAVIDSON: MEMORIAL DAY – CORONAVIRUS WILL NOT OVERSHADOW SACRIFICE OF OUR NATION'S HEROES Yet, the far too many deaths of yesterday allow those of us alive today to enjoy the freedoms and privileges of our uniquely American lives. But the “might have beens” of the lost are endless. They raise questions impossible to answer. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As the nation pauses to remember our fallen heroes of war this Memorial Day, we should remember that the political and ideological divisions so pronounced in our country today should never diminish our shared sense of gratitude for the patriots who made the ultimate sacrifice to defend our country. On the battlefield there are no Democrats or Republicans – just Americans, working together under fire to defend our freedom. We should unite as well to honor those who died for our country. There are many memorials around our country honoring those who stepped forward to defend it. Here is the story of one of them. On March 7, 1984 – a cold but clear late winter’s day – Democratic New York City Mayor Ed Koch was scheduled to headline a special luncheon inside New York City’s Grand Hyatt Hotel. Joining Koch on the dais were two of the city’s most successful and high-profile real estate developers. At 64 years of age, Maurice Paprin was the older and more seasoned of the two. Earlier in his career, after dabbling for a short while in academia, he would eventually go on to build low-income housing in both Queens and the Lower East Side of Manhattan. Sitting beside Paprin that day was a brash 38-year-old Manhattan mogul who was seemingly everywhere, buying, building and selling properties faster than the tabloids could keep up with him. His name was Donald J. Trump. Trump and Koch were frequent critics of each other. They fought over a number of issues, including Trump’s attempts to get a tax cut for Trump Tower in Manhattan and to build a project called Television City in the borough. Trump was not a candidate in 1984. He was a guy with money who wanted to make a difference by honoring the men and women who died in service to their country,  After one disagreement Trump called Koch “a moron” and said: “Koch has achieved something quite miraculous. He’s presided over an administration that is both pervasively corrupt and totally incompetent.” But despite their differences, the unlikely triumvirate of Koch, Paprin and Trump united in 1984 to raise awareness and support for a planned Vietnam Veterans Memorial in lower Manhattan. They were hoping for a big crowd, but only 25 people showed up. It didn’t matter. The three men launched into their respective speeches, explaining why the monument was needed and was, in fact, long overdue. “Never have we had a war where we have treated our veterans so shabbily,” Koch began. “We have not done what we should.” Paprin followed Koch, reminding those gathered that though he opposed the Vietnam War – and in fact was a strong anti-war activist in general – the memorial was needed. Trump closed out the gathering with an impassioned plea. ''I was a very strong opponent of the Vietnam War,'' the future president of the United States said, ''but I also recognized that the people who went to fight were great Americans. I always thought they got a bad shake in life and never got their just recognition.'' Both Paprin and Trump pledged to use every connection and relationship they had to get the project completed in time for Memorial Day 1985. In fact, Trump was so enthusiastic about the endeavor that he donated $1 million of his own money to get the job started. The commission wound up raising a total of $2.5 million, including Trump’s gift. When the project was dedicated a year later, Mayor Koch called Trump’s donation “instrumental in the completion of this project.” Cynics often suggest donations are motivated by self-interest, but Trump was not a candidate in 1984. He was a guy with money who wanted to make a difference by honoring the men and women who died in service to their country, In recent years, the memorial has been renovated and refurbished, but the original glass block wall that is 70 long and 16 feet high remains. Granite pylons contain the names of the nearly 1,800 New York City residents who died in Vietnam. Paprin, who remained a staunch anti-war activist to the end, died in 2005. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Trump, of course, now wields the awesome power to send men and women into combat to defend our nation. Members of our military have died while he has been in office, and sadly, more are likely to die before his presidency ends. Our presidents – both Democrat and Republican – all say sending members of the military into harm’s way is the hardest decision they face in the White House. We can only hope and pray that on Memorial Day in 2021 the list of more than 1.1 million dead we honor who fell in all of America’s war combined will not be much longer than it is today. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

 Well, the mystery is solved, at least if you can believe what the usual sieves — those courageously anonymous “former U.S. officials” — have told their notetakers at the Washington Post. As I surmised in last weekend’s column, Michael Flynn was not “unmasked” in connection with his controversial phone call with Russian ambassador Sergey Kislyak. He was never masked in the first place. The Post reported that on Wednesday afternoon. TIM GRAHAM: ANTI-TRUMP MEDIA PLAY DUMB ON OBAMAGATE – SEE, HEAR, SPEAK NO EVIL ABOUT EX-PRESIDENT Meanwhile, the Post is leading the media-Democrat effort to contort the fact that many Republicans were wrong in assuming Flynn had been unmasked prior to his name’s being leaked to the Post in early 2017 into a storyline that those Republicans must have been wrong to claim the leak was illegal. To the contrary, the leak is a felony, regardless of whether an American’s identity should have been concealed. Information collected under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) is classified. The point of classifying information is to keep all of it concealed, not just the names. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Though I was right that Flynn was never masked in connection with the Kislyak call on Dec. 29, 2016, I was off the mark in hypothesizing that the conversation may be been intercepted by an intelligence agency other than the FBI — perhaps the CIA or a foreign intelligence service. Sadly, this owes to my giving the FBI the benefit of the doubt: Had Flynn been picked up on a FISA surveillance of which he was not the target (i.e., a surveillance of Kislyak), I reasoned that the FBI would have masked his identity under statutorily required “minimization instructions.” Indeed, we now know that Flynn’s identity was masked (and then unmasked) dozens of times before and after Dec. 29, precisely because the government knew those minimization rules applied to him. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Alas, in this as in so much else throughout the Trump-Russia farce, the bureau played fast and loose with the rules. When investigators are so inclined, it turns out the privacy vouchsafed by the minimization rules is illusory. FBI officials — if they thought about it at all — figured Flynn need not be masked because they did not see him as an innocent American incidentally caught up in foreign surveillance. They purported to suspect that he was a clandestine agent of Russia. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Residents of Los Angeles are scratching their heads wondering why America, including even New York City, are reopening while LA remains almost completely closed. An unelected public health official in charge of county residents’ freedom announced that she anticipates a further reopening by July Fourth. In the meantime, New York Mayor Bill DeBlasio said his city is reopening in early June. This makes no sense. While LA is referred to as the “epicenter” of the COVID-19 outbreak in California, its numbers are in fact very low. The death rate in New York City from COVID-19 is 1 in 532. The death rate in LA County is almost 10 times less at 1 in 5,000. GINGRICH & DESANTIS: HOW CONGRESS CAN GIVE AMERICANS AN EXTRA $11,000 WITHOUT COSTING TAXPAYERS A PENNY California has fared far better than New York, likely because of the early shutdown of travel from China, as opposed to from Europe, warmer weather and far less density. In New York City people live in high-rises, ride in elevators, walk on crowded streets, ride in crowded subways, and shop and dine in crowded stores and restaurants. People in LA tend to live in homes or small apartment buildings, drive their cars, and, notoriously, not walk anywhere. It has less than one-third the density of New York. Yet, LA’s orders remain perhaps the most draconian in the country. The county recently finally opened its beaches, the last county in the state to do so. But, sitting or lying on a county beach, even by yourself, is prohibited. You are required to wear a mask while on the beach (be careful about awkward tan lines), but the order makes clear you are permitted to remove it before going in the water (probably wise).  Still prohibited is biking on the beach paths, with or without a mask (I guess because bikes cross paths with each other for a split second), and volleyball, even though traditionally played on the beach with just two on a team. The county also finally opened its parks and hiking trails, which had been closed for almost two months, while New York City never closed its parks.   The Department of Health announced their first “reopening” of the county for business last week.  Local news channels excitedly announced:  “Los Angeles reopens, news at 11!”  But this “Phase I” reopening only applied to florists, toy, book, clothing, music, and sporting goods stores, and only for curbside pickup.  So much for a “reopening.” LA’s orders remain perhaps the most draconian in the country. I had a sense our leaders were out of touch, but I did not realize the extent.  We now buy our books on something called the “Internet” through a “website” called “Amazon,” or simply download them to a tablet.  Music stores went out of business long ago due to Amazon and something called “streaming.”  We usually buy our toys and sporting goods on Amazon also.  Now, opening clothing stores would be nice since we like to browse the latest styles and try them on for size and fit before buying.  But the state and county are not permitting us to go into the store.  Rather, we must call ahead to order the item, and then pick it up “curbside.”  That is not helpful.  That is what the Internet is for.  Even to reopen for the limited purpose of curbside pickup, the Department of Public Health issued “Reopening Protocol” which must be met. This includes over 30 itemized requirements, under headings such as, “Workplace Policies and Practices to Protect Employee Health,” “Measures to Ensure Social Distancing,” “Measures for Infection Control,” “Measures that Communicate to the Public,” and “Measures that Ensure Equitable Access to Critical Services.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Mayor Eric Garcetti announced last week that he is extending the “reopening” to pet groomers and car washes.  Pets’ hair is now looking good; humans, not so much.  Churches remain shuttered, while liquor and weed stores have been deemed “essential” and were never closed.  At the same time, he announced that restrictions will remain in place until a “cure” is found.  Experts caution this will likely take over a year if it comes at all.  In the meantime, residents continue to suffer under the reign of Garcetti and the unelected health official. Who is she?  Her name is Dr. Barbara Ferrer.  According to her biography, she is a philanthropic strategist, educational leader and community advocate.  She works “to improve population outcomes through efforts that build health and education equity.”  She served as the chief strategy officer for the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, focusing on things like, “Family Economic Security,” “Racial Equity,” and “Community Engagement.”  She has a Ph.D. in social welfare from Brandeis University, and a bachelor of arts in community studies from the University of California, Santa Cruz.  These are excellent credentials to teach at a liberal university, but not so good to be given the keys to the largest county by GDP ($710 billion) in the United States. She states that the LA County Department of Public Health is “committed to reducing health disparities.” By confining all residents to their homes, she is certainly demonstrating that commitment. The cost, and infringement on Angelenos’ basic liberties, apparently are of far lesser concern. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The U.S. Department of Justice is now riding in to protect Angelenos’ liberties. Assistant U.S. Attorney Eric Dreiband has written to Garcetti and Ferrer, stating their extensive and extended orders appear “arbitrary and unlawful.” Government power, Dreiband noted, “is not limitless, and must be exercised reasonably.” “Simply put,” he said, “there is no pandemic exception to the U.S. Constitution.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM BRESLO

General Jack Keane joins Arthel Neville on 'America's News HQ.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. This year, Memorial Day comes with many caveats and asterisks. Much of the country will welcome the unofficial start of summer with stay-at-home orders still in place, necessitating the cancellation or reduction of community observances and gatherings. While this Memorial Day will differ from Memorial Days of years past, I’m confident that the essence of the day—gratitude—will remain front and center for Americans across the country. Current and former service members will likely tell you Memorial Day takes on a somewhat more personal aspect for them. While the United States has been blessed with security and prosperity, many of us know someone who gave everything to ensure that the United States remains the best place to live in the world. REP. BRIAN MAST: MEMORIAL DAY AND MY FALLEN FRIENDS SHOW US HOW TO THRIVE AFTER CORONAVIRUS Even in the midst of a global pandemic, Americans’ quality of life and access to world-class health care sets us apart. That’s due, in no small part, to the commitment and sacrifice of the men and women who gave their lives believing in the American Dream and the promise of the American Experiment. Every soldier, sailor, airman, and Marine has a unique perspective or experience when the oath we all swear—to support and defend the Constitution—becomes tangible. It’s the point when we realize just how much we believe in the great nation because we’re willing to endure pain and loss to protect it. While I served in the Army, I had the privilege of serving in the Old Guard in Washington, D.C. It is the oldest active-duty infantry unit in the Army and it is responsible for escorting the president and conducting official ceremonies in the nation’s capital. My first assignment with the unit was with the casket platoon. Our job was to convey fallen soldiers to their final resting place. I led these processions and at the end of the ceremony, would present a folded flag to the families of the deceased. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER During this period of my service in the Army, every day was Memorial Day of sorts. During that time of relative peace, most were WWII survivors, but we had all generations. I remember a young widow with a young daughter being particularly emotional at the burial. It was a solemn duty and unforgettable reminder that our country’s precious freedoms depend on men and women who are willing to make the ultimate sacrifice. Over the years I spent in the Army, I met outstanding men and women who dedicated themselves admirably to serving this country. Some of them went to Afghanistan and Iraq, never to return. I think about them often. Although we came from different places and different walks of life, through training and serving together, we became like family—friends for life and, Lord willing, into eternity. So on this Memorial Day weekend, regardless of cancellations or gathering restrictions, I’m remembering the sacrifice so many have made and that so many are still willing to make to keep America free and secure. Our military is made up of strong, talented individuals who unite under a single banner and selflessly serve, voluntarily. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP They all deserve our appreciation always, but especially after giving their lives on Memorial Day. Some of our traditional festivities may not be possible this year, but I encourage you to find another way to remember and give thanks for our nation’s heroes.

The Defense Department is criticizing The New York Times for running an article titled 'Why Does the U.S. Military Celebrate White Supremacy?'; Joey Jones reacts and shares his Memorial Day message. PROGRAMMING ALERT: On Sunday, May 24 at 10 p.m. ET and on Monday, May 25 at 1 a.m. ET, the Fox News Channel will air "Modern Warriors: A Memorial Day Special."  Join host Pete Hegseth and fellow veterans Johnny Joey Jones, Dan Rooney, Nate Boyer, and Medal of Honor recipient David Bellavia as they recount personal stories of service members who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. The director's cut version of the show will be available on Fox Nation following the broadcast. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  On Monday, perhaps more than in most recent years, we shouldn’t just observe Memorial Day – we should celebrate it and the American heroes who made the ultimate sacrifice in service to our country. As a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan who lost more than two dozen of my fellow Marines fighting the wars abroad – and a few fighting an internal war here at home – I feel many emotions thinking of the brave warriors I fought alongside. All these Marines were volunteers. Most of them enlisted during a time of war, each man making the personal decision that the promise of freedom for us all was more important than the prospect of a long life for himself. REP. BRIAN MAST: MEMORIAL DAY AND MY FALLEN FRIENDS SHOW US HOW TO THRIVE AFTER CORONAVIRUS While my own life changed dramatically in 2010 – when an improvised explosive device blew up and caused me to lose both legs above the knee and severely damaged my right forearm and both wrists – I was blessed to survive for a second chance at life. That’s something the heroes we honor this holiday didn’t have. My sacrifice is nothing compared to those who lost their lives, and I think of their bravery and patriotism every day – not just on Memorial Day. Among the many I knew well, a few close friends are tattooed on my arm and in my heart. Their faces are always present in my mind and I feel their impact on my life. I reflect with gratitude on Marine Cpl. Daniel Greer, who died from the bomb that took my legs. A University of Tennessee Volunteers fan, he had a special kind of charisma to win me – a diehard Bulldog fan from Georgia – over, and he that did almost immediately. His selflessness showed through as he stood by my side with a rifle to provide security while I worked to take apart IEDs with my hands. And I remember and honor Marine Gunnery Sgt. Floyd Holley, who was killed dismantling the IEDs I would’ve been responsible for had I not gotten hurt just a few weeks earlier. He was a mentor and friend with a baby girl due just a few months later. I can’t help but think that if I hadn’t lost my legs, I might have been killed by the bomb that tragically took his life. God knows I’d trade places with him in a heartbeat, but that just wasn’t my choice to make. I also think about my childhood best friend, Marine Sgt. Chris McDonald, who survived the worst of the war in Iraq only to struggle with his own demons like depression and opioid addiction. We worked hard to help him through his struggle, but we lost him when he took his own life in 2012. These are just a few of my brothers in arms – among the finest sons our great nation has produced – who likely would have lived decades longer had they not put their devotion to America ahead of themselves. These men aren’t just numbers that disappear in the more than 1.1milllion Americans who’ve perished in our nation’s wars. They, like all the others, were human beings who had dreams and insecurities, who loved and were loved. They were sons and fathers, brothers and husbands. It’s not enough to simply remember them with solemn thoughts. We have to honor them by allowing their sacrifice to effect positive change in country and in our lives. We should vote with our fallen heroes in mind. We should demand our leaders make decisions of war with the greatest of care and demand that they fulfill promises made to those who return from war. But honoring America’s war dead starts with ourselves. We have to connect the sacrifices of each and every American who died for our country with the benefits resulting from their sacrifice. We often hear the phrases on Memorial Day and other days that “freedom isn’t free” and “honor those who died protecting our freedoms.” But rarely do we hear these phrases at a time when our freedoms have been limited or taken away altogether, as has happened during the current coronavirus pandemic. Millions of us have endured some two months of lockdowns and isolation in a war against a microscopic enemy that is confirmed to have taken the lives of nearly 100,000 people in our country. By the end of the Memorial Day weekend, the number of dead from the coronavirus may exceed 100,000. The new invisible enemy taking the lives of men, women and children in our country – including many elderly military veterans – has prevented many of us from exercising freedoms protected by the Constitution’s Bill of Rights. Who among us could have imagined at the beginning of the year that our freedom to gather to worship God, or to exercise our other First and Second Amendment rights, or just to go shopping or eat in a restaurant, would have vanished for a time in an effort to save lives from this virus and give our country time to fight against it. These freedoms were something we took for granted, perhaps more so than the generations of our parents, grandparents and great-grandparents. They were freedoms that our earliest generations of Americans quite literally fought and died to obtain, and later generations have fought and died to secure. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Perhaps for the first time in a long time we have the opportunity on this Memorial Day to truly connect the sacrifice of our heroes with the impact this has had on our own daily lives. As our country begins to reopen, there’s a renewed passion and appreciation for these freedoms awakening in millions of Americans across the country. Today I don’t challenge you to simply remember my fellow Marines Chris, Floyd or Daniel ... or any of the other Americans who have given their lives for our country. I also challenge you to celebrate what their laying down of their lives has provided for you. Honor them by enjoying the freedoms in your life they helped secure by sacrificing their own lives. This is America, and we do stand for goodness towards all, self-determination and collective progress. As we all just witnessed, when necessary we will sacrifice, not just for ourselves, but for those among us who are vulnerable and in need. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So turn up a beverage and turn on a song, enjoy the sweet taste of your favorite food and the sweet warmth of the sun on your face. Look at the people you love, smiles on their faces and know, if only for a day ... that heroes who were strangers to you knew that your life and freedom were worth dying for. Now it’s up to you to make life and freedom worth living for. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JOHNNY ‘JOEY’ JONES

Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie tells ‘America’s News HQ’ the VA will continue to prescribe hydroxycholorquine to veterans. PROGRAMMING ALERT: On Sunday, May 24 at 10 p.m. ET and on Monday, May 25 at 1 a.m. ET, the Fox News Channel will air "Modern Warriors: A Memorial Day Special."  Join host Pete Hegseth and fellow veterans Johnny Joey Jones, Dan Rooney, Nate Boyer, and Medal of Honor recipient David Bellavia as they recount personal stories of service members who made the ultimate sacrifice for our freedom. The director's cut version of the show will be available on Fox Nation following the broadcast. On Memorial Day on Monday, it is our duty as Americans to honor and mourn the military service members who died while serving this great country. Of course, Memorial Day is solemn. But it is also an opportunity to reflect on, appreciate, and be thankful for the freedom that we enjoy every day in the United States of America. We honor those who made the ultimate sacrifice by prospering, enjoying our liberty, and preserving the American way of life. With Memorial Day coming up, I decided to have on this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World” a true patriot, Pete Hegseth. REP. BRIAN MAST: MEMORIAL DAY AND MY FALLEN FRIENDS SHOW US HOW TO THRIVE AFTER CORONAVIRUS Now a co-host of “Fox & Friends Weekend” and a frequent contributor on Fox News and Fox Business, Pete served in the U.S. Army for 12 years. He did tours in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, earning two Bronze Stars and a Combat Infantryman's Badge. We discuss Pete’s time in the military, what he learned, and how his remarkable experiences in uniform shaped his worldview. Pete also has a new book out titled, “American Crusade: Our Fight to Stay Free.” In the book, Pete explores whether the election of President Trump is a sign of a “national rebirth” or the “final act” of a country that has surrendered to leftists and political correctness. Can real America still win? And how? We examine these questions and how we need to be able to fight – both on and off the battlefield – for what we have here in America. And we also need to teach the next generation, so we don’t lose what makes America exceptional. Part of this exceptionalism must include taking care of our veterans, and few people have done more than Pete toward that end. He is the former executive director of Concerned Veterans for America, which turns veterans’ hopes, concerns, and experiences into practical advocacy for policies that preserve freedom and prosperity. Tragically, the Department of Veterans Affairs has too often failed in recent years to provide our veterans with the care they deserve. And that care should include access to private networks if the government fails them.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Pete has also been traveling around the country, talking to Americans from all walks of life and revealing their common wisdom. In these experiences we can see the true strength of America: Its people, who are ready to do their part to save our republic. Indeed, they understand that our freedoms – laid out in principle in the Declaration of Independence and in practice in the Constitution – are sacred, unique in history, and worth fighting for. On Memorial Day, we must remember why Americans fight for our country and are willing to die for it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I hope you will listen to this week’s episode as we prepare for Memorial Day. Our fight to stay free is of paramount importance. Remembering why Americans made the ultimate sacrifice – to protect our freedom and preserve the American way of life – is critical to winning that fight. I also hope you will listen to my next episode, scheduled to air Wednesday, on a series of harrowing earthquakes in “The Ring of Fire” that we really cannot ignore. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

William La Jeunesse reports from LAX on how all face coverings are not created equal. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  In a recent interview that I highlighted on my podcast, Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti made perhaps the most incredible statement by any socialist-sympathizing politician during the current coronavirus crisis. He actually vaporized the entire Bill of Rights in less than an entire sentence. Discussing the severe restrictions he imposed on residents of his city in response to the coronavirus pandemic, Garcetti said: “let’s continue to earn this freedom.” Earn our freedom? HUNKER DOWN: SOME STATES SAY NO FULL-SCALE REOPENING UNTIL CORONAVIRUS VACCINE, TREATMENT IS READY Without a close competition for second place, this is the most outrageous and un-American statement I can remember coming from a major political figure. What’s perhaps most troubling is that Garcetti probably didn’t even realize it. Our Declaration of Independence makes it crystal clear that we as Americans don’t have to “earn” anything from the likes of Garcetti or Los Angeles County Health Director Barbara Ferrer.  The Declaration states: “We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are life- liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” But of course, you know this, even if the mayor doesn’t. Newsflash, Mr. Mayor: God gave us our freedom and unless you recently got a serious promotion that we’re unaware of, I don’t think you have the requisite authority. The mayor clearly has confused the idea of English philosopher John Locke’s natural law with Los Angeles’ emergency ordinances and decrees. Let me help set you straight, Mayor Garcetti. While the idea of natural law predates Locke (who was born in 1632) in various forms, it was Locke who made it front and center with regard to defining a just form of government. Locke made it clear that natural law applies to all people and can be discovered through reason. No revelation required, as is the case with Divine Law. Our right to life, liberty and property were “natural” under Locke’s construct. He believed that virtually any limitation imposed by government upon our use and expression of those rights is a violation of the law, not an expression of it. Garcetti seems to think that his ideas and those of his advisers supersede natural law and our Constitution, and if we’re good boys and girls, we might just be rewarded and have our fragile freedoms restored. Garcetti is treating residents of his city like children who have had their favorite video game taken away and have to keep their rooms clean for five straight days to get it back. The mayor is telling us that rights are not rights, but are simply state-granted privileges. The city of Los Angeles and Los Angeles County have some of the most severe coronavirus restrictions of any communities in the country. Just as recently as Tuesday, the near house-arrest measures were said to be likely extended another three months as directed by Dr. Ferrer. Doctor of what, by the way?  I share a growing skepticism held by many Americans of doctors being given under-examined, unchecked influence either in government or in the media, simply because they have the title of doctor before their name. I respect their experience, and value their counsel, but it doesn’t mean we shouldn’t question their conclusions. Ferrer, for example, is a doctor of social welfare, not medicine. She’s supposed to be overseeing Los Angeles’ growing homeless crisis. Instead, she’s best known for starting the National Day of Racial Healing while at the Kellogg Foundation, as well as Truth, Racial Healing, and Transformation Centers on university campuses. And now Ferrer is known for advising Garcetti to extend Los Angeles’ draconian lockdown measures all the way to Independence Day. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Presumably with Ferrer’s support, Garcetti’s statement is the sort of a slip that reveals his contempt for our Declaration of Independence and Constitution. Going back to President Woodrow Wilson and ever since, Democrats have ranged from expressing frustration to voicing open hostility for the limits that the Constitution places on government and their collectivist dreams of ordering society the way they believe is best. Freedom means being able to walk in whatever direction you wish to walk when enjoying a public park.  Liberals hate that! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Thank you, Mayor Garcetti and Dr. Ferrer, for showing us your hand. I have a message to Garcetti and Ferrer and to all the other mayors and doctors out here who are enjoying their moment of directing freedom-limiting public policy by edict, telling us what we have to do to “earn it back.” Our freedom is not yours to give back to us. It is ours to take back from you. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CHARLIE KIRK

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Congress has already passed relief packages totaling $3.6 trillion in response to the coronavirus pandemic. It may soon spend trillions more bailing out the U.S. Postal Service in addition to the airlines and city and state governments that have for so long embraced fiscal irresponsibility. Strange priorities in a crisis. My home state of Ohio has seen 70 percent of its coronavirus deaths in long-term care facilities – nursing and assisted living facilities. This trend is similar around the country. Is it too much to ask that emergency funding instead goes to where it's clearly needed most? For some time now, data has clearly shown that the elderly are the most at risk to die from coronavirus. An overwhelming number of fatalities have been over the age of 70, not to mention those who also had one or more comorbidities. JANICE DEAN: CORONAVIRUS COST MY IN-LAWS THEIR LIVES. GOV. CUOMO, OUR VULNERABLE LOVED ONES DESERVED BETTER If this is the case, based on CDC data and that of health systems across the world, why has our response been to fight the smoke instead of the fire? Long-term care facilities have been in the news for months throughout the global pandemic. We saw how in Spain the elderly were left for dead in their beds, only to be found by soldiers sent to disinfect nursing homes. While the young and healthy clearly are at an overwhelmingly lower risk of death, we have ignored the vulnerable in hot spots such as nursing homes and long-term care facilities. Our own actions to protect the most vulnerable have been mixed in the prolonged lockdown. We have flattened the curve so as to not overwhelm our healthcare system. Now we must reassess. While the young and healthy clearly are at an overwhelmingly lower risk of death, we have ignored the vulnerable in hot spots such as nursing homes and long-term care facilities. In some instances, our response has exacerbated the spread of coronavirus. Queue Governor Andrew Cuomo, D-N.Y. He and his brother can spend all the time they want joking about the size of Q-tips on primetime cable TV. Nothing can change the fact that the governor of New York not only ignored long-term care facilities but put their residents at greater risk. Why is Cuomo still given praise for his Empire State response when we’ve known for weeks now about his tragic decision to send infected patients back into nursing homes? Governor Cuomo’s failures are emblematic of our misplaced response to the pandemic. Not only do we need to come up with a better approach to safeguarding our vulnerable in long-term care facilities, most critically we need to provide them with the resources they so desperately need. Congress has done what it usually does – misallocated resources. Many of the resources should have been directed to long-term care facilities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The folks who work in these facilities face an incredibly difficult job dealing with the most vulnerable. Many of these patients need intimate assistance for life's most basic needs, such as eating and proper hygiene. The brave employees at these facilities often go about their work without proper safety equipment. Could not the $75 million for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting and $25 million for the Kennedy Center have gone to buy supplies for long-term care facilities instead? Tragically enough, as Congress was passing the CARES Act, New York nursing homes were being forced to accept infected patients. To a large degree, Congress’ focus so far has been on the wrong problems. Of course, with so many businesses shuttering their doors through no fault of their own and millions of Americans losing their jobs, a response was required. At this point, though, shouldn’t we be spending less time debating who gets the next round of bailouts, and instead prioritize saving Americans who are most at risk? A massive pork-barrel bill spending bill is out of the question. We need a single bill targeted at the heart of the problem. Nursing home residents are the vulnerable populations of people that those who wish to safely and responsibly reopen the economy are talking about. Everyone agrees we must do our utmost to protect them. To say otherwise is an attempt to distract from the problem at hand. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP While we spend trillions of dollars to keep healthy young bartenders at home watching T.V., our long-term care facilities are forced to use swim goggles and rain ponchos in lieu of proper PPE. Why have we so neglected our elderly populations in nursing homes when, clearly, they are the most at risk? As we learn to live with COVID-19, we first must protect these who are overwhelmingly most at risk from the disease. Enough with the political bailouts. It's time to focus on where COVID-19 is truly a matter of life or death. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ADAM BRANDON

 When I called President Trump “the first black president” at a White House round table discussion on February 27, during Black History Month, I was verbally attacked, harassed and mocked by the liberal mainstream media. Fortunately, I had prayed about it before I made the comment, so I knew exactly what I was doing. My comment stirred the pot enough to force many of my black brothers and sisters to acknowledge the unprecedented policy progress made by the Trump administration while enlightening them at the same time about the oppressive history of the Democratic Party. SHAY HAWKINS: BIDEN, A 77-YEAR-OLD WHITE LIBERAL, DOESN'T HAVE THE RIGHT TO TELL ME I 'AIN'T BLACK' I made my comment as the round table meeting was ending and it was intended to be a blunt and direct message to Black America.
Fast forward to May 22. Friday, appearing on the syndicated radio show "The Breakfast Club," Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden told co-host Lenard McKelvey, known professionally as “Charlamagne tha God,” that if he can't decide whether to vote for Biden or Trump, then he "ain't black." Just like I did at the White House in February, former Vice President Biden waited until the end of his interview to send his well thought out, blunt and direct message to Black America. Later in the day, after a lot of uproar over his remarks, Biden said, in a phone call with U.S. Black Chambers “I shouldn’t have been so cavalier.” Heading into Super Tuesday before his campaign was saved by the South Carolina primary, Biden told “Face the Nation" moderator Margaret Brennan, “I feel good about the kind of support I've had with African-Americans around the country.” He made this comment despite his record of being one of the most racially oppressive lawmakers in modern American history. Biden knows that his large base of blacks in America are brainwashed by the mainstream media to the point that they will actually defend his actions even when they are causing the most underserved black in America to suffer.
It’s tragic that Joe Biden continues to have confidence in carrying the black vote despite an ongoing history of supporting school segregation. This dates all the way back to the '70s when he opposed bussing for poor black kids and continued with the Obama-Biden administration's opposition of school choice, which widened the education gap for underserved black youth across our country.
Biden has also been able to deflect attention from black voters away from the fact that he actually wrote the 1994 mass incarceration bill that disproportionately locked up millions of black men, helping to spike black fatherlessness rates across America. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER What’s even more ironic is the fact that he was able to defend and protect this racist mass incarceration bill throughout his tenure as the Vice President of the Obama administration. With his latest comments on race, Biden hopes that black Americans will continue to love their oppressors so much that the mainstream media will help them forget that it was Donald J. Trump who actually dismantled Biden’s racist crime bill with the passing of the First Step Act. We have recently seen former President Barack Obama make his resurgence ahead of the 2020 election. Rest assured that Biden is counting on America’s First African-American President, Barack Obama, to help mask his cloudy record on race.
To the surprise of many, President Obama made very little policy progress for black Americans. Under Obama, black America saw a continuation of Biden’s mass incarceration policies, a surge in black on black crime and a consistent refusal to support school choice. During his successful push to pass gay marriage, we saw an increase in HIV rates for gay black men who the CDC reports now get infected at a staggering rate of 50 percent. Obama was also known as the food stamp president and maintained a growing number of family separating welfare programs which actually incentivized fatherless homes. President Obama also proudly appointed liberal Supreme Court judges who have helped make black abortions almost more prevalent than black births in some American cities. Obama himself supported late-term abortions dating back as far as his days as an Illinois State Senator. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP
I know these facts sound grim, but we must all remember Black America’s unfortunate reality that the African chiefs, in fact, sold the slaves to the early White American settlers. Now we are witnessing Biden’s Democratic elite and the Congressional Black Caucus supporters continue to sacrifice the welfare of their loyal black voter base in order to maintain power through their historically oppressive policies. Time will tell if the American black voting population agrees with Biden’s well thought out, blunt and direct message to Black America: If you don’t vote for him, “you ain’t black.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JACK BREWER


Presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden takes criticism over derisive 'you ain't black' comment; Peter Doocy reports. The Democratic Party has taken the black vote for granted for decades, but on Friday former Vice President Joe Biden took this view to a new and very hurtful level. During a morning interview on a popular urban radio show, “The Breakfast Club,” Biden said: “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, you ain’t black.” In civil discourse, we must be able to disagree and to make our case without reducing American voters to the color of their skin. Biden’s statement is the epitome of arrogance and condescension. He challenged millions of black Americans – the descendants of slaves – to choose between our right to think for ourselves and our identities. Biden backpedaled on his offensive comment later in the day after he got a well-deserved torrent of criticism. “I shouldn’t have been such a wise guy …. No one should have to vote for any party based on their race or religion or background,” he said in a desperate effort at damage control. TRUMP CAMPAIGN LAUNCHES 'YOU AIN'T BLACK' WEBSITE AMID BIDEN CONTROVERSY Biden didn’t walk back his comments because he thinks his remarks were wrong. It’s clear he thinks he knows what’s best for black people: dependence on and lockstep obedience to the liberal agenda and power preservation. It is this mentality that led Biden to say earlier that the “poor kids are just as smart as the whites.” It is this mentality that led him to “compliment” a man who would become our first black president by calling him “clean.”                        Biden has shown clearly that he thinks he knows better than black people what is best for us, and that if we don’t support him we are denying our own racial identity and heritage. SENATE CANDIDATE RIPS BIDEN'S 'CONDESCENDING' QUESTIONING OF TRUMP SUPPORTERS' 'BLACKNESS' Worse, I don’t see Biden’s Democratic colleagues holding him accountable for his comments. Instead, I hear silence. Biden has shown clearly that he thinks he knows better than black people what is best for us, and that if we don’t support him we are denying our own racial identity and heritage. Do leaders of the Democratic Party really think they “own” the black vote? Will anyone from the Democratic Party call out Joe Biden? Will my opponent in Michigan’s U.S. Senate race, Sen. Gary Peters? After 30 years of rank-and-file partisanship as a career politician, I suspect he won’t. Here is what I can say for sure: when one party is guaranteed the black vote, it guarantees that neither party will work for it. I think that this is wrong. Too many people have died and struggled in the pursuit of black Americans’ rights to think and to choose for ourselves to permit any political party or person to take ownership of that right.  Biden’s views have been exposed and stand in stark contrast to President Trump, who visited Michigan Thursday and actually listened to the needs of black people from black people. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER On his visit the president asked black community leaders what we need to deal with COVID-19, a disease that has unmasked long-standing inequities in black communities. I was there, joining in advocating for jobs and training to build up our black communities and the entire state of Michigan. The president also heard requests for medical supplies, small-business help, and even the suggestion of a new college.  President Trump is willing to listen – but most importantly, he is prepared to act quickly for our community. Has Joe Biden sufficiently proven to us that he’s suddenly willing to do more after nearly a half-century of missed opportunities in Washington as both a senator and as vice president? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Americans of every race, creed, gender and ethnicity should evaluate the candidates and choose for themselves. For my part, I can promise Michigan voters who will see my name on the ballot for U.S. Senate in November that they can expect me to work hard to earn each one of their votes as a candidate and to think independently on their behalf as a senator. I pray that the people of Michigan will eschew bigotry and judge me based upon the fruits of my actions – not on hearsay, political affiliation and certainly not based on the color of my skin. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JOHN JAMES

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Washington is gearing up to pass another multi-trillion-dollar COVID-19 relief package. However necessary these short-term stimulus measures may be to prevent a depression; the fact is that the bill for all this spending will come due eventually. But what if there was a way for Congress to provide American families an $11,000 per year increase in their incomes without costing taxpayers a penny? According to the Milliman Medical Index, the average family of four spends more than $28,000 per year on health care. This includes the cost of their insurance premiums (even if their employer pays a portion of the premium, that benefit is still the employees’ compensation). REP. MIKE GALLAGHER: IS CONGRESS NONESSENTIAL? IT'S ACTING THAT WAY — BUT HERE'S HOW WE CAN FIX THAT Meanwhile, analysis by Larry Van Horn at Vanderbilt University has shown that cash-paying patients pay prices that are an average of 40 percent lower than health plans for the same health care services. A 40 percent reduction in the prices paid for health care services would represent a savings of $11,000 per year, per family. The main reason cash-paying patients pay 40 percent less is because they take the time to shop around for the best value for their health dollar. In search of savings, they will seek out providers that offer the best combination of quality, convenience, and price. Most patients do not do this, however, because prices are invisible to them. Further, their options are limited to their insurance companies’ networks. This is the major reason why health care prices – and therefore, health care premiums – keep going up much faster than the rate of inflation year after year. There is little reason for most health care providers to offer competitive prices because patients do not consider price when making decisions. The Trump administration has taken a bold step to fix the broken health care marketplace with a new rule requiring hospitals to make all their prices public, including negotiated prices with health plans and self-pay, cash prices.  This public posting must be in a machine-readable format to allow for third party apps to aggregate the data to allow for easy shopping for patients. Unfortunately, the president’s price transparency rules may never go into effect. This is because the hospital association is suing the administration over the new rule, arguing the government does not have the authority under current law to require negotiated prices to be disclosed. Congress should formally codify the price transparency rule into law in the next COVID relief package to eliminate the threat posed by the lawsuit. Getting these prices out in the open will be transformative. Americans with high deductible health plans are currently making decisions about how to spend their own money in the dark. Giving them access to prices in advance of care will supply much needed financial security and give them more confidence to seek out care, since they will know in advance what it will cost. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER It will also be important for health plan sponsors. Most large employers – and an increasing number of mid- and small-sized businesses – self-insure. The way this usually works is that businesses pay insurance companies to process claims and for access to the insurance companies’ provider networks. However, the money for the claims comes from the businesses’ bank accounts. While employers save a little money on administrative overhead under this model, most don’t really take advantage of the potential of self-insuring. This is because even though they are renting the insurance companies’ networks, the negotiated prices are still invisible to them in advance of care. So, there is little steering of their employers to the best value providers. With full price transparency, however, employers will be able to easily see which health care providers in their areas are the best value. They can also set up shared savings opportunities and other incentives to encourage their employees to use preferred providers. Once more patients start choosing better values, the increased competition will force the highest priced providers to lower their prices to be competitive. This will dramatically reduce patients’ out-of-pocket expenses for health care, as well as reduce the underlying costs behind high premiums. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The result will be more disposable income for families, as well as more resources for employers to invest in hiring more people, raising salaries, and making other investments. Now more than ever, America needs the economic boost and financial security that price transparency in health care will provide. Instead of a short-term stimulus paid by more debt, this would be the sort of long-term, multi-trillion-dollar boost that could not only help pull us out of the current crisis but also propel the American economy for decades to come. Joe DeSantis is chief strategy officer at Gingrich 360. To read, hear, and watch more commentary from Newt and Joe, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

Is the presumptive Democratic nominee taking black voters for granted? Reaction and analysis from Fox News contributors Richard Fowler, Lawrence Jones and Gianno Caldwell. I’ve known Joe Biden for decades, and I know it’s absolutely absurd for anyone to call him a racist in reaction to his poor choice of words in an interview Friday with an African-American radio host. Granted, the former vice president may not always be the most eloquent politician, but he has shown by the eloquence of his actions over his long career that he is a strong champion who fights for equality and opportunity for all Americans and a true friend of African-Americans. The old saying “actions speak louder than words” should be used to compare Biden’s outstanding record as a U.S. senator and vice president against President Trump’s dismal record of dividing Americans against each other. RICHARD FOWLER: BIDEN ISN’T A RACIST, DESPITE HIS ‘YOU AIN’T BLACK’ COMMENT AND CLAIMS BY REPUBLICANS Biden was right to apologize Friday for telling the black radio talk show host who calls himself Charlamagne tha God earlier in the day: “I tell you, if you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black.” Biden was trying to be funny with the remark, but he failed – and said so soon afterward himself. Unlike Trump, who will never admit making a mistake, Biden has the courage to admit when he says the wrong thing. “I was much too cavalier. I know that the comments have come off like I was taking the African-American vote for granted. But nothing could be further from the truth,” Biden said in a virtual address to the U.S. Black Chambers, a business group, hours after his radio interview. “I shouldn’t have been such a wise guy.” “No one should have to vote for any party, based on their race or religion or background," Biden said. I say: Thanks, Mr. Vice President. Apology accepted. And thanks, Mr. Vice President, for your unflagging support for decades for the important issues that matter to African-Americans. Biden has won the overwhelming support of black elected leaders and millions of African- Americans who have judged him based on his record, leadership and character. The highest-ranking black member of the U.S. House of Representatives – Majority Whip James Clyburn, D-S.C. – gave Biden an all-important endorsement for the South Carolina presidential primary this year that helped Biden become the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee. “I know Joe Biden. I know his character, his heart, and his record,” Clyburn said. “Joe Biden has stood for the hard-working people of South Carolina. We know Joe. But more importantly, he knows us." And I can tell you from firsthand experience that Biden understands that he cannot take anyone for granted – especially now, when our lives and livelihoods are at stake in the November election. And I can tell you that Biden’s record is anything but cavalier when it comes to fighting for civil rights, voting rights, and kitchen table issues like health care, education and so many other issues that matter for African-Americans across this country. Millions of other black Americans know this as well. Biden has won the overwhelming support of black elected leaders and millions of African- Americans who have judged him based on his record, leadership and character. We know that when Joe Biden got into politics it was because of his commitment to join the fight for civil rights and voting rights. This commitment motivated him to open doors for others and ensure everyone has a path to pursue the American Dream. We know Joe Biden was an unfailingly loyal vice president who showed up every day to contribute to the success of our nation’s first African-American president – President Barack Obama. Quite a contrast to Trump, who attacks and insults Obama almost daily even now and falsely claimed that Obama was born in Africa and not the United States. We know Joe Biden has plans that will help lift up African-Americans, particularly now, when our economy and health care are in a free fall. A Biden administration will mean a fairer Justice Department that will stand up for voting rights and will urge states to automatically restore voting rights for individuals convicted of felonies who have served their sentences. A Biden administration will enforce civil rights laws vigorously. Biden has said he will appoint the first African-American woman to the U.S. Supreme Court, as part of a slate of judges he will appoint to help further America’s march towards equality and justice for all. Biden knows that the African-American community has been disproportionately impacted by COVID-19 and often lacks needed health care coverage. Unlike President Trump – who has rolled back the Affordable Care Act and undermined Medicaid – Biden will not stop fighting until every American has affordable health care by expanding ObamaCare, improving public health, and ensuring quality nursing homes. Biden has always understood that millions of African-Americans are part of the workforce that stands on the front lines to defend and serve our country, but remain at the back of the line when it comes to pay, benefits and equity in the workplace. Biden knows that a caring government does not send people to work on the front lines of a crisis without appropriate gear.  He will fight for hazard pay, overtime pay and a living wage for workers in our hospitals, supermarkets, law enforcement agencies, public transit and elsewhere. While Trump tweets his angry outbursts, insults and false claims almost around the clock in a nonstop temper tantrum, Biden is focused on public service and solving the problems confronting our nation based on facts rather than emotion. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Behind the tweets and comments of any political leader, what is in your heart is reflected in the actions you take. In this election it’s not even a close call as to who will support communities of color, the poor and our struggling middle class. Thesc communities need this backing now more than any other time in our lifetime. Will Biden be pitch-perfect on all matters of race, culture and politics? In the wake of his support for policies like the bipartisan 1994 crime bill, black voters will be adamant that Biden do more to help those seeking to restore their voting rights and to treat African-Americans justly. The Biden Plan for Black America explains in detail how the former vice president’s policies would benefit African-Americans and is worth reading. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP For now, I am going to accept Joe Biden’s apology and continue to hold him and the party that I once led accountable to be more than black like me. I want the Democratic Party and a President Biden to be advocates for justice and equality for all Americans. But one thing is for sure: they will do a far better job than President Trump and the Republicans if Biden winds up in the White House. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DONNA BRAZILE 

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Months from now, if and when we're finally able to assess the coronavirus pandemic rationally and honestly, it'll be clear that it was mostly a disaster for the old and the sick. Thirty-year-olds in Brooklyn have made the most noise, flooding the Internet with their neuroses. But it is old people who have really suffered. About a third of all deaths in this country so far have occurred in long-term care facilities. We told you a lot about the tragedy unfolding in New York. TUCKER CARLSON: THERE'S NO EVIDENCE CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS SAVED LIVES. MASS QUARANTINES MAY HAVE KILLED PEOPLE As of Friday night, almost 6,000 nursing home residents have died there after Governor Andrew Cuomo forced facilities to admit infected patients. But it's not only happening in New York. In New Jersey, Connecticut and Massachusetts for example, deaths in nursing homes account for more than half of the statewide totals. So, if you're old and in a facility, this virus has been genuinely dangerous. But the real story is even worse than that, thanks to bad policies. Many nursing homes have banned all visits from relatives even those who have tested negative for the coronavirus. That means for millions of aging Americans, lockdowns equal suffering alone, marooned in isolation, away from children and grandchildren, often in the final days of their lives. It's hard to imagine anything sadder than that, but in fact, there is something sadder. No visitors means no real supervision. No one who cares about the elderly can check-in and see how they're doing. This is an invitation to the most awful kinds of abuse. Take a look at this video. It's from the Westwood Nursing Center in Detroit. We warn you -- and we don't say this lightly -- it is highly upsetting. We think you should see it because it's real. VIDEO: A nursing center worker repeatedly punches an elderly man in a bed. It goes on like that for 90 seconds, but we'll spare you. The monster throwing those punches is 20 years old. The helpless resident he is smashing in the face is 75. Westwood Nursing Center says it had no idea the assault even happened. The video went up on social media and apparently, it was posted by the proud attacker himself. People saw it and called the police and they arrested him. He's in jail tonight. Police will not tell us his name. It's not clear why. He deserves to be famous. What is clear is that the Westwood Nursing Center was a scary place even before this assault took place. A 2019 Medicare inspection of the facility found that a resident had vomited on a curtain. Two weeks later, Westwood staff still hadn't replaced or even cleaned it. Imagine all of what the inspectors didn't find. We will help you imagine. This video is from a nursing home outside Peoria, Illinois. It was recorded in 2015. An elderly man beaten to the ground by a staff member. UNIDENTIFIED MALE REPORTER: This video is from a care facility in Creve Coeur. Watch the 84-year-old man. He comes into the room with his walker and tries to get something out of a drawer. Police say the caregiver, Ernestine Cobbins struggles with him and then throws him to the floor. Fortunately, he was not seriously injured. Officers reviewed the tape, Cobbins was charged with third-degree elderly abuse. Imagine doing that to a man with a walker. The woman who did it, who committed that crime is free today. In fact, she is still in the health care business. You can look up her LinkedIn page online. We did it about 10 minutes ago and she looks perfectly content in her picture. And then there are these three nursing home employees in North Carolina. They're accused of staging fistfights between dementia patients for their own amusement. UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE REPORTER: They uncovered two separate incidents. In one, 32-year-old Marilyn McKey is accused of physically assaulting a 73-year-old resident, pushing her into a room while 20-year-old Tonacia Tyson and 26-year-old Taneshia Jordan filmed the encounter and did not help. In another incident, all three are accused of encouraging a fight between two residents ages 70 and 73. Not only did the workers not stop the fight, they filmed it. The staff members reportedly captured on the video saying punch her in the face. That happened just this fall. From what we can tell, none of these women is currently in jail tonight. Apparently the crime wasn't serious enough. It's not like they tried to open a gym in New Jersey or dared to walk on dry sand in Los Angeles. And by the way, these are not isolated incidents, far from it. Consider the following headlines. They're all from last year. "Florida woman accused of raping man with dementia at nursing home." "Nursing assistant who raped patients sentenced to 12 years in prison." "Everett man has history of raping patients, prosecutors say." "Hillcrest nursing home faces $50 million lawsuit over rape of elderly woman." And then in Seattle, a nursing assistant was arrested after being caught on camera repeatedly sexually assaulting a patient. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Once again, the nursing home didn't even know what happened. They didn't detect the crime because no one was watching. The victim's family was suspicious so they put a camera in the room. In Texas, a nurse called Billy Chemirmir was arrested for murdering patients. Police say he killed more than 20 elderly people before anyone noticed. Again, all of that happened in a single year, last year, 2019. So, what's happening in nursing homes right now? Well, we don't really know. And that's the point. Family and loved ones aren't allowed in to see. Chances are, they would be heartbroken if they knew. How did this tragedy happen? It wasn't by accident. Our politicians did it. They did it to the most vulnerable people in our society, the ones who have earned the greatest respect. The Americans who actually did build this country. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Now, our helpless elderly are locked in stinking cells, cut off from the only ones who love them. Some of them as we said, are raped and beaten. Thousands and thousands have died alone. They don't deserve this and the rest of us don't deserve the leaders whose neglect and bad judgment made it possible. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue on "Tucker Carlson Tonight," on May 22, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Reaction from Carrie Severino, former clerk to Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas. U.S. District Judge John McConnell is an unabashed liberal, big donor to the Democratic Party, and a longtime friend of Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse, a far-left Democrat from the judge’s home state of Rhode Island. McConnell owes his job to Whitehouse, who asked President Barack Obama to nominate him to become a federal judge. A recent CQ Roll Call investigation showed that McConnell gave about $500,000 to Democratic political committees before becoming a judge – more than any other judge nominated by Presidents Obama or Trump. Why should you care? Because McConnell sits on the Committee on Codes of Conduct of the U.S. Judicial Conference. The committee sets ethical guidelines for federal judges and recently proposed barring these judges from membership in the Federalist Society, a network of conservative and libertarian law students and lawyers. CONSERVATIVES CONCERNED BY GUIDANCE TELLING JUDGES TO AVOID FEDERALIST SOCIETY: 'SMACKS OF CENSORSHIP' While the Committee on Codes of Conduct wants to keep federal judges from joining the Federalist Society, which does not lobby or take positions on issues, it has no problem with their membership in the liberal American Bar Association, which does. The draft advisory opinion by the committee has been portrayed by its cheerleaders – Sen. Whitehouse being the most prominent – as a high-minded effort to remove politics from the courts. This sounds like a noble idea on its face. But the reality is that everything about the behind-the-scenes effort to implement the draft to bar judges from membership in the Federalist Society has been partisan and unseemly. To say that Whitehouse has been obsessed with attacking the Federalist Society would be an understatement. For years he has been on a one-man mission to delegitimize the Federalist Society and its co-chairman, Leonard Leo. So it was no surprise when last week Whitehouse led six other Democratic senators in penning a letter enthusiastically endorsing the draft advisory opinion seeking to keep judges from belonging to the Federalist Society.  Whitehouse’s buddy, Judge McConnell, is a key player in the effort to ban federal judges from being members of the society. McConnell’s nomination – which was pushed by Whitehouse – was controversial because McConnell had contributed to $12,600 to Whitehouse’s campaign between 1993 and 2010 as part of his $500,000 in Democratic political contributions. Politico reported that McConnell had even hosted a fundraiser for Whitehouse at his Providence home in 2006, prompting questions about whether Whitehouse should recuse himself from voting on McConnell’s nomination. (He didn’t.) Notwithstanding the controversy or corruption concerns, Whitehouse persevered, and eventually his friend and donor McConnell was confirmed to his current seat on the federal bench. Like Whitehouse, Judge McConnell is a committed liberal.  He previously served as treasurer of the Rhode Island Democratic party and as director for the Rhode Island branch of Planned Parenthood. Many judges have political backgrounds before joining the federal bench. But the problem with Judge McConnell is that he brought his left-wing politics with him to the courthouse. McConnell is an active Twitter user, despite the warnings regarding the ethical implications of social media use laid out in the published ethical guidance governing federal judges. (Recall that McConnell sits on the committee that publishes such guidance.) That guidance reminds judges who tweet that they should not engage “in prohibited political activity” and that they should avoid “association with certain social issues that may be litigated.” But McConnell seems to disregard such ethical obligations when it comes to his tweets, and makes no attempt to hide his liberal political leanings. For example:  This year McConnell retweeted former Democratic Rep. Patrick Kennedy lobbying elected leaders to prioritize mental health care for criminals. In 2019, McConnell retweeted an Axios story linking mass shootings with mental illness that can be “stigmatizing and harmful.” In the same year he advocated on Twitter that “There is no full justice in our country until everyone is in safe, decent, affordable housing.” In 2018 McConnell tweeted a link to an op-ed attacking Republicans and President Trump. And in 2017 the judge retweeted @thenewjimcrow advocating for an end to the use of bail because it harms the poor. These sorts of tweets are virtually unheard of from federal judges, because they give rise to an appearance of impropriety – something federal judges normally seek strenuously to avoid. There have been many questions about the internal process that produced the draft advisory opinion designed to bar federal judges from membership in the Federalist Society. A recent opposition letter from 210 federal judges expressed concern over reports that “no member of the Committee was permitted to dissent, despite some members’ strong disagreement with the exposure draft” and that “at least one member of the Committee was barred from voting on the draft.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Another oddity was the fact that the judges’ letter was leaked to The New York Times just days before the confirmation hearing for Justin Walker to the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. At that hearing, Senate Judiciary Committee member Whitehouse attempted to use the letter against Walker, who was one of the 210 signatories. We’ll likely never know how that letter made its way to The New York Times on the eve of Walker’s hearing. But here’s what we do know: Sen. Whitehouse has been leading the charge to take down the Federalist Society and was instrumental in ensuring that his friend, donor, and left-wing ally Jack McConnell secured a federal judgeship. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And we know that Judge McConnell is a member of the committee that is seeking to ban judges from being members of the Federalist Society. Remember that the next time Whitehouse rails against the Federalist Society. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CARRIE SEVERINO

 A few months ago the kids and I were eating sandwiches when my phone blared with a warning: a tornado was on the ground ten miles away. We didn’t know how bad or how big; we only knew it was heading our way. I herded the kids in the coat closet, we threw on our bike helmets — and we waited. (Spoiler alert: we lived.) You know what’s weird, though? When our kids talk about this day (In Which We Barely Missed A Giant Tornado), it is a good memory to them. I know that sounds weird, but here is the thing: I am fascinated by tornadoes. Send me all the storm chaser videos from now until the end of time. And the kids pick up on my excitement. SUZANNE HADLEY GOSSELIN: CORONAVIRUS QUARANTINE WEARINESS — 2 WAYS TO HELP YOU MAKE IT THROUGH A tornado warning isn’t an ominous, scary experience for my crew. Nope! It’s a weather adventure. As it turns out, we parents are the lens through which our children interpret reality. And that means…you guessed it…COVID-19 is our moment — a giant, pandemic-sized opportunity to teach our kids lessons they’ll never forget. Maturity is not ignoring your own suffering but looking past it for a minute for the good of someone else — someone else who needs you. I’ll be honest, though. Right this minute, I don’t feel like teaching someone a lifelong character lesson. The tornado was over in minutes; COVID-19 is dragging on mercilessly. To put it bluntly, I’m over it. I’m done with the dishes from here until eternity and over twenty-nine people talking me to at the same exact time. (There are not really twenty-nine people in my house. There are three small ones with super loud voices.) I may be 38-years-old, but I feel like someone should be parenting me. I’m looking around for someone to rescue me, to relieve my discomfort, to assure me that all will be OK. Which is probably why, come to think of it, my own mom recently shared a story from her own childhood that she thought I needed to hear. Her “tornado memory,” so to speak. I stirred the pot of oatmeal and read her text: “When I was a little girl, maybe five years old, our barn caught on fire in the middle of the night and burned to the ground. What is the most long-lasting memory of that night is what my father did for us. After the fire trucks left and neighbors went home, he drew us all together in Mom and Dad’s bed and told us we were all safe and we could sleep with them. It made everything ok. We were little children and we trusted our daddy to take care of us. Keeping us close to him that night and reassuring us that we were safe with him made all the difference. None of us were traumatized by that night or left insecure or anxious because he sheltered us.” It’s a touching story but think about it for a second from my grandfather’s perspective. Horses, as it turns out, were his livelihood. This was not a grand Kentucky plantation with recreational thoroughbreds. No, those horses were bread and butter for their family. Butter, if you were lucky, that is! My grandparents scraped for every penny. That barn, those horses — an incredible, devastating loss. And yet my grandfather, my Poppy — tearing himself away from the smoldering ashes, kneeling down by the old worn bed, tucking in sheets under toes, wiping hair out of faces. It’s going to be OK. That is maturity. Maturity is not ignoring your own suffering but looking past it for a minute for the good of someone else — someone else who needs you. Our children are looking to us. The barns are burning around them, the horses running wild at night. It’s dark and it’s troubling and it’s unexpected. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Do not doubt it — our children absolutely will remember this time. It will a defining moment in their stories. Their Great Depression, their 9/11. When our children look back on COVID-19, what will they remember? Will they remember us nervously rationing rolls of Scott two-ply in the closet, or how we always brought groceries to the widowed neighbor? Will they remember us stressing out about virtual school, or how we did our best and then played yard games until dinner? Will they remember stressful conversations about finances, or how we prayed together that God would provide? Will they think they were victims, deprived, or cheated? That is up to us, you guys. We set the tone. They hear us, they see us, their little emotions pick up ours like radar off a satellite. Maybe you feel like you could use a redo on the Pandemic of 2020 in your home. It is not too late to start, today, to be an example to our children of how to face adversity well. Here are three specific steps. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It’s difficult to be hopeful and intentional as a parent when you feel discouraged yourself. But we can dig deep. We can acknowledge our sadness, and then we can be the grownups. Someone else needs us.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. It hit me when my kids’ school principal called. She had heard the news from another parent that our children had lost both of their grandparents, Mickey and Dee Newman, to the virus. “How are you all doing? I’m so sorry for your loss….” As her phone call came in, my husband Sean was at his parent’s apartment picking out a dress to bury his mom in. JANICE DEAN SLAMS CUOMO NURSING HOME POLICY AFTER LOSING IN-LAWS TO COVID-19: 'NOT JUST NUMBERS ON A CURVE' He texted Katie, a health care worker who had gotten close to his mom over the last few years. Katie suggested a flower-patterned dress hanging on the bedroom door. She remembered it being there the last time she was at the house. Sean found it in the exact place she mentioned. He FaceTimed his sister Donna to help with the jewelry his mom would wear. He then looked for some items of his dad’s to be placed in the casket: an old running hat the used to wear and a World Trade Center survival medal that Sean had received after 9/11.  He had given it to his dad and now he placed the pin on the running cap. Sean then found the paperwork for his dad’s honorable discharge from the Air Force in hopes we could have a USAF honors ceremony for the burial flag at a small funeral in the future. He found a stack of love letters that his parents wrote to one another over the years. I’m not sure where my husband found the strength to do all of this. I was at home and with the kids and had just gotten 3 deliveries from the neighborhood florist. It was the only place in our small town that remained open during the quarantine. The Newmans are not just statistics on a chart. Michael and Dolores were wonderful people who lived important lives. The delivery man was wearing a mask but I could tell by his eyes he was sorry for us. He realized he had just been at the house less than two weeks ago to deliver flowers after Mickey passed away. He was silent when I told him Sean’s mom Dee was gone too. Michael and Dolores “Dee” Newman were married for 59 years and raised 3 children: Donna, Michael and Sean. They lived in the same four-story walk-up apartment in Brooklyn for over 50 years. Mickey was in the Air Force before he met Dee and always talked about how proud he was of his service. He was stationed at Hickam Airforce base in Hawaii and worked in intelligence. After his service in the Air Force was over, he joined the New York City Fire Department and was with them for 23 years as part of Engine Company 323 in Brooklyn. Dee was a homemaker and had a part-time job working with a dentist in the neighborhood for close to 20 years. She was also an amazing cook. She made one heck of an Italian meatball -- it was legendary.  Mickey was no slouch either when it came to cooking – he was head chef whenever he had a tour at the firehouse.  Mickey was also a runner. He ran over 800 races and documented each one in notebooks with the weather conditions and his time. We celebrated together the day he reached that 800th race milestone. The Newmans had a locker at Silver Point Beach Club in Long Island for decades. Every summer they took the family there several times a week.  That’s where Sean learned to surf and became a lifeguard. Mickey loved the beach. He paddle boarded and played tennis while Dee knitted. And oh, how they adored their grandchildren. Donna would bring her daughter Danielle by all the time to stay with them. Dee never missed a Grandparent Day at school, a Christmas show, dance recital or swim meet. Danielle went everywhere Mickey went growing up. They were best buddies. With their health declining over the last few years, Mickey and Dee were both having a tough time getting down the stairs. We tried to persuade them to move to another place with easier access but they lived in a rent-controlled building and it was hard to convince them to give that up. They did let us send home health aides into the house but the visits to the ER were becoming regular. Sean started looking into assisted living. We got Mickey into a nursing home/rehab center for a few months. He had dementia and needed constant supervision. Sean found an assisted living facility not far away for Dee. It was one of the only places that agreed to let Mickey move into the same facility -- once he was back on his feet. Sean and his sister were taking turns visiting them. And Danielle would bring them the foods they loved. We prayed that one day Mickey would be well enough to join his wife. This was the first time in their lives they had been apart like this. And then came COVID-19. Mickey’s nursing home went into quarantine. Sean could no longer visit. A week before his dad died, someone called to let us know Mickey was being switched to another floor so they could let more patients in.  From what I know now, I believe the new patients were ones recovering from COVID -- thanks to a statewide mandate from Governor Andrew Cuomo. On March 28th, Sean got a call and was told that his dad wasn’t well. He had a fever and his lungs were filling up. A few hours later he was dead. We assumed he had the coronavirus. We only got confirmation when we saw it on his death certificate. My husband has seen a lot of grief in his life. But, for him to break the news to his mom that her husband was dead was the hardest thing he’s ever done. Her heart was broken. They were married for almost 60 years. How could she go on without him? We assured her that as soon as the pandemic was over, we’d all be together. I encouraged her to hold on until then. Sean was able to visit his mom once after that. He brought her some orchids but had to leave them at the front desk. He saw her, standing six feet away with a mask on, and told her he loved her. She started to cry before he left. He would never see her again. Dee had told Donna over the last few weeks that some workers there were sick. She also said residents weren’t obeying the rules – they were going outside for newspapers and coffees without masks on. They were coming back without washing their hands.  As family members, we were told we couldn’t come to see Dee for risk of bringing in the virus. But the people who lived there were still coming and going.  Why was this happening? The next 48 hours after Sean visited, Dee’s health went downhill. She was moved to the hospital. We didn’t hear much from the doctors. Sean talked to his mom the morning before nurses moved her to a different floor in the hospital. She needed more oxygen and her throat was hurting. She had a cough and a fever. The last thing she asked Sean to do was get some Easter gifts for the kids. She asked him, could he put her name on them? The doctor called us the next day to tell us she was in and out of consciousness. They gave her more oxygen. A day later, she died. Even though she got the virus in the nursing home, her death was not counted that way -- because she died in a hospital. I’ve heard some experts say this is to make the number of nursing home deaths appear smaller. Like so many other things having to do with this tragedy, it doesn’t make sense. Our grief and confusion have turned to anger. We are learning more about how elder care homes were turned into death traps.  The order to return recovering COVID patients into these facilities made them, and others, sitting ducks.  Our most vulnerable loved ones could not protect themselves. But Governor Cuomo is too busy trying to protect himself and rewrite history. He goes on CNN all the time to yuck it up with his brother while many of us wonder if any talk show host will ask questions about the nursing home tragedy. At this point, all we are hearing is the governor trying to shift the blame, saying -- “not my responsibility” “above my pay grade.” Or “we did everything we could to the best of our ability.” If that’s your best, Mr. Cuomo, you should be ashamed. The Newmans are not just statistics on a chart. Michael and Dolores were wonderful people who lived important lives. They were good citizens, had families and loved being New Yorkers. But the governor of New York failed them. I can only pray that lessons are learned after this. Maybe their deaths won’t be in vain. What should happen next? A federal investigation? Hearings? What I do know is this: Our loved ones deserved better. The one thing that brings us comfort is knowing Mickey and Dee are together again. They were never two people together. They were one unit. You often hear stories about how when one person dies, their spouse follows. They just can’t live apart. I tell my kids that Grandpa Mickey asked God to call Grandma Dee -- because he missed her. She heard God’s message. She missed him too. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When she was ready, he held out his hand and she went to him.  And now they’re in each other’s arms, watching over us. I only wish Governor Cuomo had watched over them, too. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM JANICE DEAN

After putting off their wedding for nearly two years, Richard and Michelle Troxell, from Hereford Township, Pa., were determined not to let the coronavirus stop them from tying the knot. The couple turned to Zoom for help and said they had more family 'attend' than they would have if they weren't all quarantined. When my wife and I stood at the altar and promised to love each other “for better or worse,” we had no idea how much of the “worse” times we would go through. In each of our 12 years of marriage, there’s been some major, stressful event that has rattled my wife and me. It’s gotten so predictable that we’ve come to expect it. “Wonder what it will be in 2020,” I said on New Year’s Day. JOSHUA ROGERS: HOW TO STAY HAPPILY MARRIED IN TIME OF CORONAVIRUS QUARANTINE My wife chuckled. We didn’t even make it through March before a crisis hit (and I’m not talking about COVID-19 either). Our circumstances aren’t exceptional though. Bad things happen to couples all of the time because life happens. And in those times, my instinct is to fix, fix, fix (or at least try to). Thank God my wife has a different approach. Raquel’s instinct is to keep trying to turn everything over to God during stressful circumstances, and I’ve gradually begun to follow her lead. Discovering God in the messiness of marriage is the only thing that allows me to address problems with God’s strength – not mine.   CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That’s not to say that the only thing we do is pray together in our “worse” times. We lean on friends and seek wise counsel, and it has helped. But we need more than good friends and advice in the face of challenges. You and your spouse do too. Making it through stressful events requires a commitment to intimacy, and I’m not just talking about emotional and physical intimacy. We’ve got to branch out into spiritual intimacy too. For Raquel and me, that requires prayer as well as intentional reflection and encouraging each other with Scripture. (If you want examples of how we do that, there are several in my book, "Confessions of a Happily Married Man: Finding God in the Messiness of Marriage.") CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As we’ve fought alongside each other (and sometimes with each other), we keep coming back to Jesus and discovering, again and again, that God is still good. He not only makes our struggles “better”; as we follow Him together, but He also takes our “worse” times and uses them to make our relationship stronger. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JOSHUA ROGERS

 President Trump – who has been accused by at least 25 women of sexual misconduct and was recorded in 2005 boasting about how women allow him to “grab them by” their genitals – is now being portrayed by his team as a better choice for female voters than former Vice President Joe Biden. Give me a break. Trump has vehemently denied all the sexual misconduct allegations against him, which range from harassment to sexual assault, going back to the 1970s. He has dismissed his 2005 comments that were recorded unbeknownst to him by an “Access Hollywood” TV crew as “locker room banter.” LIBERAL MAGAZINE COLUMNIST WOULD VOTE FOR BIDEN EVEN 'IF HE BOILED BABIES AND ATE THEM' Now Biden faces a sexual assault allegation made in March by Tara Reade, who worked in his Senate office in 1993. Biden has denied that one allegation as vehemently as Trump has denied the far more numerous allegations against him. I have no independent knowledge of what allegedly happened between Trump and the 25 women and what allegedly happened between Biden and Reade. I do know that we are all presumed innocent until proven guilty, and both Trump and Biden are entitled to that same presumption. An unproven accusation alone is not proof of guilt against anyone. I do know that Trump has a very public history of being disrespectful to women and insulting them, as well as taking positions denying women the right to choose abortion. And I know that Biden has a history of getting a bit too close for comfort for some women in public settings by being overly affectionate. But his hugs and kisses on the cheek – even when inappropriate and indefensible – hardly qualify as sexual assault. Importantly, on issues of women’s rights and on advocating for policies and laws beneficial to women there is no comparison between Biden and Trump – Biden’s record is far, far better. So it’s really a bit much for the twice-divorced and thrice-married Trump to paint himself as a paragon of virtue and champion of womankind, standing on high moral ground and looking down at Biden. Trump’s attempt to reinvent himself this way will likely blow up in his face – it’s simply too absurd to be believable. In fact, it’s laughable. Biden says he thinks he’ll survive the allegations by Reade and win the presidency, just as Trump survived the earlier allegations against him by multiple women to be elected and expects to be reelected. I think Biden is right about surviving. And all I know about the election is that it will be close. No one knows for certain if American voters will reelect Trump or elect Biden in November. It all depends on who independent and swing-state voters choose. And, of course, it depends on how many people vote at a time when millions of Americans are staying away from crowds (like you find at polling places) to avoid being infected by the coronavirus. Democrats want to maximize voter turnout by supporting voting by mail. Trump, who himself voted by mail, wants to limit mail-in voting because he believes high voter turnout helps Democrats. Trump’s claims about mail-in voting leading to voter fraud are baseless. Why am I so confident Biden won’t be hurt by Tara Reade’s allegation regarding something she claims happened 27 years ago?  Well first, Reade’s accusation hasn’t hurt Biden’s poll numbers. Even some voters who believe Reade’s claim still aren’t ready to walk away from Biden. A poll by Monmouth University shows Biden leading Trump 50 to 41 percent. In this poll when voters were asked if they believed the allegation made by Reade, 37 percent said it’s “probably true,” 32 percent said it’s “probably not true” and 31 percent had no opinion. And if you look at other polls, the landscape is pretty much the same. Voters are not put off by this allegation enough to say goodbye to the presumptive Democratic nominee. Second, many voters who believe marital fidelity and morality are major factors in who to support could very well conclude that Biden has a better record here than Trump if they believe allegations against both men are true. Third, demographics favor Biden. Biden’s electoral base in the Democratic Party is made up of older, white working-class voters and African-Americans. Biden portrays himself as the friend of working men and women. And he has a strong record of supporting legislation benefitting African-Americans going back decades. In fact, overwhelming support from these voters clinched the Democratic presidential nomination for him. Biden supporters are unlikely to desert him for Trump based on Reade’s unproven claims. Fourth, the more progressive Democrats who supported Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. and other Democrats in primary races against Biden embrace policy positions that are far closer to Biden’s than Trump’s. It’s hard to see many of these Democrats throwing their support to Trump, who opposes just about every policy they favor. Fifth, Joe Biden promised to select a woman as his running mate, giving us our first female vice president if the Biden ticket is elected. And a woman vice president would become a serious presidential contender once Biden left office, at long last shattering the glass ceiling that Hillary Clinton almost broke through. Biden has also vowed to appoint the first African-American woman to the Supreme Court. Many women – and men who care about equal rights – will be more impressed by opening up these high positions to women than they will be about Reade’s unproven claims.  Sixth, a woman running mate will help Biden win in districts where Hillary Clinton lost in 2016. Looking back on the 2016 midterm elections, women played a significant role in the outcome of numerous contests. They were key to flipping battleground districts in California, Virginia and Iowa. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Many women are put off by Trump’s behavior as well as his positions on issues, so this segment of the voting population is Biden’s to lose. In 2016, 49 percent of college-educated white women supported the Democratic candidates, but in 2018 59 percent did. That’s a 10 percent jump in just two years. The battle for the White House will be long and hard. Republicans have already started trying to smear Biden with a number of unproven charges in order to tarnish him during this election year. The negative Trump ad campaigning has already started, while Biden is campaigning from his basement due to restrictions on large gatherings to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When voters have to make up their minds on who to support in November, I think the allegations by many women of sexual misconduct by Trump will cancel allegations by one woman against Biden. Other issues – most prominently Trump’s horrible mishandling of the U.S. response to the coronavirus pandemic and the state of our economy in November – will play a bigger role in determining who leads our nation for the next four years. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LESLIE MARSHALL

Fox News contributor Richard Fowler addresses Biden's comments about black voters. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Black Americans face many problems today – disproportionate deaths and job losses caused by the coronavirus pandemic, a higher poverty rate, continuing discrimination, substandard housing and schools in many cities, and much more. But alleged racism by former Vice President Joe Biden isn’t one of our problems. Unfortunately, a rhetorical slip by Biden in an interview with a black radio talk show host Friday is being blown out of all proportion by supporters of President Trump in an effort to score political points. The Trump supporters think black people aren’t smart enough to realize Biden’s poor choice of words was a largely insignificant incident. Well, guess what. Black folks aren’t stupid. JOE BIDEN EXPRESSES REGRET OVER 'YOU AIN'T BLACK' COMMENTS: ‘I SHOULDN'T HAVE BEEN SO CAVALIER' We know that former Vice President Biden is no stranger to the black community. We know he has spent years working on issues that black voters care a great deal about, including voting rights, investments in public education, and ending the injustices facing communities of color. We know that Biden is not a racist. Not only has he stood in the gap for civil and human rights, but he spent eight years working side-by-side with the first African-American president – Barack Obama – to build a legacy of decency, respect, and economic stability. Vice President Biden is the presumptive Democratic nominee because black voters know him, his record, and his commitment to making our country more fair and just. Beyond that, the Biden campaign is clearly extremely committed to engaging with and answering questions from black-owned and operated media, like “The Breakfast Club” program where he was interviewed Friday. During Biden’s 18-minute interview with Charlemagne tha God, Biden responded to every question. He discussed some of his plans for black America including restoring voting rights, raising wages, and increasing access to high-quality health care. He also discussed his intent to consider a woman of color as his running mate. Biden’s mistake, which he later apologized for, was to tell Charlemagne – in a poor attempt at humor: “I tell you if you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black.”  The Trump team’s desperate attempt to magnify Biden’s verbal misstep into a major campaign issue is laughable. Biden shouldn’t have made the comment, and he apologized for it later in the day, saying: “I shouldn’t have been such a wise guy …. No one should have to vote for any party, based on their race or religion or background.” Biden is right about that. But to say his poor attempt at humor erases his sterling record on issues important to black people over many decades is ridiculous. Does the former vice president have some blemishes on his record when dealing with the black community? Of course. Does Trump have blemishes – make that gaping holes – on his record on black issues as well? Yes, and his shortcoming dwarf Biden’s. Should Biden apologize for writing the 1994 crime bill and ushering in a new wave of harsh policing and mass incarceration? Absolutely, and in the future he must do better. Should Trump apologize for his far worse actions? You bet, but don’t expect to ever hear an apology cross the president’s lips. He wants us to believe he has never made a mistake and never done anything wrong. Black voters are extraordinarily pragmatic and are not going to be swayed to change their votes by an inappropriate comment from the former vice president on a radio show. These voters, just like most Americans, are examining candidates and their records to see who can best lead this nation, especially during the COVID-19 crisis and recovery. Both the Biden and Trump campaigns could benefit from engaging black America more comprehensively, and this current pandemic crisis demands it. Presidential elections are about contrast – one candidate against another. As of today, the difference couldn't be more apparent. Yes, Biden has made several missteps in his choice of words and his past policy positions, but the past three months of Trump’s incompetent mishandling of the coronavirus crisis will carry more weight in voters' minds than Biden’s fumbled choice of words.  During this crisis, we have witnessed the dangerous combination of ineffective leadership by Trump and stifling social inequities and how this impacts American lives. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As a member of the African-American community, I am the creator and gatekeeper of my own blackness. Biden’s social faux pas does not define my sense of blackness or my sense of self. It is much more important for us to focus on all of the death and societal panic that have resulted from the Trump administration and its lack of coronavirus tests, its failure to provide adequate amounts of personal protective equipment for health care workers, and its mindless rush to reopen America without consideration for scientific guidance or flattening the curve of COVID-19 rates. A recent Fox News Poll found that American voters favor Joe Biden over President Trump by nearly nine points. In that same poll, Trump's approval rating eroded eight points due to his dismal performance during this COVID-19 pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP These poll numbers make it abundantly clear that voters are far more concerned about a global pandemic than they are about a 30-second viral clip of Biden’s poorly stated comment. The Trump team’s desperate attempt to magnify Biden’s verbal misstep into a major campaign issue is laughable. Black voters are too smart to fall for this distraction. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY RICHARD FOWLER 

President Trump addresses updated guidance on reopening houses of worship. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In calling on governors Friday to allow houses of worship to reopen starting this weekend, President Trump publicly recognized a fact that has been true since the founding of our nation: in America, houses of worship are essential. “In America we need more prayer, not less,” President Trump said in a brief appearance before reporters at the White House. "Some governors have deemed the liquor stores and abortion clinics as essential," the president said. "But have left out churches and other houses of worship. It's not right. So I'm correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential." TRUMP ANNOUNCES THAT HOUSES OF WORSHIP ARE ‘ESSENTIAL,’ CALLS ON GOVERNORS TO OPEN THEM UP I thank the president for working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to add houses of worship to its list of essential institutions and for calling on state governors to allow them to open their doors. I hope governors do as the president asked and understand that people of faith do not meet at churches and other religious centers to simply fill a building. We do so because it’s an integral part of what our faith teaches about how we should live. For example, as a Christian, I believe Jesus’ words: “For where two or three gather in my name, there am I with them.” (Matthew 18:20 NIV) Thanks to technology, places of worship have been able to find creative ways to meet virtually during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many gather via Zoom or stream their services on YouTube and social media platforms. Some congregations – including the church I pastor in northern California – are even organizing drive-in services so people can worship in their cars. But the time has come to begin reopening our places of worship. As a resident of California, I commend Gov. Gavin Newsom and our state and local elected officials for their efforts to keep Californians safe. But as these leaders begin rolling out plans to reopen our states, I want to respectfully encourage and assure them that restrictions on places of worship can be lifted safely. Our churches and other religious centers can resume operations following a plan like the one our organization, the National Hispanic Christian Leadership Conference, created that calls for four phases of reopening for houses of worship: Phase 1 – First two weeks Return to holding services, with churches and other places of worship limited to 25 percent of their seating capacity. This will allow for the maintenance of social distancing, increased sanitizing methods and controlled screening to prevent transmission. Houses of worship should also take advantage of drive-in services if their locations allow for it. People can remain in their vehicles with their windows closed and listen to the message via the radio. Online services can and should continue. Phase 2 – Third and fourth weeks Return to filling houses of worship at 50 percent capacity, with continued social distancing, face coverings and sanitization. Drive-in and online services can and should continue. Phase 3 – Fifth and sixth weeks During the fifth and sixth weeks of reopening – or whenever the amount of new COVID-19 cases in the state has plateaued or decreased and reliable therapeutic and treatment options for the coronavirus exist – religious facilities can operate at 75 percent capacity. Services can continue to be broadcast via television or radio or streamed online for those who are homebound or at greater risk of catching the virus. This phase may last several weeks or months. Phase 4 – Date undetermined Once the CDC no longer deems COVID-19 a public health threat and there are effective treatments and/or a vaccine available, religious facilities will resume normal operations at 100 percent capacity. Of course, each church and other religious center will need to formulate its own plan depending on where they are located, in order to meet their community’s specific needs and concerns. But adopting a cautious, phased and flexible plan should help places of worship resume services in a responsible and ethical manner. I am so grateful I live in a nation where people are allowed to freely exercise their faith or lack thereof. Our Bill of Rights was created expressly to protect that freedom, among many others. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Gathering with others for a religious or spiritual service during a time of crisis brings comfort to many and strengthens not only individuals, but whole communities as those individuals go out to encourage and minister to others. Religious services are going to look very different in the coming days, weeks, months and even years. As I have preached to my congregation before: we are not returning to normal, we are experiencing a complete reset to the most basic way of living out our faith. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The faith communities in this country have the unique opportunity to set the tone for reopening our nation. There should be no contradiction between honoring the authorities who have been placed over us and holding fast to the tenets of our faith by taking a safe and measured approach to meeting together. Our faith should make us better citizens who are a blessing to our communities and the nation where we live. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REV. SAMUEL RODRIGUEZ

National Review Online's Deroy Murdock joins Tucker Carlson on 'Tucker Carlson Tonight.' Former Vice President Joe Biden spent much of Friday wielding a crowbar and prying his feet out of his mouth. He then apologized for the hideous racial comments that he uttered in the morning. As well he should have. The presumptive Democratic presidential nominee told radio host Charlamagne Tha God on “The Breakfast Club”: “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black.” This remark was truly racist. Biden unveiled a new power unseen anywhere in the Constitution: the ability to decide who is and is not black, and on the basis of political beliefs, no less. In essence: You ain’t black, unless I say you black. JOE BIDEN EXPRESSES REGRET OVER 'YOU AIN'T BLACK' COMMENTS: ‘I SHOULDN'T HAVE BEEN SO CAVALIER' Biden revealed his view, widely popular among Democrats, that black Americans must support him and the Democratic agenda. If not, they’re not just wrong, mistaken, or lacking in information. No, no. Much worse. They’re not even black. How insulting, degrading and dehumanizing. Biden never would tell Caucasian voters: “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t white.” Instead, he would urge them to read his policy papers, listen to his speeches, or watch his shaky missives from his Delaware bunker. Of course, this was not the first time that Biden showed how little he thought of black people and our ability to make our own decisions. Back in August 2012, Biden told black voters in Virginia that if Republican Mitt Romney were elected president, “They’re going to put y’all back in chains.” Note Biden’s pandering use of “ain’t” and “y’all” when addressing blacks, including a southern accent in the latter instance. He either learned this from or taught this to Hillary Clinton, who exhibits the same annoying, patronizing behavior, along with such bizarre lunges for black votes as telling (again) “The Breakfast Club” in 2016 that she carries a bottle of hot sauce in her purse. The man who beat Hillary for the 2008 Democrat presidential nomination, Obama, chose Biden as his running mate despite Uncle Joe's January 2007 description of the then-U.S. senator from Illinois: "I mean, you got the first mainstream African-American who is articulate and bright and clean and a nice-looking guy. I mean, that's a storybook, man." Biden’s dismissiveness toward blacks looked much more hostile in the 1990s, when he pushed anti-crime legislation that resulted in the mass incarceration of blacks, mainly males, a group that Hillary called “super-predators.” Thankfully, President Trump’s criminal justice reform is reversing many of the injustices created by Biden’s support of this 1994 bill and attitudes like Hillary’s. Trump’s support for historically black colleges and universities, his pro-school choice policies, and his tax cuts and deregulation that brought black unemployment to record lows in the pre-COVID-19 boom are, Biden should know, among the many reasons that Americans can be both black and pro-Trump. Biden’s 1977 remarks are just plain ugly. Here is how he expressed his worries about school busing: “Unless we do something about this, my children are going to grow up in a jungle, the jungle being a racial jungle with tensions having built so high that it is going to explode at some point.” “I thought to myself, I have been black for 54 years,” Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C., said Friday. “1.3 million black Americans already voted for Trump in 2016 .... This morning, Joe Biden told every single one of us we ‘ain’t black.’ I’d say I’m surprised, but it’s sadly par for the course for Democrats to take the black community for granted and brow beat those that don’t agree.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Michigan Republican candidate for U.S. Senate John James seconded Scott’s emotion. “You challenging me and millions of other people out there on their blackness, descendants of slaves, from you is some seriously condescending, out of touch bullcrap,”James said in a campaign video. James hopes to join Scott as the second black Republican in the U.S. Senate. “Vice President Joe Biden’s latest quote is both pathetic & hurtful,” James added. “Challenging millions on their blackness is condescending. The GOP was started to oppose slavery. I have the right to think and vote for myself along with all other Americans, including black Americans.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Facing this backlash, Joe Biden phoned the U.S. Black Chambers Friday afternoon and said: “I shouldn’t have been such a wise guy.” Don’t expect to see “Joe Biden” and “wise” in the same sentence again any time soon. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DEROY MURDOCK

 I am four generations removed from slavery and have been black all my life, but according to comments made Friday by former Vice President Joe Biden I’m not black because I support President Trump. Since when did a 77-year-old white liberal gain the right to strip me of my cultural identity, biological features, and history of chattel slavery and tell me I “ain’t black” because I stand for conservative values as a first-generation Republican? The presumptive Democratic presidential nominee told the host of “The Breakfast Club” radio program Friday: “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, then you ain’t black.” JOE BIDEN EXPRESSES REGRET OVER 'YOU AIN'T BLACK' COMMENTS: ‘I SHOULDN'T HAVE BEEN SO CAVALIER' Admittedly, Biden gave a half-hearted walk-back of his comments later in the day that was almost as dismissive and insulting as his initial comments. Biden told a black business group that he “shouldn’t have been such a wise guy.” He acted as if what he said was correct in substance, but just poorly worded. In fact, Biden used broken English, in a stereotypically black voice, to make the point that Democrats in general – and he in particular – own the black vote. Trying to make amends for his earlier comments, Biden said later in the day: "No one should have to vote for any party based on their race or religion or background." But Biden’s real views were clear from his first comments: the Democratic Party takes the black vote for granted and is willing to defend his racist comments because the party’s only focus is on winning elections at any cost. Since when did a 77-year-old white liberal gain the right to strip me of my cultural identity, biological features, and history of chattel slavery and tell me I “ain’t black” because I stand for conservative values as a first-generation Republican?  Biden clearly does not believe that an intelligent, reasonable, melanin-blessed individual could possibly prefer President Trump in the November election. This is despite the fact that Trump presided over the lowest black unemployment rates in U.S. history until the coronavirus pandemic hit and signed the most far-reaching criminal justice reform bill in history. Biden’s claim to our vote? He happened to work for a black president. This is ridiculous. Let me compare my choices side by side. Let’s start with President Trump. I worked on Capitol Hill when the president’s tax reforms were approved. These reforms and cuts in taxes – along with Trump’s regulatory relief – arguably created an economy that employed more black Americans, Asians and Latinos than ever in this nation’s history. I also was a key drafter of the Opportunity Zones policy that has the potential to attract billions of dollars into the distressed communities where black Americans disproportionately reside. Sen. Tim Scott, R-S.C. – my former boss – was instrumental in crafting the First Step Act. The criminal justice reform bill, which disproportionately benefitted black Americans, would never have become law without President Trump’s direct involvement. Now let’s take a look at Joe Biden. Well, he worked for President Obama. Admittedly that’s not nothing. Many black folks recognize the impact of a white man being willing to take orders from a black man for eight years. Since there is a reasonable argument that a black person can make not to vote for Biden, why does Biden feel comfortable saying what he said and saying it in a stereotypical, minstrel tone?  However, since he left the office of vice president, Biden’s problems with African-Americans have followed him. Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., accused Biden of racism for working with segregationist Democrats as a senator to block busing to integrate schools. During the debates among Democratic presidential candidates, another black candidate at the time – Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey – piled on and accused Biden of racism. Even potential Biden running mate Stacey Abrams of Georgia, who is also black, has played the race card, strongly implying that Biden would be a racist should he fail to pick a vice presidential running who is not black, not female, and well … not her. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Since there is a reasonable argument that a black person can make not to vote for Biden, why does Biden feel comfortable saying what he said and saying it in a stereotypical, minstrel tone? I think it's the same reason Hillary Clinton expected black people to believe she carries hot sauce in her purse (thereby implying that all black women do and she is relatable). Biden mistakenly believes blacks will continue to support Democrats no matter what, and that we can be depended on to guilt any reluctant blacks into falling in line. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP He is wrong on both counts and he will find out the hard way in November. Here’s my message to Joe Biden: You associate being black with simple minds and broken English. But I am black, I know my own mind, and President Trump has my vote in November – not you.

White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany responds to a reporter question at Friday's White House press briefing. President Trump has tweeted feverishly about "Obamagate," which is loosely defined as everything the Obama-Biden team did using their executive branch powers to ruin Trump's candidacy (and then presidency). The Trump-loathing media have responded with an unusual tactic. The self-appointed guardians of democracy, who have auditioned themselves as America's great explainers, are playing dumb. Yahoo News hosted a virtual town hall with former Vice President Joe Biden on May 19. Dylan Stableford reported: "Biden was also asked about ... the so-called Obamagate conspiracy, which revolves around a vague allegation that the former president illegally tried to sabotage the Trump campaign, or was involved in an effort to entrap Trump's adviser Michael Flynn into lying to the FBI. Trump has referred to the invented scandal numerous times in recent weeks, although when a reporter asked him to specify what it was about he declined." LIBERAL MAGAZINE COLUMNIST WOULD VOTE FOR BIDEN EVEN 'IF HE BOILED BABIES AND ATE THEM' Liberals call the Obama scandals "invented," but the invention here is the entire Russian-collusion narrative. Newly released documents show Obama aides screamed "collusion" on cable TV but admitted to Congress they had no evidence. No wonder journalists who energetically pushed a false narrative are playing dumb now. Biden said of Trump: "This is his pattern: diversion, diversion, diversion, diversion, diversion! Don't speak to whatever the issues before us are." Biden and his media enablers want the dominant story to be Trump's allegedly horrible coronavirus response. Don't look into the origins of the Russia probe. These ersatz historians who love comparing every Republican scandal to Watergate can't seem to grasp with their brains how Obama might have been getting intelligence on incoming National Security Adviser Michael Flynn's contact with the Russians during the Trump transition, and supervising FBI attempts to entrap Flynn. This effort didn't sound "vague" when it was discovered that FBI "professionals" said bluntly that they went to the White House "to get him to lie" so they could "prosecute him or get him fired." The May 15 episode of "Washington Week" on PBS displayed a cavalcade of confusion. CBS News White House reporter Weijia Jiang, who's attempting to rival Jim Acosta of CNN in needling the president with gotcha questions, complained: "Even the president himself was not able to offer clarity about what crime was committed. I mean he's talking about people should go to jail. He has coined yet another phrase, Obamagate, to talk about this. And he hasn't talked about what he's talking about, and that doesn't matter sometimes." Associated Press White House reporter Jonathan Lemire made it sound like the Obama years are back again, since he couldn't find an Obama scandal anywhere. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER "There's no real sense of a scandal here among most observers," Lemire said. "Most observers" can be defined as the press pool that voted overwhelmingly for Obama – twice. "Obamagate ... it's a nickname for a scandal that doesn't seem to have a there there," Lemire added. "He hasn't elaborated on what it's about." Then PBS’s "Washington Week" host Robert Costa (who is also a Washington Post reporter) asked Abby Phillip of CNN how the Biden campaign is responding to these Obamagate messages. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Phillip said the campaign has studied what went wrong with Hillary Clinton in 2016 and been "very aggressive" in undermining Trump's attempts to "rebrand" all the Trump investigations as an Obama-Biden scandal. "So they're really trying to put pressure on media organizations to not cover this incredulously and to really take a skeptical look at all of this," she said. Programs like these suggest that Team Biden either is incredibly effective at pressuring reporters to be scandal deniers or never had to pressure them in the first place. CLICK HERE FOR MORE BY TIM GRAHAM

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. It has now been 63 days -- we're keeping track -- since California became the first American state to issue a so-called shelter-in-place order for all citizens. Governor Gavin Newsom's order was the beginning of an unprecedented coronavirus mass quarantine that has changed this country forever. In many ways, the United States is hard to recognize compared to just two months ago. Two months from now, it will be more different still. DEMS MAKE BIG PUSH TO AID ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS AMID CORONAVIRUS CRISIS In fact, it may be years before we fully understand the effects of what our leaders have done in response to the Wuhan coronavirus. There are certain to be battles over how to interpret this moment many years from now. It's possible your children will hear only one version of the story. Uncomfortable facts by that point may have been scrubbed from social media platforms as disinformation. So, while we can, we'd like to get on tape, for the record, some of what actually happened here. The first thing to remember is that our leaders didn't simply revoke the country's constitutional rights one day from a cold start. They laid the groundwork first. They softened opposition by sowing fear. On March 14, to name one among countless possible examples, a former Obama administration health official called Andy Slavitt predicted that just nine days from now, America's largest cities and hospitals would be "overrun with cases." Now, Slavitt is not an epidemiologist. In fact, he is a former McKinsey consultant. But countless other self-described experts on television backed him up. A huge number of Americans, they told us, would get infected with the coronavirus, and a huge number would die and die in the ugliest most desperate way -- gasping for breath with tubes shoved down their throats. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now at the time, the World Health Organization suggested that a million Americans would die this way. The WHO estimated a case fatality rate of 3.4 percent. It's horrifying. It scared the hell out of the country. It scared the hell out of us. I think we repeated those numbers to you on this show. But they were totally wrong. We now know, thanks to widespread blood testing, that the virus isn't that deadly. An enormous percentage of coronavirus infections produce mild symptoms or no symptoms at all. They're asymptomatic. The death toll is a tiny fraction of what we were told it would be. Cuomo's lockdown, like most in this country was modeled on the <a href="https://www.foxnews.com/category/world/world-regions/china" target="_blank">Chinese government</a>'s quarantine, their response to the Wuhan coronavirus -- which is odd if you think about it. Who decided that following the example of the country responsible for unleashing the pandemic was somehow good public health? One study in Scotland estimated the real death rate could be 0.04 percent. Another in Miami Dade, Florida suggested 0.18 percent. The one in Los Angeles 0.06 percent. In fact, the highest figure we've been able to find from a credible blood test study comes from Spain, and it produced a death rate of just over 1 percent, and that's still far below what they told us it would be. At the time, ambitious politicians understood instinctively that Americans were really scared, and some did their best to heighten that fear. Here's New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo telling his daily television audience that tens of thousands of Americans would die unless the Trump administration sent more ventilators. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo: FEMA says we're sending 400 ventilators. Really? What am I going to -- what am I going to do with 400 ventilators when I need 30,000? You pick the 26,000 people who are going to die because you only sent 400 ventilators. This is why it pays to use a little restraint in your public statements because, as it turned out, New York had more than enough ventilators. Too many ventilators, really; some were never even used. But Cuomo didn't dwell on that. He blew right past it and spent most of the subsequent weeks discussing the vital importance of obeying his quarantine. Cuomo's lockdown, like most in this country was modeled on the Chinese government's quarantine, their response to the Wuhan coronavirus -- which is odd if you think about it. Who decided that following the example of the country responsible for unleashing the pandemic was somehow good public health? Well, they all thought that. Virtually, all of our leaders agreed the Chinese course was the only course. Dr. Anthony Fauci came on Fox Business to explain that actually, the Chinese government could be trusted. David Asman, Fox Business' "Bulls & Bears" host: China has been known to fiddle with their stats before. Do you trust what they are telling us about this illness? Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: From what I can see right now, they really are being much, much more transparent than what happened with SARS, where they really kept back information for a while. It was embarrassing to them. They're really transparent now. They've put the sequence of the virus up on the public database right away. So, in that respect, they've been transparent. Yes, because when you think of the Chinese Communist Party, transparent is the first word that comes to mind. Even then, when Fauci said that, there were some informed and independent- minded Americans who had real questions about the wisdom of following the Chinese model. But over time, their views began to disappear from Twitter and YouTube and Facebook. In their place, the media presented hardened political activists, people like Zeke Emanuel, and allowed them to pose as experts on virus mitigation. Zeke Emanuel, Vice Provost for Global Initiatives at the University of Pennsylvania:  Realistically, COVID-19 will be here for the next 18 months or more. We will not be able to return to normalcy until we find a vaccine or effective medications. Is all of that economic pain worth trying to stop COVID-19? The truth is, we have no choice.  "The truth is, we have no choice." Get a pen and write down that sentence for future reference. The next time you hear someone say it, run. "The truth is, we have no choice." When you hear that, you know, things are about to get much worse. In fact, we always have a choice. A handful of political leaders made that choice. They decided to try a different approach, and then immediately -- and in unison -- they were denounced as enemies of the state. When Georgia began to reopen some of its businesses in late April, The Atlantic magazine described that plan as "Georgia's experiment in human sacrifice." In the words of The Washington Post, Jeff Bezos's personal newspaper, "Georgia leads the race to become America's number one death destination." As if Jack Kevorkian had become the governor of Georgia. And that was just in print. On television, the geniuses decided that relaxing the lockdowns would be far worse for Georgia than Sherman's March to the Sea. Stacey Abrams, former Georgia gubernatorial candidate: This makes no sense and it doesn't improve our economy. It simply puts more Georgians at risk. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host: If that sounds insane to you, you're not alone. Mayors in Georgia are describing the governor's decision as reckless, dangerous and illogical. Chris Cuomo, CNN anchor: Georgia may be doing too much too soon. Don Lemon, CNN anchor: No matter what anybody tells you, no matter how many hopeful signs there may be, it's far too early to let down our guard. It's far too early to go back to the lives that we were living just last month. And if that shocks you, it should. Someday, unfortunately, that tape will be scrubbed off the internet. That's a shame. Georgia is fine as it turns out. That was Don Lemon telling you Georgia is an incredibly dangerous place, and it had an effect. "The truth is, we have no choice." Get a pen and write down that sentence for future reference. The next time you hear someone say it, run. Imagine if you saw Don Lemon say that while being forced to watch CNN while waiting for a flight at an airport. Maybe you're headed to Atlanta. You'd be rattled by that -- of course, you would be. And rattling you was exactly the point of saying it. Stop thinking, obey. That was the message and was amplified day after day after day by outlets like CNN. Watch this CNN anchor a month ago remind his audience that staying locked indoors was their moral duty. Chris Cuomo: The only thing that has checked this contagion is our collective conscience to stay home together as ever, as one. We know that is our true power. The question is, when will it really be put to this problem? The one thing you never saw from these people -- these journalists -- was a straightforward discussion about whether or not lockdowns actually work. You'd think that would be the first thing they would talk about, but they didn't want to. Hundreds of millions of people ordered to stay home, only go outside for essential reasons. Does forcing people to live like that really contain a virus? There are a lot of reasons actually to believe that it does not contain a virus. For example, forcing people into close quarters all day obviously increases the odds of infecting family members. The biggest studies on that have shown it. Did you hear that? Ending the lockdowns slowed the spread of the virus or was associated with a slower spread. Amazing. For some reason, that study has not received a lot of attention. Maybe you shouldn't be surprised by that. Closing every business except grocery stores forces a lot of people into a small space. Is that a good idea? There are a lot of potential problems. We don't know all of the answers; someday we'll have a better understanding of the science behind quarantines. We should have had it before we imposed them. But for now, here's what you need to know and what they're not going to tell you. There is, as of now, precisely no evidence that the lockdowns in America saved lives anywhere. In fact, it's possible that mass quarantines killed people. Researchers at JPMorgan compared the coronavirus infection rates of all 50 U.S. states and many European countries before and after the mass quarantines. Overall, ending the lockdowns was associated with a slower spread of the virus. Did you hear that? Ending the lockdowns slowed the spread of the virus or was associated with a slower spread. Amazing. For some reason, that study has not received a lot of attention. Maybe you shouldn't be surprised by that. More than any other governor maybe in the country, Kristi Noem from South Dakota refused to lock her state down. She refused to use the coronavirus pandemic to enhance her personal powers. For that, she was vilified in the national press. Some outlets treated her like a mass murderer. On April 13, The Washington Post wrote this: "South Dakota's Governor resisted ordering people to stay home. Now it has one of the nation's largest coronavirus hotspots." Meanwhile, the obedient states --states that imprisoned their entire population -- got a round of applause from the entire American media the very next day. The New York Times lauded California, by contrast, this way: "California set the tone on coronavirus shutdowns. What's its next move?" And the message of all of this, of course, is unmistakable. You saw it at the time. California was saving its people. Rightwing, old South Dakota was plunging its state into calamity. So, that was more than five weeks ago. How did things turn out in the end? Have you seen a follow-up story on it? Probably not. Here the facts. As of now, about 5 per 100,000 people in South Dakota have died of the coronavirus. In California, the death toll is 8.4 per hundred thousand. That's 64 percent higher. That doesn't prove lockdowns kill people. It does suggest it doesn't work very well. And yet even now, millions of Americans are living, suffocating under continued lockdown. California's economy has been crushed, particularly for middle-class people. They're barred from going to work. They can't go on the dry sand in Los Angeles per their lunatic mayor. Now, you can laugh about this because it's stupid. But for millions of healthy people at virtually no risk from dying of this virus, the lockdowns have been a life-changing disaster. Early in the pandemic, the president of the United States made that point. Any intemperate response to this pandemic, even if it mitigates the virus itself, could wind up killing a lot of people. President Donald Trump: People get tremendous anxiety and depression and you have suicides over things like this when you have terrible economies, you have death. In other words, bad economies don't just make people poor, they kill people. That's obviously true. And yet The Associated Press, the most trusted, branded news raced in with a correction. "President Donald Trump is making a baseless claim of surging suicides if the U.S. economy remains mostly shut through the spread of the coronavirus, " The AP wrote. Then they added this: "Historically, in a crisis, suicides tend to diminish as society pulls together in a common purpose." As if the government locking you in your own home for two months, taking away your job, depriving you of human contact was comparable to fighting the Second World War, a common purpose. That's the opposite of what it was. The people who made these orders went to their weekend houses in Aspen. They ignored the terms of their own orders. They got their hair done. A month later, The Washington Post wrote this: "The coronavirus pandemic is pushing America into a mental health crisis." Well of course, it is. Calls to the Federal Emotional Distress Hotline have gone up 1,000 percent. Across American counties -- the heart of the opioid epidemic -- report a surge in overdoses compared to last year. By the way, in the State of New Jersey, for example, the governor stopped AA Meetings. You were not allowed to go to your AA group, but he kept liquor stores open. Okay, how do you think that worked out? Not well. But don't worry, The AP reassures us, President Trump was making a baseless claim that this might affect people's mental health. And there's more, we could go on for days. But just this: In March, the CDC warned that coronavirus might survive for a prolonged period on exposed services. Remember that? Gloves in the elevator? Millions of Americans were panicked by this. Why wouldn't they be? They wiped down everything they touched. They refused to order takeout food. They put their groceries in mail-in days' long quarantine before opening them -- maybe you did that. We're not mocking you for it. They told you to. Now, the CDC has new guidance. Coronavirus  " does not spread easily on surfaces." Okay. So, where are we now? What's the result of this? Well, it's not totally clear. But here's what we know. For 50 years, America has steadily shipped its manufacturing jobs abroad. Now, those jobs which provided middle-class stability to millions were the core of the middle class were replaced often by low wage, no benefit jobs. People serving an ever-shrinking number of very rich people in finance, a lot of them getting checks from the government -- that's the new economy. That new economy has been destroyed by these lockdowns. In the age of coronavirus, tens of millions of service jobs have gone away. Many will not return. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So only manufacturing is left, but here's the catch: The manufacturers are all in China now. In other words, China won. So, no matter what they tell you in coming years, that's what happened. That's what actually happened. Remember it. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 21, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Insight from Bradley Thayer, political science professor at the University of Texas-San Antonio. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. For the last 70 years, the U.S. and countries around the world have put their trust in the World Health Organization (WHO) to alert the global community of disease outbreaks and provide technical expertise in public health. In return, the WHO has – time and again – demonstrated its systemic organizational problems and lack of accountability. The COVID-19 pandemic is just one more example of the WHO’s willingness to let politics govern over their core responsibility as a global public health watchdog. As a physician, I’m especially concerned about the WHO’s failure to properly respond to these outbreaks. Nearly 100,000 Americans have died from COVID-19, and this international health organization must be held to strict medical and information sharing standards going forward. AVELLA AND DUGAN: GEORGIA VS. CORONAVIRUS — THESE PRINCIPLES OF DEMOCRACY MADE ALL THE DIFFERENCE Decisions by the WHO guide and impact the abilities of medical providers to provide proper guidance and care for their patients.  The director-general of the WHO, Tedros Adhanom, made several disastrous mistakes in mitigating and preventing the COVID-19 outbreak. On Jan. 14, the Chinese government denied human-to-human transmission of the virus was occurring, and the WHO quickly endorsed their message. It’s shocking that the WHO made no attempt to independently verify the claims of an undemocratic government widely known for its iron muzzle on the media, the “Great Firewall” of Internet controls, and an unapologetic history of concealing the truth. Then again, this easy solidarity with China is no surprise when considering Tedros was largely backed by China when seeking the WHO’s top position. More notably, his home country is one of Africa’s leading partners for China’s “Belt and Road Initiative” and China remains their largest source of foreign investment. Politics, unfortunately, had much to do with the Tedros decision to state that the Chinese response to the outbreak was “transparent” and had his full confidence. As Tedros was helping the Chinese government, hospitals across Wuhan became overwhelmed by sick patients while Chinese officials silenced the medical community with one hand, and stockpiled personal protective equipment with the other. However, thanks to unwavering international pressure, Tedros declared the outbreak a public health emergency and changed course. It is time to reevaluate the organizational structure of the WHO to ensure future responses are based on science, not propaganda. It’s doubtful the WHO would have reacted differently without Tedros catering to China. This isn’t the organization’s first failure at responding to a disease outbreak. The 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa and the 2009 H1N1 influenza pandemic sparked heavy criticism of the WHO’s poor performance and prompted many external and internal investigations calling for reform. While some reform measures have been adopted, WHO continues to lack accountability, and without it, medical expertise and public health will always come second to politics and propaganda. Independent investigations of the COVID-19 outbreak will undoubtedly be written and recommendations for reform will be outlined. Minor technical changes will be adopted and the ones threatening political favor will be ignored. In order to ensure meaningful changes are actually made, countries need to abandon the carrot and grab the stick. The U.S. is the largest volunteer contributor to the WHO, and with these persistent problems, the Trump administration rightly decided to halt funding pending an investigation into its handling of the COVID-19 outbreak. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As the Trump administration continues to pry open political motivations driving the WHO, over 60 countries, including Canada, Australia, New Zealand and Japan, as well as the European Union, have signed a resolution backing the investigation. That resolution was recently adopted unanimously during a virtual meeting of the World Health Assembly, despite repeated complaints from China. It is time to reevaluate the organizational structure of the WHO to ensure future responses are based on science, not propaganda. Participating countries should consider establishing a small select voting body of medical experts, similar to the structure of the United Nations Security Council, with the purpose of championing cooperation in solving global health issues. This body could oversee significant policy issues like outbreaks, major capital expenditures, and assess actions taken by other countries during public health emergencies. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Accountability comes with the power to make decisions that member states are then obligated to implement. This would be supplemented with international pressure. The U.S. — the largest single provider of humanitarian assistance, the largest contributor to the WHO, and global watchdog — must lead this fight to ensure the WHO fulfills its role in global health and pandemic response. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. ROGER MARSHALL

Retired Rear Adm. Samuel Cox says Memorial Day originated during the Civil War to honor the fallen soldiers. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The coronavirus pandemic has confronted our nation with many unique challenges. For the first time in our storied history, Americans were asked to not go to work, to not hustle and to not exhaust ourselves. Now, we are presented with an equal number of questions about how to move forward and re-open. How does America recover? How do we press forward? And how do we move on from the collapse of the routine that has always driven us on? I believe that Memorial Day can help provide the answer to these questions. MICHAEL LEVIN: AFTER CORONAVIRUS, HOW WILL YOU ANSWER THIS IMPORTANT QUESTION? Memorial Day gives us answers because we can reflect and seek spiritual guidance from the most selfless our country has ever known. We look to their grit. We ask ourselves what they would tell us to do and how would they ask us to revere the freedom they gave their last breath to provide. While they are no longer here to share what they learned in person, their stories leave us with lessons that are especially important in times where our country is challenged with adversity. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Each week when I fly into Washington, D.C., I see the beautiful white crosses and Stars of David of Arlington National Cemetery from above. When my young boys, Magnum and Maverick, are with me we tour the seemingly endless Vietnam Veterans Memorial, the larger-than-life steel statues of the Korean War Memorial, or the expansive World War II Memorial. In my opinion, there are none from whom we can learn more than these heroes who gave it all so that we may live free.  Gracing the walls of the building that houses my office are the names of each fallen brother and sister from my war. Each day, as I pass through the entrance, I see the faces of those I knew, and each time my eye catches a heading for all lost in a given month and year my mind replays conversations had with so many fallen friends. The etching of their names reminds us of their commitment to the fight and the way nothing would ever stop them. Every time, I wonder if we are worthy of their sacrifice. Just as each soldier strives to prove themselves each day of service, I believe my fallen friends would want each civilian to strive to prove themselves each day of free life. In that, I believe, lies the answer to how our country recovers from this crisis. So, this Memorial Day, I am reflecting on the sacrifice of my friends — that I served with, took fire with, climbed mountains in Afghanistan with, disarmed bombs with and took it to America’s enemies with — and the lessons we can learn from them: Americans are never victims. If we wake up under the flag they charged into battle with then we wake up getting to decide that today will be a better day than yesterday and that this week will be better than last week. I believe Staff Sgt. Eric Trueblood (KIA 03/10/2011) would remind us that we are not measured by what we do when something is a walk in the park. Rather, we get measured when we face something that seems impossible. I believe Staff Sgt. David Day (KIA 04/24/2011) would tell us that the tougher the times, the tougher the people get built. Sgt. Justin Allen (KIA 07/18/2010) was never one to feel sorry for himself, so I believe he would take on the challenge with everything he’s got — not once complaining.  Sgt. Anibal Santiago (KIA 07/18/2010) would probably challenge everybody — in language that isn’t fit to print — to have the courage to get out and live their lives. I believe Senior Chief Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technician Craig Vickers (KIA 08/06/2011) would remind us—in excruciating detail—that, no matter what we do, every minute still has 60 seconds, each hour still has 60 minutes and each day is still going to take 24 of those.  We shouldn’t let time pass us by trying to evade life’s challenges. I believe Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technician Second Class Petty Officer Tyler Trahan (KIA 04/01/2009) would keep it simple: keep going no matter what, he might say. I believe Capt. Kyle Comfort (KIA 05/08/2010) would remind us that even knowing every possible detail about the coronavirus that there is to know, there is still going to be risk.  I believe Doc Jonathan Peney (KIA 06/01/2010) would tell us that not even training to be safe is safe. I believe Sgt. Tanner Higgins (KIA 04/14/2012) would tell us not to waste a moment of this precious life that we have the privilege to live. I believe Sgt. Andrew Nicol (KIA 08/08/2010) would probably say that he didn’t live in tents, cargo ship containers, mud huts and swamps so the people he fought for can curl up and hide. Finally, I believe Sgt. 1st Class Lance Vogeler (KIA 10/01/2010) — one of my closest friends and who I would undoubtedly turn to for advice if he were still here — would share with me a couple lessons. Seek the positive in the negative, he would say. Commitment to life is not about the quantity of minutes we get but about the way we spend the minutes we have and how we effect those in our path. A massive quantity of his minutes were spent in combat fighting for us. He was killed during his 12th deployment, just days after I was taken off the battlefield by an improvised explosive device. Each Memorial Day I am given a renewed commitment to honor his sacrifice and the sacrifice of all those who were laid to rest beneath our beautiful flag of 50 stars and 13 red and white stripes. This Memorial Day, they all remind me that we are not made of glass and we don’t just break when we fall. CLICK HERE FOR THE FOX NEWS APP I hope our nation can learn from them. We have been challenged by COVID-19, but Americans are never victims. If we wake up under the flag they charged into battle with then we wake up getting to decide that today will be a better day than yesterday and that this week will be better than last week. If we do not actively work to make it that way then we squander the life and freedom they gave everything to defend. So, for those honored by the slow hum of Taps, I pray that this Memorial Day the crack of their 21-gun salute can be so jarring that it wakes up the world. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. BRIAN MAST

A look at the day's trending stories on FoxNews.com. Democrats say they want more “inclusive” voting practices. They fail to mention just how inclusive their plans are: sending ballots to dead voters. Nevada is a case study of the lengths Democrats will go to secure a voting edge. First Marc Elias and Perkins Coie sued the state on behalf of Democrat groups, demanding election officials break laws against ballot harvesting, ignore signature verification requirements and send ballots to inactive voters the state believes moved away. They demanded more in-person voting locations while arguing voting in person was too dangerous for the June 9 mail-in vote primary. VICTOR DAVIS HANSON: CORONAVIRUS DEEPENS DIVISIONS — EXCEPT MAYBE THIS ONE BIT OF COMMON GROUND The message was sent, and Democrats in Clark County got in line. A new voting plan was reached “shrouded in mystery,” according to the Las Vegas Review-Journal. Officials would now increase the number of in-person voting locations in the Democrat-heavy region, mail ballots to all “voters” and allow “field registrars,” commonly known as ballot harvesters, to pick them up. All at the expense of taxpayers of $323,000, and the rule of law. The result has made Clark County look more like Tammany Hall. What is unfolding should concern every American. Weeks before the election, live ballots are piling up at apartment complexes. Others are found in the trash. The Review-Journal reported one postal worker has already found thousands of ballots that are “no good,” just “sitting in crates with no additional safeguards.” Jenny Trobiani, who has worked for the U.S. Postal Service for over three decades, said the ballots were for residents who “had all moved or died.” She even received one in the mail for her deceased mother. Dozens of ballots are being found pinned to community bulletin boards. “From Friday to Monday, I could have voted 20 times,” said one resident of an apartment complex in Las Vegas. “That’s what’s so concerning about all this.” Who is to stop a Democrat “field registrar” from picking them up, signing them and dropping them off? That sounds outrageous. But it is what Democrat groups are seeking in their lawsuit. Trained poll officials would no longer be able to throw out fraudulent ballots that do not match their signature on file. Instead, the lawsuit would prohibit what it calls the “dubious art of signature matching” and circumvent Nevada’s ballot harvesting ban. Signature matching is so “dubious” it has been required for every new voter registration in Nevada and used to verify every voter who shows up at the polls for years. This is not unique to Nevada. Democrats are attacking the integrity of our elections across the country and circling the wagons.   Democrats are welcoming voter fraud in Nevada. And they are not even hiding it. The Elias lawsuit is explicit. It states the statewide ban on ballot harvesting “hamstrings” the ability of Democrat groups, including the Democratic National Committee, the Nevada State Democratic Party, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee and Priorities USA, to “assist voters in making the transition to vote by mail.” Democrats are happy to “assist,” as long as you vote Democrat. This is not unique to Nevada. Democrats are attacking the integrity of our elections across the country and circling the wagons. From Planned Parenthood to the Center for American Progress, left-wing activist groups are pushing the same false talking points that while we flatten the curve we must upend our elections. Voting must be more “inclusive” (by adopting liberal policies). Nancy Pelosi’s $3 trillion bill would launch a federal takeover of our elections, all in line with Elias’ lawsuits in 29 states. Their mission is to nationalize ballot harvesting, gut signature verification and voter ID laws and send millions of ballots to voters who have died or moved away, before November. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That's why the Republican National Committee and Trump campaign have launched our Protect the Vote effort, a digital platform which spotlights our efforts to protect against the Democrats' assault on our elections as they push for sweeping changes, including vote-by-mail and more ballot harvesting amid the coronavirus pandemic The opportunity for fraud with these Democrat proposals is enormous. There are over 200,000 inactive voters in Clark County alone. Inactive voters are given the opportunity to update their registrations and can still request a ballot in the upcoming election. Individuals are only deemed inactive after the state receives evidence from the Postal Service that they have moved. “Knowingly mailing a ballot to a wrong address is bad enough,” a Review-Journal editorial recently argued. “Combining that with the elimination of signature verification is an open invitation to shenanigans and makes absolutely no sense.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP That’s why this week I sent a letter to Nevada Attorney General Aaron D. Ford requesting an investigation into Clark County’s backroom deal, and potential violations of state election and open meeting laws. Democrat officials in Clark County did not allow any public input before unilaterally upending its election procedures. Our elections must be free, fair and secure. They should not enable voter fraud at the taxpayers’ expense. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM RONNA MCDANIEL

Lawmakers demand results after coughing up $3 trillion to salvage the economy; congressional correspondent Chad Pergram reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  The coronavirus crisis has forced all Americans to ask the question: what are the essential and non-essential things in our lives? Amid this debate, as Americans struggle to survive the shutdown and as our country struggles to avoid a prolonged recession, it is odd that Congress, through its actions, would openly declare itself nonessential. Congress has, after all, not congressed in any meaningful sense for over two months. During this time the largest spending bill in American history passed without amendments or a recorded vote. Last week Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., passed a rule allowing Congress to stay out of session until mid-July and a proxy voting proposal that would undo centuries of precedent and allow the speaker to pass legislation with less than 25 out of 435 members present. AVELLA AND DUGAN: GEORGIA VS. CORONAVIRUS — THESE PRINCIPLES OF DEMOCRACY MADE ALL THE DIFFERENCE In other words, approximately 5 percent of the members of Congress are essential and the rest of us are nonessential. These developments should not come as a surprise. They are essentially the culmination of decades of dereliction of constitutional duty by Congress. We have gone from the Framers fearing that the legislature would necessarily predominate and suck everything into its impetuous vortex to the current situation where Congress has decided, like a character in the film "Office Space," that it is not going to quit, it is just going to stop going to work. What little power remains in the increasingly powerless institution is in the hands of an increasingly small number of people at the top of the legislative hierarchy. As I wrote two years ago reflecting on my first term in Congress: “I have come to believe that the problem (with Congress) is not the people. The problem is a defective process and a power structure that, whichever party is in charge, funnels all power to leadership and stifles debate and initiative within the ranks… “Leadership determines which bills come to the floor for a vote, leadership chooses loyal committee chairs so as to ensure that bills opposed by special interests will be killed in committee, and in the event that problematic amendments do make it to the House floor, the Rules Committee — an organ of the speaker — kills them off. The legislation that does pass tends to come in last-second omnibus bills that legislators have no chance to read, let alone debate and amend.”  Two years later, the problem has gotten even worse. House Democratic leadership no longer need to rely on such subtle tactics to stifle debate and force rank-and-file members to cast up or down votes on multi-trillion dollar legislative packages: they now can simply keep us outside of Washington, D.C., and call a few of us back whenever the speaker needs their votes. How do we fix Congress? A good start would be to end the vacation and reconvene in person, President Obama said last weekend, “This pandemic has fully, finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge don’t know what they’re doing. A lot of them aren’t even pretending to be in charge.” I assume he was talking about Congress under Pelosi’s leadership. If so, I have to say what I don’t often say: I agree with President Obama. I know some conservatives might be tempted to think Congress’ inability to pass laws is a net positive. Yet the opposite is true. A feckless Congress further empowers unelected and unaccountable bureaucrats in the executive branch and activist judges in the judicial branch. A weak Congress passing complex, unreadable, 1,000-page bills written by a small group of staffers empowers special interests and fortifies the status quo against meaningful reform. A functional Congress is, in other words, essential. It is essential now more than ever. At a time when we are rapidly spending trillions of dollars that we do not have to combat coronavirus, Congress has to do oversight to ensure this money is having a positive impact. As we ramp up domestic manufacturing of PPE, it will require legislation passed by Congress to strengthen our medical supply chains and thereby wean America off of our dangerous dependency on cheap Chinese goods. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As we confront relentless Chinese Communist Party propaganda, Congress must come together and figure out a foundation for winning this New Cold War.         How do we fix Congress? A good start would be to end the vacation and reconvene in person, for at least two weeks, so that we can start to do our committee work, which cannot be done by proxy. This should in turn lead to an enduring change in the congressional schedule, where we end this foolish practice of flying in and out of town each week for meaningless votes. While we are at it, Democrats should join the newly launched China Task Force so Congress can reassert its role U.S. foreign policy and send a strong signal of support to our friends in Taiwan, Hong Kong and Xinjiang suffering from coercion and oppression by the Chinese Communist Party.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It would also be a good idea to drain the pesky swamp that seems to just get swampier. Eventually this means we will need a complete overhaul and simplification of the budget committee and appropriations process. But for now, let’s start small with a simple prohibition on former members of Congress lobbying on behalf of foreign entities. As we emerge from the coronavirus crisis, Congress must reclaim its rightful constitutional authority. Nothing could be more essential. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. MIKE GALLAGHER

Sidney Powell, attorney for Michael Flynn, joins Sean Hannity with insight on 'Hannity.' Is U.S. District Judge Emmet Sullivan’s collusion cameo nearing its end? On Thursday the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, on its own motion, ordered Judge Sullivan to respond within 10 days to the petition for a writ of mandamus filed by former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn. Earlier this week, Flynn’s counsel, Sidney Powell, filed the petition for that extraordinary writ, asking the appellate court to instruct Sullivan to grant the Justice Department’s motion to dismiss the case against Flynn. FEDERAL APPEALS COURT ORDERS JUDGE IN FLYNN CASE TO RESPOND TO MOTION TO DISMISS CHARGES CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That was after Judge Sullivan not only declined to grant the prosecution’s motion, but (a) invited non-parties to intervene in the case by filing amicus briefs (transparently, to make arguments that he somehow has authority to deny DOJ’s motion); and (b) appointed one amicus, former federal judge John Gleeson, as a quasi-prosecutor to make arguments that prosecutors are declining to make in favor of entering a judgment of conviction and sentencing Flynn. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As I noted Wednesday, Sullivan’s encouragement of amicus briefs, which are not authorized in criminal cases, flies in the face of Sullivan’s own very firm orders previously declining to permit amicus briefs in Flynn’s case – some two dozen times by Powell’s count. The appointment of Gleeson is equally astonishing and offensive to the principle of courts as impartial arbiters. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Fox News' Bryan Llenas discusses why legislators in New York are calling for an independent investigation into whether or not the state's policies led to needless deaths in nursing homes. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  The news media that gave us Bill Clinton, “The Man from Hope,” are now trying to sell us on New York Democrat Gov. Andrew Cuomo, The Candidate From CNN – where his brother Chris anchors. From Hope to hopeless. The Brothers Cuomo created yet another journalism outrage Wednesday night. Younger brother Chris, who anchors for CNN, once again interviewed his older, more successful brother. It wasn’t news. CUOMO BROTHERS' JOKEY CNN INTERVIEW IGNORING NURSING HOME CONTROVERSY SPARKS OUTRAGE In fact, it was so horrific that it made news. As reported by NewsBusters Chris whipped out giant swabs and asked his brother, “is it true that when you are having the test administered, you inhaled and the doctor's finger went all the way up your nose and got stuck and it had to be released with a tool?” Chris has gone from newsman to Baghdad Bob for the wannabe Cuomo presidency. And that’s especially important since the governor is widely viewed as a potential replacement should Democrat presidential candidate Joe Biden falter before the election. The press is so obvious on this point that MSNBC Host Joy Reid called Andrew “a kind of acting president.” The CNN half of the duo doesn’t ask tough questions, he clowns with his brother like they were on the set of “Saturday Night Live.” That might not be so bad if Andrew were in a job more befitting his skill set – performer or perhaps journalist. Instead, Andrew is governor of the state hardest hit by the coronavirus. And it was as governor that Andrew ordered patients infected with the virus into nursing homes where thousands died. Now, as Politico reported on May 7, Cuomo is “under fire for response to Covid-19 at nursing homes.” He changed course but only after more than 5,300 people had died in nursing homes. None of that gets discussed when the Cuomos get together on TV. Or at least not when they are yucking it up on air. Chris even joked that the giant swab was needed to “fit up that double-barrel shotgun that you have mounted on the front of your pretty face.” The resulting segments are both an embarrassment to what remains of professional journalism and a stain on the body politic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Even the press has noticed before this. Columbia Journalism Review’s Jon Allsop raised the obvious question, “Should Chris be allowed to interview a family member in a journalistic setting?” Over at Mediaite, one analyst called the interviews a “conflict of interest” way back in March, which is about seven years in quarantine time. He added that, “For the sake of journalistic integrity, their interviews need to stop.” They haven’t. CNN has what it considers to be a winning formula. The audience likes it and the result promotes a Democrat politician who then owes the network big time for creating a phony narrative where he has done a good job. The Society of Professional Journalists Code of Ethics (Yes, there is one.) is pretty clear on this whole fiasco. “Journalists should: Avoid conflicts of interest, real or perceived. Disclose unavoidable conflicts.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP CNN clearly considers Cuomo a journalist although you almost have to wonder why at this point. Here’s his network bio: “Chris Cuomo anchors CNN's Cuomo Prime Time, a 9 pm nightly news program where Cuomo tests power with newsmakers and politicians from both sides of the aisle, and reports on the latest breaking news from Washington and around the world.” Only the first part of that appears to be true — the name and time slot mostly. He’s clearly not testing his brother’s power, he’s testing CNN’s power to put his brother in the White House. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAN GAINOR

 Kids imitate their parents. They watch our every move. They hear our every word. They sense our every attitude. Our actions, good and bad, become models for their conduct. Imagine what kind of messages were sent during the college admissions scandal. Actress Lori Loughlin (“Full House”) and her husband Mossimo Gianulli are the latest parents to plead guilty in the scandal, which came to light last year. The Massachusetts District Attorney’s Office announced Thursday that Loughlin and Gianulli will each plead guilty to conspiracy, likely resulting in jail time, fines and community service. LORI LOUGHLIN'S PLEA AGREEMENT: WHAT THE TERMS MEAN As a parenting author and founder of a nonprofit that partners with thousands of schools and universities around the world, I can’t help but wonder what Loughlin and the other parents involved in this scandal were communicating to their children. Whether they know it or not, many parents of Generation Z kids are sending wrong messages by the very way they approach parenting. In millions of cases (certainly not all) their leadership styles are unhealthy and intrusive — the college scandal being a prime example. They believe they must seize control and do whatever is necessary to get their kids what they want. Or, what the parents themselves want. While it sounds like a noble pursuit, it’s actually back firing on a generation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER These are the message that I believe the intrusive and controlling parents involved in the cheating scandal sent to their children: CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP What should Loughlin and the other parents do now? I believe the wisest response would be to meet with their children and model transparency and bravery. They can begin undoing the three messages above by saying: I suggest parents return to the basics. They need to model a life worth imitating and communicate words and messages that enable kids to become the best version of themselves. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TIM ELMORE

Media reporter for The Hill Joe Concha reacts to the about-face on 'believe all women' in an effort to get Joe Biden elected. Many prominent figures in the #MeToo movement have reached a clear verdict on former Vice President Joe Biden: It’s more important to believe him than the woman accusing him of sexual assault. For more than three years, the radical left has smeared President Trump and his supporters, falsely portraying conservatives as enemies of female empowerment and enablers of sexism. These vicious partisan attacks played an especially prominent role in the contentious confirmation process for now-Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was falsely accused of sexually assaulting multiple women when he was in high school and college. BIDEN, AMID READE ALLEGATIONS, HIRES AIDE WHO SAID CANDIDATES SHOULD NOT RUN IF ACCUSED OF SEXUAL MISCONDUCT Remarkably, some of the people who went after Kavanaugh most aggressively have been entirely silent – and in some cases even openly supportive – of Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee. This is despite the fact that Biden has been accused of sexual misconduct and behavior that was either lewd or violating by a long list of credible women. In contrast to the Kavanaugh accounts, the accusations brought against Biden are more recent and involve women who have little incentive to lie about a prominent political figure from their own party. These are the top five so-called “feminists” who continue to empower Biden by turning a blind eye to his creepy and possibly criminal behavior. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi In 2018, Pelosi, D-Calif.,  publicly claimed that Supreme Court nominee  Kavanaugh had exhibited behavior “that was not suitable for a person who would be a judge on any court much less the Supreme Court of the United States.” Pelosi even called Kavanaugh’s impassioned defense of his good name “hysterical,” and insisted that he had “disqualified himself” from the position. Pelosi’s reaction to the allegation that Biden sexually assaulted a former member of his Senate staff in 1993, however, was quite different. “I do support Joe Biden,” she recently said. “I’m satisfied with how he has responded. I know him. I was proud to endorse him on Monday, very proud to endorse him. And so I’m satisfied with that.” Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton Failed presidential candidate Hillary Clinton was another prominent Democrat who had a lot to say about Kavanaugh. In a 2018 interview with The Atlantic, she said she found the Senate testimony of Kavanaugh’s accuser, Dr. Christine Blasey Ford, “very credible.” “You have to ask yourself, ‘why would anybody put themselves through this if they did not believe that they had important information to convey to the Senate?’” Clinton said at the time. Evidently, Clinton had forgotten all about her sanctimonious stance on Kavanaugh’s fitness for high office when she endorsed Biden’s presidential candidacy last month.  Sen. Elizabeth Warren Sen. Warren, D-Mass., was such a committed #MeToo activist that she even supported impeaching Kavanaugh after he was confirmed by the Senate and cleared by the FBI. “Last year the Kavanaugh nomination was rammed through the Senate without a thorough examination of the allegations against him,” she tweeted in 2019, adding that the Supreme Court justice “should be impeached” just like “the man who appointed him.” Of course, failed presidential candidate Warren isn’t applying the same standard to Biden, who happens to share much of her political agenda. When Biden finally issued his belated and dodgy denial of Tara Reade’s sexual assault accusation, Warren called his threadbare defense both “credible” and “convincing.” Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand Sen. Gillibrand, D-N.Y., another failed presidential candidate, loves to lecture America about feminism. Her passionate rebuke of Kavanaugh at his confirmation hearing was widely praised by Democrats, becoming an instant highlight of the #MeToo movement. “Do we value women in this country?” Gillibrand said at the time.”Do we listen to women when they tell us about sexual trauma? Do we listen to their stories about how their lives have been forever scarred? Do we take their claims seriously? Or do we just disbelieve them as a matter of course?”  Today, however, Gillibrand is just another pro-Biden sycophant, claiming that when she said we must “believe women,” she only meant that women should be allowed to make accusations. “She has come forward, she has spoken, and they have done an investigation in several outlets. Those investigations, Vice President Biden has called for himself,” Gillibrand said. “Vice President Biden has vehemently denied these allegations and I support Vice President Biden.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Sen. Kamala Harris Sen. Harris, D-Calif., was an anti-Kavanaugh firebrand, taking every opportunity to amplify the accusations against the Supreme Court nominee during and after his confirmation process in her role as a member of the Senate Judiciary Committee. “When I look at what has occurred over these few days, we have fallen short in fulfilling our constitutional duty to fully evaluate Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination,” Harris said in 2018, adding that the confirmation process “was a disservice to survivors everywhere” and “a disservice to the American people.” Harris also happens to represent Biden accuser Tara Reade’s home state of California. Reade claims that she reached out to Harris’ office for help before going public with her story. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But just like many other Democrats, Harris doesn’t think that the plausible claims about Biden’s predatory behavior should disqualify him in 2020. Without even waiting for Biden’s personal denial, Harris recently declared that she would be “honored” to serve as Biden’s vice president. despite Reade’s allegation. According to some of the loudest supporters of the #MeToo movement, we must always believe survivors of sexual assault and harassment – except when it comes to Joe Biden. Luckily, American women don’t have to mimic the partisan hypocrisy of prominent faux-feminists. We can disqualify Biden at the ballot box this November. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LARA TRUMP 

 Sometime in the next two months, a group of Democratic donors and political consultants will call each other on the phone and decide who their party's vice presidential candidate is going to be. ZELENSKY SEEKS PROBE OVER LEAKED AUDIO OF BIDEN LINKING US AID TO UKRAINE PROSECUTOR'S OUSTER This happens every four years, but for the first time in memory, this is a genuinely meaningful decision. In normal elections candidates choose running mates whose signature qualities are blandness and obedience. A good vice president is a lot like a good waiter -- he appears, takes orders and leaves. He does not talk too much. He does not express interesting opinions. When vice presidents say they serve the president, they are not being polite. They are being literal; it's a service job. But not this year. This year, Democrats have chosen a man who can't manage the country even if he does win. His aides know that. The candidate himself seems to know that. The whole country knows it. We just don't talk about it very much. Joe Biden's decline is so depressing to watch. It is so embarrassing and sad that most of the time, the rest of us try to ignore it and pretend everything is fine. Many of us know that someday, we will be where Biden is today. So, it feels like bad karma to dwell on it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But the vice presidential pick forces this issue. Whoever is chosen will run the government if Biden wins. Once his advisers make that decision, they'll call Biden in his basement rec room and let him know who his running mate is. Biden will practice the name to make sure he can pronounce it. He'll fiddle with the camera on his iPad, and then he'll tell the world. Who will it be? Well, it will be a woman, we know that much. Biden has said it. So, you can take half the country off the table right away. No man, no matter how clean, bright and articulate, is going to share a ticket with Joe Biden. So, that leaves nearly a hundred million American women to choose from. And by the way, when Joe Biden says women, he'd like you to know he means no offense to the gender fluid, gender nonconforming, or indigenous to spirit communities, all of whom built this country and have Joe Biden's gratitude. But in this case, Biden would very much prefer a lady. So, who is it going to be? Well, The Washington Post has already cast its vote. Over the weekend, Jeff Bezos's newspaper all but endorsed maybe the single least distinguished person ever to emerge from the Georgia State Senate and Georgia politics in general -- frequent cable news guest called Stacey Abrams. Abrams lost a governor's race once, then under a pen name wrote some softcore porn thrillers, books that one Amazon reviewer noted, have a "nice amount of heat." And that's about the sum total of it. Stacey Abrams's career has unfolded almost entirely without distinguishing achievements. She does understand Joe Biden pretty well, though, and that's her main advantage. Abrams knows or senses that Biden doesn't really believe anything. He just wants to be liked, and more than anything, Joe Biden does not want to be called a racist. That's his kryptonite. This turns out to be good news for Stacey Abrams. If it helps her get the job, she is more than happy to call Joe Biden a racist. Whoever is chosen will run the government if Biden wins. Once his advisers make that decision, they'll call Biden in his basement rec room and let him know who his running mate is. Biden will practice the name to make sure he can pronounce it. He'll fiddle with the camera on his iPad, and then he'll tell the world. Reporter: Do you think that not choosing a woman of color, a black woman actually is a slap in the face to the black female voters? Stacey Abrams, former Georgia gubernatorial candidate: I would share your concern about not picking a woman of color because women of color, particularly black women, are the strongest part of the Democratic Party. Stacey Abrams shares your concerns about not picking a woman of color, especially if that woman is her. She is very concerned about that. It turns out that Sen. Kamala Harris has the same concern. Like Stacey Abrams, Harris recently lost an election the media predicted she would win. But unlike Abrams, Harris isn't just threatening to call Joe Biden a racist; she already has. Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., during a Democratic presidential debate in July 2019: I am now going to direct this at Vice President Biden. I do not believe you are a racist. But you also worked with them to oppose busing, and, you know, there was a little girl in California who was part of the second class to integrate her public schools, and she was bused to school every day. And that little girl was me. In the long ignorable history of the give-me-what-I want-or-I'll- call-you-a-racist politics, that has to be one of the great moments. Kamala Harris is so completely out of touch with American life that she imagined that, somehow, forced busing was wildly popular with African-Americans. It was not popular; it is not popular now. Why? Because busing was patronizing and destructive. It hurt everyone involved except maybe for the self-satisfied white liberals who designed it. Their kids went to a private school. But somehow Kamala Harris didn't know that. So say what you will about Stacey Abrams, she is clearly a lot smarter than Kamala Harris is. We'd like to see Kamala Harris write a porn thriller. We doubt it would have any heat at all. Even Joe Biden seems to have figured this out. Recently, he has been talking to a new candidate who is neither one of these, and it is Gretchen Whitmer, the governor of Michigan. Whitmer confirmed that Tuesday on NBC. If Joe Biden were still with us, maybe he would be still moderate today. But he's not. Joe Biden's handlers are in charge now. They're not moderate. Craig Melvin, co-host of the "Today" show: How's the vetting process going so far? You being vetted by Mr. Biden. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer: You know what? I've had a conversation with some folks. Melvin: How would you characterize the conversation? Whitmer: It was just an opening conversation, and it's not something that I would call professional, you know, formalized vetting. "A professional, you know, formalized vetting." Oh, okay, as opposed apparently to an amateur vetting, the kind you don't get paid for. What is Gretchen Whitmer talking about? No one knows. Ask anyone who lives in the state of Michigan, they're still trying to figure out why Gretchen Whitmer banned the sale of paint and carpet in response to a pandemic. Whitmer never explained why she did that. It's likely she has no idea of herself. Paint and carpet just seem scary to her, so she made them illegal. Then when citizens complained about this, Whitmer denounced them as racist. Do you sense a theme here? No wonder the Biden campaign called Gretchen Whitmer. They're looking for someone with deep experience dealing the race card. We should note there are a few other possibilities, people you may not have heard of, for the vice presidential pick. Michelle Grisham is the governor of New Mexico. Grisham spent her first year in office fighting to increase the number of abortions in New Mexico because America's birthrate isn't falling fast enough for her. Did Grisham call her opponents racist, too? Probably. We haven't checked, but you'd have to guess. And then there's Congresswoman Val Demings. She represents Florida's 10th congressional district. Demings is not well-known, but her appearance is what Biden says he is looking for. Demings was one of the impeachment managers during last winter's climax to the Russia insanity. Remember back when we were pretending Ukraine was somehow vital in some way? Remember that? Whatever. Nothing else. The job put her on television a lot. Rep. Val Demings, D-Fla.: Our president put his personal interest above the interest of the nation, corrupting and cheating our democracy and he shall be held accountable. Because you know what? Nobody is above the law. "Cheating our democracy" -- whatever that means. Demings is a former police chief. Good for her. That doesn't mean she believes in enforcing the law, though. She says immigration law should be ignored. She hasn't explained what other laws should be ignored. She has also backed legislation to let police confiscate firearms from citizens who haven't even been accused of a crime. And then finally, lingering in the background like a shy teenager is Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota. Now, in a normal political moment, which this is not, Klobuchar might be the front-runner for the job. She did surprisingly well in the first two Democratic primaries, both in swing states. She is relatively popular, serving in the state that Hillary Clinton only narrowly carried four years ago, so she could help. She is also older. She is calmer and more experienced. At times, she even seems like she might not be a total extremist. All of which means, Amy Klobuchar probably has no chance at all. Weirdly, Joe Biden over his 50 years in Washington was often described as a moderate. And if Joe Biden were still with us, maybe he would be still moderate today. But he's not. Joe Biden's handlers are in charge now. They're not moderate. They've moved the poor guy so far to the fringes, Biden is now disavowing the Obama administration for being too far right. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Barack Obama movement conservative ... it's pretty amusing, really. Also, a little scary. And in the end, it probably means Stacey Abrams will get the job. We'll see. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 20, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The states are reopening, quickly in some places and cautiously elsewhere, which creates a new level of soul-searching for each of us: who will you be after COVID-19? For some, this has been a period of intense tragedy, as they witness the illness or death of loved ones and friends. For others, it’s been a time of deep economic uncertainty, because their businesses are closed or their livelihoods are curtailed. For most, though, this is a strange and frustrating period where routines are disrupted and patience grows thin, even though the risk of illness or death due to the novel coronavirus is limited. JASON WRIGHT: CONGRATS, CLASS OF 2020 — THIS IS HOW YOU WILL MEASURE YOUR SUCCESS Which group are you in? If you’re in the first two groups, you have my empathy and prayers. I lost my dad just weeks before all this began. So I’m no stranger to recent or sudden loss. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But if you’re in group three, and this whole thing is a big fat annoyance as opposed to something life-threatening or life-changing, my question for you is this: who will you be when it’s over and they blow the all-clear? “Every adversity brings with it the seed of an equivalent advantage,” wrote Napoleon Hill in the granddaddy of all self-improvement books, “Think and Grow Rich.” So how will you benefit from this experience? I don’t mean benefiting financially. Instead, I’m asking, how will you be a better or different person as a result of this unique period in our lives? I like to jump on planes and go places and see people and run around and do stuff. Right now, can’t do that. So I’m spending a lot of time sitting and thinking. Not staring at the news or sighing at the Dow. Instead, I’ve been using this time to think about the kind of human being I’m trying to be, how I relate to my wife and children, how my business runs, and how I serve others. I’m taking online courses on Buddhism and the Alexander Technique. Not planning on changing religions or going into acting; I just want to use this time to learn some new things. But most of all, I’m spending considerably more time with my family, since all six of us are here under the same roof. And that’s been great. Not perfect, of course, but great. Yes, this is a period of illness and death, of economic uncertainty.  But it’s also spring, a time for renewal and rebirth.  We’ve been through crises before, you and I, personal, physical, geopolitical. And we know that problems have a beginning, a middle and an end. Sooner or later, everyone will go back to work, to school, to camp, to restaurants, to the ballgame, to Disney World. When that moment comes, will you be the same old you or will you have taken advantage of this time to grow, to better, to be more grateful, to be, well, whatever you want to be? These days, people involved with helping others are having a much easier time of it than those who are wrapped inside themselves. That’s because when we’re all wrapped up inside ourselves, we make a very small package. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Yes, this is a period of illness and death, of economic uncertainty.  But it’s also spring, a time for renewal and rebirth. So that’s why I ask:  when you emerge from the chrysalis, the sabbatical period, of the COVID-19 shutdown, who will you be? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY MICHAEL LEVIN

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  As coronavirus lockdowns enter their third month, social media giants are tightening censorship against people who protest lockdowns and raise evidence the virus may be less risky than initially thought. YouTube has pulled videos from scientists and physicians, even those with top-tier credentials. Meanwhile, Facebook has blocked efforts to organize protests against lockdowns. Facebook’s stance is particularly problematic because as the largest social media network, it may gain from lockdowns, which force friends or community groups to rely on virtual gatherings instead of real-life meetings. ALEX BERENSON: CORONAVIRUS TRUTH AND WHY THE MEDIA ESTABLISHMENT HATES ME SO MUCH Investors certainly seem to believe the lockdowns have not hurt Facebook. Its stock rose 5 percent to an all-time high on Wednesday. Shares in Google’s parent company, which also owns YouTube, also are near an all-time high. Twitter, the third major social media company, is taking a more open and pro-free speech stance. Twitter allows debate about whether the societal risks of lockdowns might be worse than the dangers of coronavirus. (My own Twitter following @alexberenson has grown 15-fold since March, and Twitter does not appear to be censoring me.) As private corporations, social media outlets are not bound by the First Amendment and can remove speech that violates their guidelines. However, given their reach and the growing political battle over lockdowns amid questions about their efficacy, their censorship actions leave them at risk of backlash. Further, combined with the conventional media’s reluctance to question lockdowns and the failure of predictive models from public health experts, social media censorship may actually backfire, leading many people to believe they cannot trust the media at all and encouraging them to consider outright conspiracy theories. Facebook, which more than half of all Americans use, has repeatedly censored groups trying to organize anti-lockdown protests. “Events that defy governments’ guidance on social distancing aren’t allowed on Facebook,” a Facebook spokesman said on April 20. Coronavirus censorship first became an issue when Susan Wojcicki, the chief executive of YouTube, told CNN on April 19 that YouTube would ban videos contradicting World Health Organization guidelines about coronavirus. Instead, YouTube had “focused on the stay at home messages” and would be “raising authoritative information,” Wojcicki said. Of course, the WHO has repeatedly changed its own statements on coronavirus – for example, tweeting that antibodies to coronavirus do not confer immunity to the virus, then hours later deleting that message and reporting antibodies likely “provide some level of protection.” Wojcicki didn’t mention how YouTube might treat changes in WHO messaging. On April 27, YouTube followed through on Wojcicki’s threats, removing video of a press conference from two California physicians. The physicians argued COVID fatality rates were lower than commonly reported and that forcing people to stay inside for prolonged periods of time might actually damage their immune systems. At the time YouTube removed it, the press conference had been viewed more than 5 million times. In a statement, YouTube said it censored “content that explicitly disputes the efficacy of local health authority recommended guidance on social distancing” – a stance that if repeated on other issues could lead YouTube to block content that disputes any government statement. Since then, YouTube’s censorship has continued. Less than a week ago, the site removed a video from Knut Wittkowski, the former head of epidemiology at Rockefeller University’s Center for Clinical and Translational Science, criticizing lockdowns. Wittkowski’s video had been viewed about 1.5 million times before YouTube removed it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Meanwhile, Facebook, which more than half of all Americans use, has repeatedly censored groups trying to organize anti-lockdown protests. “Events that defy governments’ guidance on social distancing aren’t allowed on Facebook,” a Facebook spokesman said on April 20. On May 13, Facebook took its most aggressive action yet, removing the 380,000-member group “Michiganders Against Excessive Quarantine,” one of the original anti-lockdown groups. It then quickly removed a replacement group called “Stand Up Michigan.” Ironically, the censorship efforts may be backfiring, by leading people to conclude that they cannot trust media outlets to give them honest information about the coronavirus and driving them to conspiracy theorists such as Judy Mikovits – whose short film “Plandemic” contains several bizarre theories, including that a flu vaccine may be responsible for the high death toll in Italy. Though YouTube and Facebook have removed Plandemic repeatedly, it has been viewed millions of times. In contrast, Twitter is avoiding outright bans on content. “We are trying to nuanced approach to this that recognizes there is a huge amount of emotion and vitriol and all sides of the issue,” a Twitter executive wrote me last week. “We’re trying to make sure that factual debate finds a way through.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Twitter prefers to label posts that it views as potentially problematic rather than remove them, he wrote. “We think it (labeling) will allow the conversation to continue.” Unfortunately, YouTube and Facebook seem to prefer to stop the conversation. This op-ed first appeared on the author's website http://www.alexberenson.com/. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ALEX BERENSON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Red- and blue-state America was already divided before the coronavirus epidemic hit. Globalization had enriched the East Coast and West Coast corridors but hollowed out much in between. The traditional values of small towns and rural counties were increasingly at odds with postmodern lifestyles in the cities. There were, of course, traditionalists in blue states. And lots of progressives live in red states. But people increasingly self-segregate to where they feel at home and where politics, jobs and culture reflect their tastes. ANDY PUZDER: CORONAVIRUS RESTART – HERE'S THE MOST COMPASSIONATE THING TO DO FOR WORKERS, THEIR FAMILIES The ensuing left/right, liberal/conservative, Democrat/Republican divide not only intensified in the 21st century, but it also took on a dangerous geographical separatism. The coasts vs. the interior reflects two Americas — often in a manner similar to the old Mason-Dixon line that geographically split the U.S. for roughly a century. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Liberals scoff at the deplorables and irredeemables for embracing an ossified, unchanging 18th-century Constitution. The red-staters supposedly cling to their weird, dangerous habits such as owning guns and opposing abortion, while adhering to paleolithic ideas of small government, secure borders and don’t-tread-on-me individualism. Blue-staters are confident that progressive citizens of the world like themselves are where the global action, money and future lie. And who could doubt the success of Silicon Valley’s wealthy tech companies, Wall Street’s investment giants or internationally respected universities such as Harvard, MIT, Caltech and Stanford? Progressives believe the story of America has most often been one of discrimination, original sin and a need for constant repentance and reparations for a flawed past. Conservatives feel just the opposite — that one does not have to perfect to be good, and that America is far better than anywhere else. Red-staters contend that many blue states are broke and need bailouts to ensure that their generous pensions and entitlements don’t wither away into insolvency. Cities are often seen by those in less densely populated areas as dirty, full of homeless people, dangerous and ungovernable. Red-staters also see failed statist ideas the world over. For them, China, the European Union and much of Africa and Latin America are proof that democratic socialism is neither fair nor compassionate. Conservatives welcome in immigrants, but only if they come legally, assimilate to U.S. values and arrive in manageable numbers to be integrated. Conservatives are convinced that entrepreneurs and individuals will better save us. Most elites, they believe, were wrong in their modeling, their predictions and their advice about the contagion When the virus hit, these divides intensified. Blue-state governors wanted long lockdowns, red-state governors not so much. Elite professionals, state employees and the wealthy residents of the coasts feel they can easily ride out a bad recession. They believe that even a miniscule chance of dying from the virus still makes it too risky to go out. Yet in red states, there are many self-employed people and small-business owners who are always at risk on the margins. They believe they have great odds to beat the virus but not to beat a more deadly depression. The 2020 election is the unspoken force multiplier of the divide. Blue-state politicians believe that if the lockdown continues, the country won’t recover before November. Donald Trump will then be blamed for the downturn. They hope for a replay of the 1932 election, with Trump as Depression-era Herbert Hoover vs. a progressive challenger with big promises of more programs and larger government. Progressives also want more connectivity with the world abroad to beat the virus. They rely on elite researchers, statisticians and epidemiologists to chart and predict the course of the epidemic. Conservatives are convinced that entrepreneurs and individuals will better save us. Most elites, they believe, were wrong in their modeling, their predictions and their advice about the contagion. Many conservatives think that the best and brightest had little practical experience, less common sense and did not live in the real world. Red-staters look at the lies of the Chinese, the enabling deceptions of the World Health Organization and the initial failures of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They conclude that transnational organizations are sometimes incompetent and corrupt, and that even our own bureaucracies are too unimaginative, sluggish, haughty and territorial. Is there any agreement between red-state and blue-state America? Perhaps. Red-staters are not flocking to blue-state urban corridors, where the virus hit hardest. They are happy to live in less crowded places, rely on their own cars, have detached homes and be free of government edicts that often make little sense other than to showcase the dictatorial powers of petty bureaucrats and local officials. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Even blue-staters are beginning to see their mass transit, high-rise living and clogged streets more as incubators of disease than as the circulatory system of an exciting, high-end life. Perhaps in this time of plague, Americans can at least agree that the romance of Arcadia is suddenly preferable to the allure of big-city lights. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  In his daily coronavirus briefing on Wednesday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo was as haughty and boastful as ever. The difference this time was that the Albany press pack didn’t give him a free pass. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER It’s incredible how highly he rates himself when he has presided over the most COVID deaths of any state in the nation by far — 22,976 as of Wednesday, some seven times more than California, 11 times more than Florida. New York still hasn’t come to grips with why that is. The disparity is not a random act of God, as the governor would have us believe. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP He bears at least some culpability. He was slower to respond to the threat of the virus. And then he compounded that error with the unforgivably callous act of forcing nursing homes to admit COVID-positive patients — a death sentence for other residents as the infection spread like wildfire. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MIRANDA DEVINE'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The American colonists rebelled from the king of England for less than what Gov. Gretchen Whitmer has done in Michigan. It’s a cautionary tale, as many politicians have recently crossed the line and forced Americans to live in ways that would have been shocking three months ago. Whitmer’s actions are merely one example of a politician using dire circumstances to arbitrarily infringe on the freedoms of those they claim to govern. We are co-authoring this column to put a spotlight on this dangerous pattern of government overreach during COVID-19 and to present better solutions. ADAM LAXALT: CORONAVIRUS AND TRANSPARENCY — THESE GOVERNORS USING CRISIS TO HIDE ACTIONS FROM CITIZENS Americans never wanted to see small-business owners treated like criminals. We never wanted our parks and beaches to be designated as inherently dangerous. We have never been required to stay away from loved ones who are sick or dying. As a nation, we understand the severity of the health crisis we now face, but the law should never be used to persecute an individual’s freedom nor to prosecute Americans operating legal businesses to support their families. Charging small-business owners with crimes is just too much, especially when the public wants leaders to pursue a level-headed approach. With each passing day, we see politicians like Whitmer singlehandedly picking winners and losers with executive orders. Concerns about such authoritarian cronyism were strongly considered by the Founding Fathers when they framed a government with separate branches of government. As James Madison wrote: “The accumulation of all powers, legislative, executive and judiciary, in the same hands, whether of one, a few, or many... may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny." Today, the state of Georgia is deserving of attention. The COVID-19 pandemic has been handled in an orderly fashion, for the benefit of the people who live there. Gov. Brian Kemp, while the most influential person in Georgia’s decision-making process, is not the only voice at the table; Georgia law requires the State Senate and House to be full-fledged partners in times of emergency. Two other features of what was done in Georgia that would serve other states well to match.  First, public health state of emergencies must have the concurrence of the General Assembly. Second, the legislature must maintain the right to terminate the state of emergency at any time.   On March 14, Kemp issued an executive order declaring a public health state of emergency, calling forth the emergency powers of his office with the compliance of the legislature. On March 16, the legislature convened to ratify Kemp’s order. At that time, the House and Senate each had the opportunity to concur with or terminate the governor’s declaration. Having determined the gravity of the situation demanded emergency action, the Senate and House quickly agreed. There are also two other features of what was done in Georgia that would serve other states well to match. First, public health state of emergencies must have the concurrence of the General Assembly. Second, the legislature must maintain the right to terminate the state of emergency at any time. Together, these checks on the executive branch limit what the governor may order and create a partnership where the executive branch of government is agile enough to meet citizens’ needs without legislation. On April 8, Kemp extended the public health state of emergency through May 13, under the same set of conditions as the first — legislature concurring and retaining the right to end things at any time. Again, on April 30, the governor extended the state of emergency through June 12 under the same set of conditions. On May 12, the governor issued an executive order rolling back some of the safety restrictions established for COVID-19. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Former President Harry Truman stated that his incoming successor, Dwight Eisenhower, would issue an order and wonder why nothing happened. Truman believed that the five-star general would struggle to establish consensus outside his own orbit. Truman remarked it would not be long until Eisenhower learned that without a partnership with Congress, not much would get done. In these present days, too many politicians are turning Truman’s words upside down. Let this sink in: a number of states are now under indefinite executive orders, with no mechanism for a legislative check and balance. For many states with part-time assemblies, legislators cannot even convene for oversight or to pass helpful legislation without an express invitation from the governor. The separation of powers is vital to American democracy. The separation of powers accepts that government is impacted by the realities of human nature and the pursuit of self-interest. It works because the people are in charge. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Without the basic protections deemed so valuable by America’s founders, domination by a single leader will ensue – we’ve seen as much in Michigan and other unfortunate instances across the nation. Georgia showed that an effective response is possible without tyranny. The separation of powers is one of the principles that led to America’s greatness. It works, and it’s how it’s done in Georgia. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID AVELLA Republican Mike Dugan serves as majority leader in the Georgia State Senate. 

Vice President Biden calls out those 'tasked with enforcing the rule of law' for 'abusing their powers' during virtual commencement address. President Trump recently concocted a new phrase to continue his absurd attacks and insults against President Barack Obama. I’m not even going to dignify the phrase by including it in this column. Suffice to say, without providing any facts (his usual method of operation), Trump accused his predecessor in the White House of “the greatest political scandal in the history of the United States.” Why did Trump hurl this completely unfounded accusation? Why, in the middle of a pandemic confirmed to have taken almost 100,000 American lives – including an alarmingly disproportionate number of African-Americans and Hispanics – did Trump attack the only African-American president in our history? MSNBC’S MIKA BRZEZINSKI WANTS TRUMP BLOCKED BY TWITTER: ‘A CALL IS BEING SET UP’ And why – at the same time as he’s trying to lure African-American voters to support him in the November election – did Trump go after our standard-bearer? It’s simple. Because Trump wants to distract the American people. Because he wants to blame the administration of President Obama and Vice President Joe Biden for the Trump administration’s many failures. Because Trump wants to get reelected at any cost. To put it precisely, because Trump knows that if he can boost his share of the African-American vote up to 10 percent – from the approximately 6 percent of our vote he got in 2016 – he will be reelected. Or alternatively, if Trump can motivate just 8 percent of African-Americans not to vote for Vice President Biden – or to vote for a third-party candidate –Trump can will as well. However, this political strategy will fail. Because no matter how hard Trump tries to smear the legacy of his predecessor, we will not easily forget the tremendous accomplishments of the Obama-Biden administration. And we will not forget the terrible failures of the Trump administration, including its inept response to the coronavirus pandemic. Quite the opposite. We will make Trump pay a price at the polls for going after President Obama. We will ensure that Trump’s attack, intended to both attract and suppress the African-American vote, will backfire in November. But before we debate presidential legacies, I’d like to focus on another dangerous phrase repeated by the president this week. On Monday, Trump said he’s taking hydroxychloroquine to combat the coronavirus. This despite the fact that the Food and Drug Administration warned against the widespread use of the drug. In defending himself, Trump stated: “What do you have to lose?” Which got me to thinking: remember when Trump said those words before? I do! Remember when, in August 2016, Trump was running for president and he asked African-Americans: “What the hell do you have to lose” in voting for him? I do! Remember when, in August 2017, after white supremacist protests in Charlottesville, Va., Trump said there were “some very fine people” among the white supremacists? I do! Remember when, in January 2018, in speaking about immigration at a bipartisan meeting with members of Congress, Trump reportedly asked, in reference to African and other countries, “Why are we having all these people from s---hole countries come here?” I do! Remember when, in July 2019, Trump tweeted that Democratic Reps. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan are “from countries whose governments are a complete and total catastrophe” and that they should “go back” to those countries? I do! And by the way, three of these congresswomen were born in the United States of America! Remember when, that same month, Trump attacked Rep. Elijah Cummings, D-Md., as a "brutal bully" and called Cummings' majority-black district a "dangerous and filthy place?" I do!  Congressman Cummings, may he rest in peace, was a legendary leader and a dear friend, who died exactly three months after being attacked by Trump. Why did all of these painful Trump memories come flooding back to me this week? Why did Trump’s attack on the Obama-Biden legacy, combined with his repetition of the phrase, “What do you have to lose,” get me so fired up? Because the American people – especially African-Americans – have already lost so much during the Trump administration. And we stand to lose so much more if he is reelected to a second term in November. So, back to Trump’s shameless and unfounded smear of President Obama. Let’s focus on the facts and what exactly we have to lose. As my Fox News colleague, Juan Williams, wrote in his aptly-titled book, “What the Hell Do You Have to Lose,” African-Americans stand to lose a rising middle class, an equal opportunity to compete in the workforce, and a society that values fairness and supports equality. Specifically, during the Obama-Biden administration, African-American unemployment and poverty rates dropped by historic levels. Incarceration rates for African-Americans also fell during each year under President Obama to their lowest point in over two decades. At the same time, life expectancy and high school graduation rates among African-Americans reached their highest levels ever. And during the Obama-Biden administration, over 1 million more African-American and Hispanic students enrolled in college. President Obama and Vice President Biden made 62 lifetime appointments of African- Americans to the federal bench. These appointments included 26 African-American women – more than appointed during any presidential administration in American history.  Now that’s a legacy of our 44th president for the ages. And it’s just a drop in the bucket of a listing of the accomplishments of the Obama-Biden administration. So what is Donald Trump’s legacy? He and his Republican Party have opposed and tried to overturn almost every accomplishment of his predecessor. On employment, education, criminal justice and health care, African-American’s rights and progress have been eroded since Trump took office.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The independence of our judiciary and African-Americans’ hard-fought right to vote are under constant attack. According to the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., has enabled the Trump administration to pack the federal bench with 150 judges who are “some of the most extreme nominees” in American history. And Trump’s Justice Department has abused the Civil Rights Act to countenance the closure of polling places in urban areas used predominantly by communities of color. The Trump administration and Republican governors have also made it more difficult for African- Americans and other communities of color to register to vote. They have passed laws to end or limit early voting, to require documentation to vote, and to purge voter rolls. That will be the disgraceful legacy of our 45th president. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So when Donald Trump falsely accuses Barack Obama of crimes and he asks us what we have to lose, the stark difference between these presidents and their legacies couldn’t be clearer. Former President Obama’s one-word response to Trump’s baseless attacks couldn’t be clearer: “Vote.” Because if we don’t, we have everything to lose. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DONNA BRAZILE

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  What if the government has it wrong -- on the medicine and the law? What if face masks can’t stop the COVID-19 virus? What if quarantining the healthy makes no medical sense? What if staying at home for months reduces immunity? What if more people have been infected with the virus in their homes than outside them? JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO: DOES THE GOVERNMENT WORK FOR US OR DO WE WORK IT? What if there are as many credible scientists and physicians who disagree with the government as those who agree with it? What if the government chooses to listen only to scientists and physicians who would tell it what it wanted to hear? What if the government silences scientists and physicians, and even fires one, who attempt to tell it what it didn’t want to hear? What if the government wants to stoke fear in the populace because mass fear produces mass compliance? What if individual fear reduces individual immunity? What if a healthy immunity gets stronger when challenged? What if a pampered immunity gets weaker when challenged? What if we all pass germs and viruses -- that we don’t even know we have -- on to others all the time, but their immune systems repel what we pass on to them?  What if the COVID-19 virus has run its course and run into natural immunities? What if many folks have had symptom-free episodes with many viruses and are now immune from them? What if the government refuses to understand this because it undermines the government’s power to control us? What if government orders to nursing homes and assisted living facilities to accept the sick and contagious are insane? What if the same government that micromanages nursing homes and assisted living facilities knows that they are not hospitals and are not equipped to cure the sick or contain contagion? What if the government makes health care decisions not on the basis of medicine or human nature but statistics? What if reliance on the government’s statistics has made many folks sick? What if we’d all be healthier and happier if we make our own choices with our own physicians rather than the government making choices for us? What if it is un-American for the government to tell you how to care for yourself? What if it is equally un-American for you to follow the government when it intrudes into your personal choices? What if the Supreme Court has ruled many times that your health care decisions are private, personal and to be made between you and your physician? What if the Supreme Court has also ruled many times that your private health care decisions are none of the government’s business? What if we never elected a government to keep us free from all viruses, but we did elect it to keep us free from all tyrants? What if the government -- which can’t deliver the mail, fill potholes, stop robocalls, or spend within its income -- is the last entity on earth into whose hands we would voluntarily repose our health for safekeeping? What if the government won’t admit that its understanding of science is colored by politics?  What if the government has misunderstood its mandate? What if the government thinks it can do its job by keeping us safe but unfree? What if -- according to the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence -- government’s first duty is to safeguard our rights? What if there is no legal basis for the government to keep us at home or to close our businesses? What if the government gave itself the power to interfere with our personal choices? What if that self-imposed power violates the basic constitutional principle that the government derives its powers from the consent of the governed? What if no one consented to a government that interferes with our personal choices? What if our personal choices to take personal chances have never needed a government permission slip? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER What if the Constitution was written to restrain the government? What if all in government -- local, state and federal -- have taken an oath to uphold and comply with the Constitution? What if the government decrees that liquor sales are essential but clothing sales are not? What if the government decrees that abortions are essential but orthopedic surgery is not? What if the government decrees that music stores are essential but the free exercise of religion is not? What if these decisions about what is essential and inessential are for individuals -- and not for the government -- to make? What if to the barber or short-order cook or retail salesperson a barbershop and a luncheonette and a clothing store are essential? What if to those who love God, the free exercise of religion is essential? What if the government makes essential whatever serves its friends, enhances its wealth, maintains its stability and removes obstacles to its exercise of power? What if the Constitution -- with its protections of our rights to make free choices -- is an intentional obstacle to governmental power? What if America’s founders and the Constitution’s framers chose liberty over safety? What if the government doesn’t like that choice? What if the government only nominally endorses it? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP What if -- when the pandemic is over -- the government remains tyrannical? What if -- when the pandemic is over -- folks sue the government for its destruction of life, liberty and property only to learn that the government gave itself immunity from such lawsuits? What if -- when the pandemic is over -- the government refuses to acknowledge its end? What if -- as Thomas Jefferson said -- the blood of patriots should be spilled on the tree of revolution at least once in every generation? What if we nullify the government that has nullified our rights? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO

America is inherently an optimistic country, in contrast to the media’s misery merchants. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.   As states begin to reopen, Americans are reporting being happier than before. According to the Gallup poll, 72 percent reported feeling happiness "during a lot of the day, yesterday" – a 5-point increase from a month prior. Gallup also found a 12-point decrease in "worry." Now, this might be the first time you heard this, though the findings are two days old. If you can't make a misery sandwich out of good news, our media merchants say: why bother? Which shows you the difference that's more glaring every day. GUTFELD PROCLAIMS AMERICANS WHO WANT TO RETURN TO WORK 'SHOULD BE ALLOWED THE CHANCE': 'THEY ARE ADULTS' We are inherently an optimistic country – in contrast to the media. We often believe we are less greedy, less sexist and less racist than the over-class of academics, bureaucrats and press say we are. We bristle at the negativity and question the gaslighting hoaxes, and challenge those who tell us that we can't work – while they can. We prefer to listen to doctors over TV anchors; preferring risk management over fabricated emotion. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We know we aren't perfect, and we will face some new ground ahead. But we also believe we are up to the challenge, and willing to weigh the benefits with the risks. We think critically about the future; avoid the finger-pointers glued to the past. Some 35 million people are out of work, but they are not out of spirit. That's because, as the poll shows, Americans are optimistic about what we can handle. We know big things are ahead. We can feel it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But in returning to work, Americans know we can act responsibly and respectfully, and keep each other safe. Remember, America isn't a nationality as much as it is an idea. The people who came here had to be made of tough stuff. And were still making that tough stuff. It’s you. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 20, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

Former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani joins Sean Hannity on 'Hannity.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Sometimes, a good rant is all a writer can offer. Bear with me. Last Friday morning, some 3,500 New Yorkers lined up at a Catholic church in Queens to receive free food hours before it even opened, ­according to the New York Police Department. Catholic Charities has reported a 200 percent increase in demand over the past month and a half. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP By prolonging the coronavirus shutdown long after its core mission was accomplished, Gov. Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio have plunged tens of thousands of New Yorkers into poverty. ANDY PUZDER: CORONAVIRUS RESTART – HERE'S THE MOST COMPASSIONATE THING TO DO FOR WORKERS, THEIR FAMILIES It needs to end. Now. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS OP-ED IN THE NEW YORK POST

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Attorney Sidney Powell has fired a broadside at Judge Emmet Sullivan. On Tuesday, she filed a writ of mandamus asking the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia to order Sullivan to grant the Justice Department’s motion to dismiss the case against her client, Gen. Michael Flynn. The Court of Appeals should issue that order and override Sullivan’s unprecedented and, frankly, bizarre behavior in opening up the criminal prosecution of Flynn to input from outside parties and appointing John Gleeson, a former federal prosecutor and retired federal judge (who recently penned an op-ed attacking the Justice Department), to argue against the department’s motion. ANDREW McCARTHY: THE SUSAN RICE MICHAEL FLYNN CYA EMAIL Gleeson has even told Sullivan that he may need to engage in “additional factual development.” In other words, a nonparty, private lawyer is making the astounding proposal that he be given the powers of a government prosecutor. The Justice Department moved to dismiss the charges against Flynn after an internal investigation revealed troubling information about the prosecution. The department concluded that it could not prove its case to a jury beyond a reasonable doubt. The department has now determined that the FBI had no evidence justifying an interview of Flynn in the first place. That interview resulted in the claim that Flynn “lied” to the FBI. A valid prosecution would require that the alleged lie be “material” to an investigation. Since there was no legitimate basis for an investigation, the “materiality” requirement could not be met. Rather than try to respond to the procedural nightmare Sullivan has created, Powell is now trying to go over his head. So what is a writ of mandamus? It is a request that a higher court order a lower court to perform its duty properly. The power of mandamus is given to federal appellate courts by The All Writs Act (28 U.S.C. § 1651). As a Justice Department manual on court procedures notes: “Mandamus is an extraordinary remedy, which should only be used in exceptional circumstances of peculiar emergency or public importance.” In Cheney v. U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia (2004), the Supreme Court established three conditions that Flynn – or any other petitioner – must meet before a writ can be granted: Powell makes a strong case that this matter meets all of those requirements. Powell also argues that Judge Sullivan’s behavior in the case “reveal[s] a deep-seated antagonism” toward Flynn. Powell argues that by refusing to grant the government’s motion to dismiss, Sullivan has “exceeded” his authority, “egregiously abused” his discretion, and is defying precedents of both the D.C. Circuit and the Supreme Court. That includes a 2016 decision, U.S. v. Fokker Servs., in which the Court of Appeals said that the power of a district court judge like Sullivan is “narrow” and circumscribed when the government requests the dismissal of a prosecution. That power is limited to ensuring that government prosecutors are not engaging in harassment by repeated prosecutions – dismissing a case only to refile it again later against the same defendant. Here, it appears that it is the judge who is engaging in possible harassment, not the prosecution. The Court of Appeals specifically said in Fokker that a judge can’t deny a motion to dismiss a prosecution just because the judge “has a disagreement with the prosecution’s” decision. Moreover, Powell points out that, by opening up the case to third parties to file amicus briefs and appointing a retired judge to argue against the government, Sullivan is acting in direct defiance of another Supreme Court decision issued less than two weeks ago. In U.S. v. Sineneng-Smith, a unanimous court chastised (and vacated a ruling by) the Ninth Circuit for engaging in similar behavior, opening up a criminal case to third parties to file amicus briefs and instructing them to address an issue that had not been raised by either the government or the defendant in the case. Powell also argues that Sullivan’s behavior in the case “reveal[s] a deep-seated antagonism” toward Flynn. At Flynn’s initial sentencing hearing, she notes, Sullivan “publicly berated” Flynn, although the government had reassured the judge that Flynn had given them “substantial cooperation.” The judge, she writes, “suggested [Flynn] may have committed ‘treason,’ asserted that he had ‘sold [his] country out,’ and expressed ‘disdain’ and ‘disgust’ for General Flynn’s conduct – flat wrong on crucial facts of the case.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Powell argues that these criticisms “even uttered in private conversation,” would be grounds for Sullivan to recuse himself from the case. Saying “them to the world” makes “fair judgment impossible.” This is the United States, not France or one of the handful of other countries where the roles of prosecutors and judges are combined. As Powell correctly argues, our Constitution places the law enforcement and prosecutorial functions in the executive branch, not the judicial branch. Sullivan has “disregarded the constitutional imperative of a ‘case and controversy’ and the ‘separation of powers’ that invest the power to prosecute solely in the executive branch.” He has “no authority to adopt the role of prosecutor or change the issues in the case by inviting or appointing amici to perform the investigation or prosecution that the court deems appropriate.” Powell summarizes Sullivan’s errant behavior by using Chief Justice John Roberts’ well-known baseball analogy: "This is an umpire who has decided to steal public attention from the players and focus it on himself. He wants to pitch, bat, run bases and play shortstop. In truth, he is way out in left field.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Powell not only asks the Court of Appeals to order Sullivan to dismiss the prosecution, but she also asks the court to assign another judge to the case for any final proceedings that may occur: “one who has not implied that [Flynn] is a traitor.” The interests of fundamental fairness and the objective, nonpartisan administration of justice favor the Court of Appeals granting both of those requests. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY HANS VON SPAKOVSKY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Testifying before the Senate Health, Labor and Pensions Committee on Tuesday, Dr. Anthony Fauci warned of the potential for "really serious" consequences from renewed coronavirus outbreaks should states reopen prematurely. But, Fauci’s warning applies equally well to the “really serious” consequences of opening too late. Of course, Fauci is an immunologist focused on the pandemic, not a businessperson or an economist. While it’s important to heed the advice of medical experts, it’s a mistake to ignore the economic costs of their recommendations in terms of both human suffering and death. As stated by President Trump, we can’t let the COVID-19 “cure be worse than the problem itself.” The severe physical and emotional impact of unemployment on American workers lends credence to the president’s concern. ADAM LAXALT: CORONAVIRUS AND TRANSPARENCY — THESE GOVERNORS USING CRISIS TO HIDE ACTIONS FROM CITIZENS A recent Federal Reserve Bank survey found that almost 40 percent of people in households making less than $40,000 a year who had jobs in February, lost their jobs in March. Commenting on the survey, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell observed that “[t]his reversal of economic fortune has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future.” He makes an important point. I still recall being a 25-year-old in 1975 supporting a wife and two children, finishing college, and preparing to enter law school. The economic and emotional pressures were intense, alleviated only by the fact that I had a job, could feed my family, and pay our rent and utilities while looking forward to a better life. A sudden government shutdown that resulted in me losing my job and having to face the prospect of being unable to feed or house my young family, let alone complete my education, would have been devastating. It’s hard to even imagine sitting home day after day for weeks – maybe months – with those I loved, able to work but prohibited from doing so, our only source of income a government check. I certainly would have appreciated that check, but government largesse is a meager substitute for the dignity of a job, the security of a paycheck and the opportunity to succeed. If I lived in a state that insisted on remaining shut down, knowing that the risks for a healthy 25-year-old from the virus were very low (a death rate of roughly 0.03 percent for people in their 20s), I would have joined the protesters fighting for the right to resume their lives. If the governor of my state nonetheless persisted in keeping the economy on lockdown, the associated frustration, despair and misery would have taken a severe physical and emotional toll. We always knew the shutdown was a tradeoff between economic damage and slowing the spread of the disease. In this respect, the shutdown initially made sense. Reopening the economy will similarly be a tradeoff that makes sense.   As such, I was not at all surprised to learn that a recent study entitled “Projected Deaths of Despair From COVID-19” by the Well Being Trust and the Robert Graham Center for Policy Studies in Family Medicine and Primary Care, predicted that a massive number of Americans could die due to the shutdown “if we do not do something immediately.” Labeling deaths of despair from drugs, alcohol and suicide an “epidemic within the pandemic,” the researchers estimated total deaths ranging around 27,644 (assuming a quick recovery, with unemployment having the smallest impact) to 154,037 (assuming a slow recovery and unemployment having the greatest impact). The Deaths of Despair study’s number one suggestion for avoiding these deaths: “Get People Working.” This is not to say that the government shutdown was the wrong decision. The government’s goal was to find a way to deal with the disease so as to avoid overwhelming our health system as had occurred in Italy and Spain. It appears to have succeeded. Even in the places hardest hit by this disease, we have avoided that potential catastrophe. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We always knew the shutdown was a tradeoff between economic damage and slowing the spread of the disease. In this respect, the shutdown initially made sense. Reopening the economy will similarly be a tradeoff that makes sense. The economic and humanitarian costs of the shutdown are growing and could easily spiral out of control while the public-health risks appear to be diminishing. Rather than dead bodies piling up like cordwood as predicted when it reopened, Georgia announced Tuesday that it had the lowest number of COVID-19 positive patients hospitalized since hospitals started reporting data on April 8, with a 34 percent decrease from 1,500 patients hospitalized on May 1 to 986 on May 18. Our lives have changed. The need to wear masks, avoid crowds, keep our distance, wash our hands and keep them off surfaces will continue until there is a vaccine or an effective therapeutic, as will the need for vulnerable people to self-isolate. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But, the time has come for those who are not high risk to work, socialize and circulate. We need the economy to begin breathing again to avoid the suffering and potentially irreparable consequences of a continued shutdown. At this point, the most compassionate thing we can do for American workers and their families is to restart the economy. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDY PUZDER

 How amusing to find President Obama’s national security adviser, Susan Rice, suddenly calling for the public release of the Flynn–Kislyak conversation intercepted by the Obama administration in late December 2016. I called for its release nearly three-and-a-half years ago. Dr. Rice, in a familiar pattern for her, has spent the ensuing years saying things that were obviously untrue only to reverse herself once the paper trail starts to dribble out. ANDREW MCCARTHY: RICE TRIED TO PROTECT OBAMA, BLAME COMEY FOR WITHHOLDING INTELLIGENCE FROM FLYNN & TRUMP TEAM Try not to get dizzy. Rice has gone from claiming to have had no knowledge of Obama administration monitoring of Flynn and other Trump associates, to claiming no knowledge of any unmaskings of Trump associates, to admitting she was complicit in the unmaskings, to — now — a call for the recorded conversation between retired general Michael Flynn and Russian ambassador Sergey Kislyak to be released because it would purportedly show that the Obama administration had good reason to be concerned about Flynn (y’know, the guy she said she had no idea they were investigating). CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Naturally, we have now learned that Rice was deeply involved in the Obama administration’s Trump–Russia investigation, including its sub-investigation of Flynn, a top Trump campaign surrogate who was slated to replace Rice as national security adviser when President Trump took office. On Tuesday night, I did a column for Fox News, analyzing the newly unredacted paragraph from Rice’s previously reported email memorializing a White House meeting on these subjects. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The meeting took place on January 5, 2017, and involved Rice, Obama, and Vice President Biden, the administration’s top political hierarchy on national security matters, along with Obama’s top law-enforcement and counterintelligence officials, deputy attorney general Sally Yates (soon formally to take the acting AG role she was already performing), and FBI director James Comey. Prior redactions had already demonstrated that the meeting’s central purpose was to discuss the rationale for withholding intelligence about Russia from the incoming Trump national-security team. It is perfectly obvious that not all Russia information was being withheld. Indeed, the following day, Comey would join other intelligence chiefs to brief then-president-elect Trump on Russia’s interference in the 2016 campaign (and we now know the FBI treated Comey’s conversation with Trump as an investigative mission). What Obama officials decided to conceal was the Obama administration’s investigation of the Trump campaign — a probe based on the absurd theory that Trump’s campaign had conspired in the Kremlin’s hacking and other cyber espionage operations. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING ANDREW McCARTHY'S COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ANDREW McCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. It’s not trouble enough that President Trump is engaged in a tense, multifront struggle with China. He also must guard his back from attacks by elements of the American media. Tuesday provided a memorable example. JONATHAN TOBIN: FOR REPORTING OBAMAGATE STRAIGHT, MEDIA KNIVES OUT FOR CATHERINE HERRIDGE With a World Health Organization meeting dominated by the coronavirus, a spokesman for China’s Foreign Ministry issued a belligerent, threatening statement. The spokesman, Zhao Lijian, told reporters in Beijing: “The United States has made a miscalculation and found the wrong target when it picks on China, shirks its responsibilities and bargains on how to fulfill its ­international obligations to the World Health Organization.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In its report of those remarks, The New York Times used this headline: “China hits back, in words and aid pledges, as America goes at it alone.” It went on to accuse Trump of threatening “isolationism.” See, China “hits back” means America started it. And “isolationism” suggests it’s the US against the world, when, in fact, 122 nations ­favored a probe into the Chinese origins of the virus and its human-to-human transmission. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Even conceding the American media’s hatred of Trump, you might assume the deaths and devastation caused by the coronavirus would at least lead them to view China’s denials of any wrongdoing with suspicion. If you made that assumption, you would be naive — and wrong. For the left, Trump and America are to blame. That’s where they ­begin and that’s where they end. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  If you’ve lived on a coast during hurricane season, driven in a big city with heavy smog, or hiked in woods prone to wildfires, you may have seen a simple color-coded alert. At a glance, it told you if a hidden danger was present that affected you and others — an approaching storm, harmful air pollution, or dry brush ready to burn. Simple information with practical advice to stay safe and not endanger others. Authorities didn’t close the beach, block the road or close the trail. Instead, they counted on you to read the sign and let you decide on the appropriate precautions. In the past few months, COVID-19 has become a new danger. My initiative, Resolve to Save Lives, works in the United States and around the world. We looked for the very best policies to help us get our economy started again without rekindling the epidemic. DR. RASHID A. CHOTANI: MEDICAL TREATMENT FOR NON-CORONAVIRUS PATIENTS MUST RESUME – HERE'S HOW TO DO IT SAFELY Americans want two things: to get back to business and to not endanger the health of their loved ones and themselves. The better we control the virus, the sooner we can restart our economy, because to protect livelihoods, we must protect lives. And the quicker we get back to work, the healthier we will be. Today we released our recommendations – a four-level, color-coded alert system. Think of it as a weather report on the virus that does three things. This alert system should be implemented by state governments — with wide consultation within society — and then applied at both state and local levels. First, it empowers you to protect yourself and your family. There are times when older adults and people with serious health conditions should be extra careful to avoid infection. And businesses, schools, health care facilities, nursing homes, and others need practical information on what they can do at different levels of risk. We need to know about a looming or receding threat such as a hurricane. Increased risk of the new coronavirus should be communicated similarly so people know what they can do to protect themselves and their loved ones. Knowing that this is a week to wear your mask when you’re indoors and near other people should be as easy and straightforward as bringing an umbrella to work on a rainy day. Second, it holds government – and all of us – accountable. We found the seven best measures to track to know how widely the virus is spreading, how ready our hospitals and health workers are, and how safe our public health system can keep us. And we made sure to account for both health and economics, which are in sync, not in conflict here. Third, this system can accelerate progress reducing risk by focusing on crucially important things we can do to restore economic activity and fight the virus without rekindling the pandemic. There are basic principles to follow (our recently released guidelines are here, an explanation of them here, and details of what a system would look like in your community here). They communicate a simple, practical message: It’s not about open vs. closed or health vs. economics. It’s about stages of opening and about accelerating economic recovery while keeping people as safe as we can. When there are lots of cases, health care or basic control measures are getting overwhelmed, more precautions — washing your hands, teleworking, cleaning dirty surfaces well – will protect you and others. When cases decline, it’s safer to resume some normal activities, while still physical distancing wherever possible and not having large gatherings. When the virus is better controlled, we move toward a new normal, continuing safety measures such as regular handwashing, protecting the most vulnerable and not going out if we’re sick. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It’s not about open vs. closed or health vs. economics. It’s about stages of opening and about accelerating economic recovery while keeping people as safe as we can. Each community can find a balance, increasing or decreasing the alert level based on health, economic and social considerations. We all want to get back to our normal lives. By tailoring our actions to the level of viral threat, we can open up society as quickly as possible and people can get back to other essential work while also protecting the vulnerable and saving lives. We’ll continue to work with communities around the country and the world to discover even better approaches to tracking, responding to, and stopping the virus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There’s a lot riding on our success. A careless action could ignite a wildfire that jeopardizes a whole community, and ignoring the alert levels of COVID-19 could start a deadly viral flare-up that sets back economic recovery. By adopting an alert-level approach, we can empower people, hold governments accountable and accelerate progress. We can recover our economy without risking our lives. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. TOM FRIEDEN

 Journalists are pack animals. That’s especially true in Washington. Despite the hunger for scoops, when it comes to the substance of stories, few have the guts to go against the ideological groupthink that prevails in our nation’s capital. That’s what makes CBS’ Catherine Herridge so exceptional. ANDREW McCARTHY: RICE TRIED TO PROTECT OBAMA, BLAME COMEY FOR WITHHOLDING INTELLIGENCE FROM FLYNN & TRUMP TEAM In an era when too many network journalists slant their reporting to serve establishment opinion, Herridge sticks to the facts. Her dogged determination to get to the bottom of stories has made her an invaluable source on the national-security beat. Her sterling quality and integrity have also put a target on her back. When it came to the “collusion” hoax, she dared to let the truth guide her. Likewise with her reporting into government misconduct in the prosecution of President Trump’s first national security adviser, Michael Flynn. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Most of her colleagues reveled in collusion falsehoods — and ignored FBI wrongdoing. She did the opposite. But there’s always a price to be paid for ­refusing to conform. If you expose documents that further discredit the already-exploded myth that Trump colluded with Russia, you are going to lose friends in Washington. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If you show that there was a concerted attempt to spy on his campaign and to leak information designed to paralyze his administration, you aren’t going to be popular with journalists who were part of this effort. So it’s hardly surprising that Herridge — a star reporter at Fox News from 1996 until last year before moving to CBS — has been subjected to abuse by Joe Biden’s campaign mouthpiece and backstabbed by her colleagues in recent days. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING JONATHAN TOBIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  In national polling, former Vice President Joe Biden is the clear 2020 front-runner. He's up nearly five points in the RealClearPolitics polling average; he's up in Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Florida and Arizona. That's because Biden campaigned as the anti-Bernie Sanders: a "return to normalcy" candidate rather than a transformational one. His entire pitch relied on his high name recognition, the general perception of his likability and his unthreatening demeanor. The coronavirus pandemic merely underscored this pitch. Biden hasn't waned in the national polling since the pandemic — his lead has been utterly consistent. That's true even though Biden has been relegated to his basement, gaffing through completely anodyne statements about COVID-19, glitching his way to a few thousand viewers at a time, being interrupted by the birds honking outside his window. ALI PARDO: TRUMP SUPPORTS FREEDOM FOR CUBAN PEOPLE, WHILE BIDEN WOULD ABANDON US COMMITMENT TO FREEDOM How can a major party candidate win if nobody cares whether he's even alive? Because Biden's candidacy isn't a referendum on Biden but on Trump: President Donald Trump is widely perceived as volatile, unstable, chaotic. Biden is perceived as somnambulant. Better a sleepwalker, many voters seem to think, than the rolling chaos of a second Trump term. Yet somehow, the Biden campaign has decided to abandon Biden's greatest advantage: his promise of a sedated interregnum. Instead, according to The New York Times, Biden's campaign will embrace radical proposals. "With Mr. Biden leading President Trump in the polls, the former vice president and other Democratic leaders are racing to assemble a new governing agenda that meets the extraordinary times — and they agree it must be far bolder than anything the party establishment has embraced before," The Times reported. Are Americans truly desperate for a reshaping of our medical system, a universal basic income and trillions more in debt?   Some of the new proposals are directly from the Sanders campaign: forgiving student loans, a Green New Deal, expansion of government health care, a government jobs plan, a ban on stock buybacks and compulsion toward profit sharing for corporations. Meanwhile, former President Barack Obama explained over the weekend that the coronavirus has merely underscored deep-seated American racism that requires a complete remaking of our society. Equating disparate health and incomes between black Americans and white Americans due to COVID-19 with the shooting of black Georgian Ahmaud Arbery — and citing both as legacies of America's historic racism — Obama stated, "No generation has been better positioned to be warriors for justice and remake the world." CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But do Americans really want the world remade? Or are they simply longing for the world of four months ago, when unemployment stood at 3.5 percent, when incomes were rising at the lowest end of the income scale, when Americans could attend events without fear of infection and death? Are Americans truly desperate for a reshaping of our medical system, a universal basic income and trillions more in debt? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Biden seems to be betting on the latter. And that's idiocy of the highest order. It completely undermines his entire case for the nomination; it allows Trump to place the new radical agenda front and center, rather than his own foibles. Biden's go-for-broke strategy is a massive opportunity for Trump — if Trump doesn't blow it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BEN SHAPIRO

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. For three years, our entire professional class hectored us about the overweening threat we supposedly faced from Russia. SUSAN RICE'S RESURFACED 2017 COMMENTS DENYING KNOWLEDGE OF TRUMP TEAM SURVEILLANCE RAISE EYEBROWS Russia, you'll remember, had somehow hacked American democracy during the 2016 presidential campaign. Russian agents had infiltrated our government at the highest levels. Honorable former naval officers -- people who seemed honorable, anyway, like Carter Page -- were, in fact, secret stooges of Vladimir Putin's and they were working toward diabolical ends with political consultants like Roger Stone. It was all hiding in plain sight, and it was working. Forget Mexico or Saudi Arabia or the United Arab Emirates or many other countries. It was Russia, more than any other place that threatened America's sovereignty, that was actually in control of our foreign policy. That's the story they told us. None of it was ever plausible. In fact, it was completely absurd. It was obviously absurd. There was never any evidence that it was true, but they kept saying, day after tiresome day, until it stuck. Until every single CNN viewer, every single PBS donor, every subscriber to The New Yorker Magazine believed it as a matter of religious faith. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Russia hacked our democracy. It was almost on their tote bags. It was their mantra. Chris Cuomo, CNN anchor: The Russians exploited a massive backdoor into the foundation of our democracy. Tony Romm, technology policy reporter for The Washington Post: The work by Russian agents to try to destabilize American democracy. Don Lemon, CNN anchor: That's everything you need to know about the threat to our democracy. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi: ... Attack on the integrity of our elections. Hillary Clinton: The first time we've had an adversary attack us that we have not responded. These people -- brandishing their silly credentials like we have a moral obligation to listen to them because they know what they're talking about. They were fools. Reading their stupid talking points again and again, like they were real. But they were doing it for a reason. The beauty of the Russia fable was that it allowed these people, our ruling class, to ignore the huge number of actual problems the United States faced, problems that, in many cases, they caused or at the very least, failed to solve. While our leaders in Washington wasted literally years accusing each other of working for Putin, China grew more powerful. It grew closer to replacing the United States as the world's dominant nation. The drug addiction crisis that has killed tens of thousands, hundreds of thousands, over time. The border that is essentially open. A disappearing middle class, the core of our country. The rise of China, and then, of course, any number of counterproductive foreign wars that should have ended long ago. For three years, nobody in Washington talked about any of this. In fact, failing to worry about Russia exclusively invited suspicion on you. If you wanted, for example, American troops home from the Middle East or if you wondered aloud why no one seemed to care when your 23-year-old niece died of a fentanyl OD, that might be evidence you, too, are colluding with Russia. And that's not an exaggeration. Susan Rice -- who seems smart, she went to Stanford -- admitted later that she decided Michael Flynn was a Russian spy because he talked too much about China, and that's what Russian spies do. Now, Donald Trump was elected -- no one thought he would be -- precisely because he talked about issues like these, the ones that mattered. That was a massive threat. So they derailed, to a large extent, his first term agenda, using a hoax concocted by the administration he replaced. Who benefited from this? Well, the people who thought it up. But nobody benefited more than the Chinese government. While our leaders in Washington wasted literally years accusing each other of working for Putin, China grew more powerful. It grew closer to replacing the United States as the world's dominant nation. By the time this version of coronavirus spread West from Wuhan, China was calling many of the shots internationally. We didn't even know it until the crisis hit. For example, the U.S. has given far more money than any other nation to the World Health Organization. And yet strangely, our ally, Taiwan, still is not a member of the WHO. Why is that? Only one reason -- China doesn't want them to be, and so they're not. China is effectively in control of the WHO. You want proof? Watch the director of the World Health Organization repeat the most ridiculous Chinese propaganda as if it were all completely true with an utterly straight face. As always, if you want to know who is really in charge, watch the lies they tell. Is China now too strong to criticize? Is our only option to submit? Maybe. We'll find out. Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Director-General of the World Health Organization: The Chinese government is to be congratulated for the extraordinary measures it has taken to contain the outbreak. China is actually setting a new standard for outbreak response, and it's not an exaggeration. So, the new standard the fake doctor you just saw is promoting, in the end, created the worst economic calamity since the Great Depression, a calamity that China benefited immensely from. China may be the only country on the globe that has become stronger in the face of this. No doubt, the Chinese government was pleased with what their puppets at the WHO accomplished. On Monday night, the president of the United States released a letter to the World Health Organization warning that the U.S. will suspend funding permanently if the organization doesn't reform itself right away and wean itself from China. We'll see if that happens. Either way, though, the problem is much bigger than just the World Health Organization. China's tentacles extend almost everywhere in our society. The Chinese government is now deeply enmeshed in higher education in this country. It is not an overstatement. A number of university professors, including one on Tuesday, have been arrested for spying on behalf of Beijing. Literally spies on campus -- tenured spies. China has profound influence in Hollywood, you know that. And professional sports, we saw that last year; and in corporate America, up and down the chain. The Chinese own huge amounts of real estate throughout this country -- one of the reasons your kids can't afford to live in our cities. All of this has changed our lives in profound ways, but all of it happened with very little public notice. Why? Because the people making it possible didn't want to advertise it. They were getting very rich from it. Every ambitious climber in corporate America knows the rules now. Don't offend Beijing, and you could be rewarded. The head of Disney's streaming service just left to become CEO of TikTok, a Chinese company. That may appall you, but in corporate America, many are envious. They wish they were him. Washington hasn't been immune to this, either. China's influence is everywhere in the capital city. Former Senator Joe Lieberman lobbies for China now. Hard to believe, isn't it? Samir Jain was a top cybersecurity official for the Obama administration. Now, he lobbies for Huawei. And those are just a couple of the very few who have followed the law and actually registered under FARA as foreign lobbyists. Hunter Biden never bothered to do that. Biden worked hard to sell his access to politicians in Washington -- presumably his father, Vice President Joe Biden, chief among them -- to investors who were getting rich in China. It was never a secret. Many people in Washington knew exactly what Hunter Biden was doing, and they didn't say anything to anybody. Why? Because it didn't seem weird to them. It wasn't strange. So many other well-connected people were doing the same thing --  selling access to elected officials in Washington to the Chinese. Nancy Pelosi still doesn't understand why any of this is a big deal. Pelosi has spent decades bowing to the Chinese government even as she attacks this country is racist and backward, as she does virtually every day of the week. Just the other day, Pelosi announced that no conversation about China is legitimate. It's all a distraction. Pelosi: Let me just say that what the president is saying about China is interesting -- it's an interesting diversion. Let's keep our focus on meeting the needs of the American people opening our economy. Yes, it's a "diversion." How many antibiotics do we make in this country in the middle of a pandemic? Let's see. Zero. None. All in China. Just a diversion. When you watch something like Pelosi's statement, a terrifying thought creeps up from the back of your mind. Is China now too strong to criticize? Is our only option to submit? Maybe. We'll find out. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Even now, there's certainly downsides for anyone who dare say a negative word about Beijing. China is now threatening to punish elected American officials who dare to criticize the Chinese response to coronavirus. Hard to believe? They're saying that out loud. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 19, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Dr. Marc Siegel says reoffering care is a 'great move forward' for patients and health care providers.  Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  To meet COVID-19 head-on, the American medical community has had no choice but to make the pandemic our primary focus. We have been forced to retool our hospitals by opening more beds, canceling elective procedures (including non-emergency surgeries), converting operating rooms into intensive care units, and a whole lot more. But we are beginning to see that turning our attention away from other illnesses and conditions comes at a serious cost. WEARING A FACE MASK CAN REDUCE CORONAVIRUS TRANSMISSION BY UP TO 75 PERCENT, STUDY SAYS An analysis by The New York Times demonstrates that more Americans have died of non-COVID-19 causes in the first third of 2020 than in the first third of 2019. Were these deaths also the result of COVID-19 and simply not recorded as such? Or have we been paying so much attention to COVID-19 that we have neglected other threats? As we continue our fight against this pandemic, we must adapt to meet the needs not only of those infected with SARS-CoV-2 (the coronavirus that causes COVID-19), but also of those Americans who require medical treatment unrelated to the pandemic. A vital step forward is reopening our hospitals and clinics for elective surgeries and other procedures that cannot be handled via telemedicine. But is this a step we can safely take? A recent report from Nature suggests that as many as 40 percent of infections occur in the days before patients become symptomatic themselves. In order to safely reopen our hospitals, we need to make sure that doing so won’t precipitate the resurgence of the disease. We argue that a vital approach to keep this risk down is to adopt an intelligent testing strategy for SARS-CoV-2. This strategy must achieve two goals: We must test patients to keep our hospital staff safe, and test hospital staff to ensure infection does not transmit from the hospital back into the community. The first challenge is to reduce the risk that an asymptomatic patient will accidentally spread the virus when coming in for an elective procedure. The currently available tests will not catch every such case, but they can identify the vast majority. When coupled with the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) – which is no longer as scarce as before – such screenings could make a considerable difference in our ability to reopen. Testing asymptomatic patients requires that we use different types of tests and interpret them together to achieve higher accuracies. The Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) testing for viral RNA is the first test to become positive, doing so around four to five days after infection, but it also has a high false-negative rate and becomes less accurate over time. By contrast, antibody testing typically starts to catch positive cases seven days after infection, but becomes increasingly accurate over time. By testing patients on the day before or day of their procedures, we are more likely to catch asymptomatic cases. Testing medical staff represents a different challenge. Regular testing of large asymptomatic groups can entail a logistical and financial burden upon the hospital or clinic. To meet this challenge, two plausible solutions are point-of-care antibody testing and pooled testing. The point-of-care (POC) antibody testing approach has the ability to test large numbers of suspected cases even without swift access to a central laboratory. Although positive POC antibody test results would require confirmation by PCR or laboratory testing, the team can take provisional protective actions while awaiting those results. Additionally, antibody screening can reveal the prevalence of prior infections and shed light on the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 in the overall population being examined. The alternative solution entails the use of “pooled testing” that enables the testing of large groups with relatively few tests. The concept is simple: instead of testing each individual separately, the samples from a large number of individuals are divided into a few groups, so that fewer need to be run. If the test is negative, the entire group is considered free of the virus; if the group is positive, subgroups are then tested until the positive individual or individuals are successfully identified. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Recent experience shows that a single positive result from RNA testing will still test positive after the addition of 63 negative samples. Once we have tested enough to understand which populations are at a higher or lower risk, we can then tailor the size of each testing group accordingly, thereby further minimizing the number of tests. The use of pooled testing can enormously reduce the burden on health care amidst this pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There is no doubt that for our health care system to work, it must not only meet the demands of COVID-19 patients, but must concurrently be able to continue to treat other unrelated illnesses and injuries. Hospitals and clinics must reopen. But to reopen safely, they must employ intelligent testing strategies that embrace both viral RNA and antibody testing. Only then can we provide great care that defies SARS-CoV-2. Also contributing to this op-ed were: Dr. Syed S. Ashraf, a board-certified internist and managing partner at Carelife Medical in Northern Virginia, providing clinical guidance and expertise for the COVID-19 screening process. Dr. Charles Mize, the chief medical officer for U.S. Health Defense and an emergency medicine specialist with extensive international and medical policy experience. Currently he is providing emergency medical care in Alaska and is actively involved in developing COVID-19 treatment protocols for different organizations. Dr. Faisal H. Cheema, a physician-scientist specializing in basic sciences and transitional and clinical research. He holds a research leadership position in a large health system and also has a faculty appointment at the University of Houston College of Medicine Dr. Terry Clark, a general surgeon, Fulbright scholar, and executive vice president and chief medical officer for Boston Biopharma. Boston Biopharma is providing point-of-care antibody testing kits for COVID-19.

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. For over 60 years, May 20 – the original Cuban Independence Day – has served as a reminder of what was lost in Cuba: liberties that many paid the ultimate sacrifice trying to regain. To this day, the Cuban people remain censored and abused by their own government, while much of the world tragically turns a blind eye. In April 1961, the Cuban exile troops of Brigade 2506, which included my grandfather, embarked on a failed attempt to free their country from dictator Fidel Castro, who stripped their fellow citizens of their rights. This group of men bravely attempted to give their homeland, their neighbors and their families the freedom we enjoy in America. This year – and especially on this day – just months after losing two of my grandparents, my heart aches thinking of these heroes and their loved ones who will never see their people freed. TRUMP CAMP HITS BIDEN OVER COMMENTS ABOUT RESTORING OBAMA POLICY TOWARD CUBA But losing their homes and their country was only the beginning of their story. In America, they found freedom and a better, safer home for themselves and their children. The story of my family fleeing Cuba is what drives my love of country and liberty. The determination of my grandfather’s generation to fight back and overcome adversity in pursuit of a better future for their children embodies the American Dream. Cuban Americans like me used to take solace in the fact that, unlike the rest of the international community, American presidents stood up for the human rights and freedom of the Cuban people. But now an emerging wing of the Democratic Party coddles socialist autocracies like Cuba and cheers on as communism runs amuck in Latin America. What was once a fringe policy position now seeps dangerously into the mainstream of the Democratic Party. There was a time when Democratic leaders were wise enough to keep the leftist ideologues within their ranks in check. But now the far-left wing of the Democratic Party – led by socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., who famously praised Castro's "literacy programs" – has taken control of the party’s policy agenda. Though Sanders has dropped out of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination, former Vice President Joe Biden – the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee – is embracing much of Sanders’ radical agenda. Just last month, when Biden was asked if he would return to the failed, Obama-era policy of appeasing the Cuban dictatorship, he quickly responded: "Yes, I would." Biden’s double-down of President Barack Obama’s Cuba policy is another example of his willingness to sell out America's longstanding commitments to freedom in Latin America, in order to win over the far-left wing of today’s Democratic Party. In contrast, President Trump has taken decisive action to combat the oppressive regime in Cuba. He has imposed strong sanctions on the Cuban military, which funnels vast swaths of Cuba’s wealth into the hands of the nation’s oppressive leaders and their cronies. Biden, on the other hand, proposes appeasement – a dangerous proposition. Obama’s failed policy enriched corrupt officials and enabled human rights abuses in Cuba and also propped up other socialist dictators in Latin America. This resulted in conflict, famine and mass migration across the region. The Nicolas Maduro dictatorship in Venezuela, supported by Cuba, is harboring Hezbollah terrorists. These actions are not only a threat to the security and welfare of the region; they threaten the well-being of Americans. Recently Biden has attempted to pivot and adopt a tough-on-Cuba stance in preparation for the 2020 election, but this bears little resemblance to his actions as vice president. Just last week, Biden tried to join in opposition to Cuba being named to the United Nations Human Rights Council. But the Obama-Biden administration attempted to appease the communist regime with lax sanctions and diplomatic overtures. And Cuba served on the U.N. Human Rights Council three separate times during Biden’s tenure. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Clearly, Biden cannot be trusted to hold Cuba’s government accountable for its horrendous actions. Rather than taking the bold decision to confront such abuse, Biden is focused on winning over American socialists. As vice president, he sold out American workers to communist China while his son Hunter made lucrative deals in Beijing. Now he is proposing we abandon the Cuban and Venezuelan people to advance his personal political interests. Come November, we cannot stand idly by while Joe Biden sells out the Cuban people and our core American values. My story is just one of many. We cannot allow the sacrifices of families like mine to have been made to be in vain. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Now more than ever we need to lean into the very values that make us uniquely American –freedom, liberty and the understanding that every human life is a gift from God. To move forward, we must remember our shared past, build on the present, and fight for our future. And we need President Trump leading that charge.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Freedom of Information laws protect democracy by empowering citizens to hold officials accountable. This safeguard isn’t swept aside because our country is suffering through a pandemic; it becomes more important to make sure politicians are acting responsibly. In an editorial published last week, The New York Times rightly asserts that public officials don’t get to withhold information and avoid accountability. In fact, the public deserves more transparency in difficult times. “While the work of government continues, citizens are losing a fundamental right to transparency. That’s a threat to good government and democracy,” the editors write. TUCKER CARLSON: AMERICANS ARE REBELLING AGAINST NEUROTIC, DUMB LEADERS AND EXTREME CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS Those entrusted to process FOIA requests perform a critical service that cannot go unfulfilled or under-fulfilled, even during times of crisis. However, despite the greater need for transparency in the wake of COVID-19, some governors have decided to withhold vital information and obstruct the FOIA process. For example, Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, D-Mich., is using emergency powers provided during the pandemic to refuse a request by Americans for Public Trust. APT is seeking vital information pertaining to a state contract run by the Great Lakes Community Engagement, headed by a Michigan-based Democratic consultant and managed in coordination with EveryAction, a project of NGP VAN, which boasts that it’s the “leading technology provider to Democratic and progressive campaigns and organizations.” Why this no-bid contract was awarded by the governor’s office has never been explained. The people of Michigan are being kept in the dark about why a Democratic political data firm was hired to conduct sensitive coronavirus-contact-tracing surveys that gave the firm access to personal and private health records. Does the Democratic data firm have the health records of Michigan residents? If so, what are they doing with them; if not, where are the records? Who made this decision and why is the no-bid process being shielded from public vetting? All governors work for their citizens, not the other way around. A pandemic isn’t the time to end transparency and accountability, it’s the time to increase it. This apparent conflict of interest and refusal to provide basic information should raise more than a few eyebrows. Michigan’s own Lansing State Journal editorial board argues, “People want to know what local health departments are doing; whether the state is following its own guidelines; that regular government functions are operating properly during crisis; that details aren’t being overlooked.” Whitmer is not alone in undermining public trust in government and the rule of law. Govs. David Ige, D-Hawaii, and Tom Wolf, D-Pa., are telling state officials to ignore FOIA requests until normal operations resume, which could be months from now. Gov. Gina Raimondo, D-R.I., is giving administrators a 40-day extension to comply with the FOIA claiming her press conferences provide all the disclosure needed right now. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER And Gov. Larry Hogan, R-Md., has given agencies discretion about when to respond to requests, allowing bureaucrats to freeze unfavorable reports for months. All governors work for their citizens, not the other way around. A pandemic isn’t the time to end transparency and accountability, it’s the time to increase it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Federal Emergency Management Agency predicts that by June, the daily COVID-19 death toll will reach 3,000 Americans and that an astonishing 200,000 people will contract the virus each day. Those numbers, simply put, are astronomical, and unlike anything we’ve ever seen before in the United States. The loss of life is unthinkable to bear, and it’s also bringing to light some very stark realities about our country’s health care system. Cracks that are always present but often not seen by the public are now on full display. For months, governments at the federal, state and local levels have been grappling with policies intended to flatten the curve. Despite these efforts, health care facilities in many parts of the country have had to make due with little or inadequate personal protective equipment, ventilators and other life-saving supplies. WILLIAM MCGURN: CORONAVIRUS EDUCATION — JERRY FALWELL JR. GOT THIS RIGHT The public may never have known about the fragile state of some aspects of health care in our country if the coronavirus pandemic had not struck. But strike it did, and with a vengeance. For years, poll after poll has shown that Americans believe our health care system is broken. As a physician who practiced medicine for years before entering the political arena, my first-hand experience shows me that Americans are indeed correct. Despite the best efforts of many in the medical community, our health care system must undergo serious changes if we are to be better able to serve our families, friends and loved ones. COVID-19 has convinced some in our nation that the solution to the health care crisis we face is giving government the power to run the system. Yet many of those same people believe that the government has failed to properly respond to the virus. While the so-called public option, which is just another name for "Medicare-for-all," might seem like the answer to our problems to some, empowering an institution that failed to protect the nearly 100,000 Americans who have lost their lives to the virus is the exact wrong policy.  We simply can’t trust Washington to make our health decisions for us. The idea of putting thousands of bureaucrats, a very small fraction of whom have any medical background at all, in charge of our health care decisions just does not make sense.  Doctors and other medical providers are best equipped to help Americans make decisions regarding their health. But the federal government is not comprised solely of medical professionals. Even those with medical backgrounds at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have struggled to put forth guidelines quickly enough to prevent the massive death toll we’re seeing from the virus. The idea, then, of putting thousands of bureaucrats, a very small fraction of whom have any medical background at all, in charge of our health care decisions just does not make sense. "Medicare-for-all" would be a public takeover of our health care on an unprecedented scale. It would put medical decisions for families across the country in the hands of politicians, not doctors and patients. It would drive costs up and deprive families of health care choices – at the very moment when most Americans are concerned about better and more affordable access to care. During these trying times in our nation, we need more choices and control when it comes to our medical conditions, not fewer. We need better quality care now more than ever, and the comfort of seeing medical professionals we choose and trust. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Further, many of the innovations that detect and treat COVID-19 are being developed by private entities, not government institutions. Scientists at Stanford Medicine developed a test to detect coronavirus antibodies. A Boston-based therapeutics company is developing a promising vaccine, as is a separate company in Seattle. The National Institutes of Health recently called on all innovators to rapidly develop coronavirus diagnostics, promising a share of a $500 million pool earmarked for the project, because the government simply isn’t capable of developing diagnostics as quickly as those in the private sector. This kind of empowerment is what the politicians should be doing for our nation’s doctors, nurses and medical professionals. They are the real heroes of this crisis. But enacting "Medicare-for-all" would do the exact opposite – it would take away their ability to administer the personal care we all desperately need at this time. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We will ultimately prevail over the COVID-19 pandemic. Children will return to school. Families will resume routine medical visits. One day, this nightmare will be in the past. But the worst thing we could do would be to bring about a nightmarish future for our health care system when this does end, and expanding government-run health care would do just that. The American people deserve to make their own health care choices, which will result in the highest quality of care. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. TOM PRICE

House Judiciary Committee member Rep. Andy Biggs weighs in on 'America's Newsroom.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.   The COVID-19 outbreak that began in Wuhan, China and spread death, massive unemployment and economic dislocation around the world is just the latest example of China’s long history of misconduct in its dealings with the rest of the world. As of Tuesday night, COVID-19 was responsible for more than 321,000 confirmed deaths worldwide and over 91,000 deaths in the U.S. Confirmed cases of the disease totaled over 4.8 million around the world, including over 1.5 million in the U.S. China lied to the world about the extent of its COVID-19 outbreak, falsely stated at first that the disease was not easily spread, and refused to cooperate with health experts from the U.S. and other nations trying to understand the nature of the novel coronavirus that causes the deadly disease. TRUMP ON CHINA TRADE DEAL: 'I FEEL DIFFERENTLY NOW ABOUT THAT DEAL THAN I DID THREE MONTHS AGO' Many lives could have been saved, hospitalizations could have been averted, and the shutdowns that nations around the world have imposed could have been far less severe if China had not tried to cover up the extent of the COVID-19 outbreak and if it had promptly halted travel by its citizens outside the country. Given China’s history, no one should be surprised that now the Chinese government is now threatening members of the U.S. Congress who have had the temerity to introduce legislation that would allow U.S. citizens to seek restitution from China for its role in the spread of COVID-19. We have to face the truth: Chinese hostility to the rest of the world is part of a pattern exhibited by the Communist regime in the years since President Richard Nixon began his ping-pong diplomacy with China in 1971 – leading to the resumption of U.S.-China trade followed by full diplomatic relations in 1978. In all that time, China hasn’t acted as an international competitor and responsible member of the world community – it has acted like a Cold War enemy and an international outlaw. The truth is that China has treated its relationship with the U.S. as adversarial for as long as anyone can remember. But we don’t need to cover hundreds of years of history between the West and China. It is only necessary to briefly review the last 50 years. America has sacrificed millions of jobs, generations of technological advantage, and our economic dominance to China. In particular, President Bill Clinton’s relaxation of trade restrictions with China was great for U.S. multination corporations, but devastating for American workers. Foreign investment in China nearly tripled in the first decade of this century, while nearly 2.5 million Americans lost their jobs. Workers in China earn only a small fraction of the wages of U.S. workers, and China doesn’t impose worker safety and environmental standards even close to those in the U.S. All that combines to make it cheaper for companies to manufacture products in China – meaning that jobs have become one of our biggest exports to that nation. Over the past two decades, the Chinese have flooded the U.S. market with everything from basic electronics, to low-cost consumer goods, to medication and medical supplies – all while buying up more and more of our advanced products along with more of our national debt. This has resulted in the one of the largest international transfers of information, technology and wealth in the history of the world It is not unreasonable to argue that America has sacrificed millions of jobs, generations of technological advantage, and our economic dominance to China. All of this was done to enable U.S. corporations to make a fast buck by replacing American workers with cheap Chinese labor. Warning voices were out there – including then-businessman Donald Trump – but academics, globalists, and professional politicians and bureaucrats ignored them. The list of China’s harmful conduct is longer than space permits to provide here, but to cite just some examples: The U.S. has given sophisticated rocketry and telemetry science to the Chinese that the Chinese can now use against us. We educate thousands of Chinese nationals in American universities every year. Most return to their country with U.S. science and technology.  In the meantime, China threatens our hegemony as the world’s currency of exchange. We have paid for China’s naval buildup. We have built a robust Chinese middle class. China’s abuses include aggressive and adversarial expansion in the South China Sea. The Chinese use their leverage against smaller neighbors to gain trade advantages. China is perhaps the world’s biggest polluter, but has insisted on concessions to international agreements that have the effect of permanently excluding China from having to operate under the same environmental restrictions that the European Union and the U.S. must operate under. China continues to threaten Taiwan. The recent manipulation of the World Health Organization into muffling warnings about the Wuhan flu outbreak has brought widespread human suffering to the world. Government actions that have stifled economic activity worldwide have created threats of starvation for tens of millions of people. During our current economic difficulties, China is trying to buy up American businesses. Chinese companies trading on our stock exchange adamantly refuse to allow audits that are routine and required. China continues to steal the intellectual property of our companies, or mandate that these companies share important corporate secrets or face serious consequences. In the meantime, China’s leaders use American big tech and social media companies to oppress their people. Did our high-tech wonks think that tech that they were providing to the Chinese government to spy on the Chinese was merely being used to invade privacy? The domestic intelligence is used by the Chinese to torture and kill dissidents, and more broadly, to surveil their population. Now, of course, those same American companies are offering their malevolent spying technology to state and local government tyrants to surveil Americans. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Canada and Mexico don’t mind sniping at the U.S., but we remain huge trading partners and share generally amicable relations. The same can be said for the European Union as well. Even Russia has interests that intersect with the United States. Decades of a trade surplus with the United States, rocketing economic growth, and tech transfer have fueled the hegemonic goals of China. Important legislation permitting Americans to sue China is pending in Congress. We must also incentivize American companies to start thinking of themselves as American companies, and provide the tax, deregulatory, and red-tape slashing incentives to bring our supply chains home. Some are encouraging moving operations to Southeast Asian countries, but Chinese influence over those nations is already outsized. China might be motivated to exercise even more power over those nations should they become home to more workers for U.S. companies. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We should use the dispute resolution forums of the multilateral institutions to which globalists seem so attached. Most importantly, we should reinstate a list of prohibited items that can’t be transferred to China. Failure to act will continue to erode our competitiveness in every way with that nation. We shouldn’t treat China as a friendly economic competitor when it views itself as our adversary with intentions of world hegemony. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. ANDY BIGGS

Wisconsin Sen. Ron Johnson, chairman of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, joins Martha MacCallum on 'The Story.' Blame-shifting. It is a Washington pastime. It also appears to be the reason why former National Security Adviser Susan Rice wrote her now-infamous memo, documenting an Oval Office meeting at which top Obama administration officials resolved to withhold Russia-related intelligence from the incoming Trump administration. A key paragraph of Rice’s memo, previously redacted, has now been declassified and made public. Fox News obtained a copy Tuesday from the office of Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., which had sought access to the document. The memo was written as an email “to the File” as Rice was leaving her office for the last time on Jan. 20, 2017, the day Donald Trump was inaugurated. DECLASSIFIED SUSAN RICE EMAIL SHOWS COMEY SUGGESTED 'SENSITIVE' INFO ON RUSSIA NOT BE SHARED WITH FLYNN It seems that the purpose of the memo was to shift the blame to then-FBI Director James Comey for the withholding of Russia intelligence from the Trump team. Rice’s objective was to absolve President Barack Obama of any blame for directing that Russia information be concealed from Trump and his incoming national security team, particularly Michael Flynn, who was slated to become national security adviser. Of course, the withholding of that information would be essential if the investigation of Trump, begun by Obama’s administration, were to continue after Trump took office. Though written on the day Trump was being inaugurated, Rice’s email purports to memorialize an Oval Office meeting over two weeks earlier, on Jan.5, 2017. At that meeting, according to the newly disclosed paragraph in the Rice memo, Comey raised concerns about the frequency of communications between Flynn and Sergey Kislyak, then the Russian ambassador to the United States. When pressed by President Obama about whether he was recommending that the National Security Council withhold Russia-related information from Flynn, Comey is portrayed in the Rice memo as noncommittal. The FBI director is said to have stated that concealment was “potentially” necessary. The meeting ended with the understanding that Comey would continue to monitor the situation and get back to Obama “if anything changes.” READ: DECLASSIFIED SUSAN RICE EMAIL ABOUT JAN. 5, 2017 OVAL OFFICE MEETING WITH OBAMA The implication, obviously, is that Comey never got back to Obama. That is, if Russia information was withheld from Trump – as it was – the culprit was the FBI director who was staying on, not the outgoing president whose administration investigated Trump on the baseless claim that his campaign might have conspired with Russia to steal the 2016 election. Portions of Rice’s email had previously been disclosed, but the paragraph describing the discussion between Obama and Comey had been redacted. The paragraph was just declassified by acting National Intelligence Director Richard Grenell, who provided the now un-redacted document to Sen. Johnson. There was no evidence that Flynn had committed any crimes. The newly disclosed paragraph underscores the intensity of the Obama administration’s focus on Flynn, as well as the dearth of a factual or legal basis for investigating him, either as a criminal suspect or a clandestine agent of the Kremlin. The Jan. 5 meeting took place at a critical juncture in the Trump-Russia counterintelligence investigation. The FBI had opened its probe under the codename “Crossfire Hurricane” in late July 2016. It was deemed an “umbrella” investigation of the Trump campaign, and came to include sub-investigations of four campaign officials. One of those sub-investigations targeted Flynn, a retired Army lieutenant general and decorated combat commander, whom Obama had appointed head of the Defense Intelligence Agency – only to fire him when Flynn butted heads with Obama officials on policy. The FBI’s counterintelligence investigation of Flynn, codenamed “Crossfire Razor,” was opened in mid-August 2016. Remarkably, Flynn – who had just published a bestselling book in which he described Russia as an adversary competing globally against the U.S. – was suspected by the bureau of being a Russian agent. By then, Flynn had joined the Trump campaign as the candidate’s top adviser on national security issues. The Obama administration’s purported suspicions of a conspiracy between the Trump campaign and the Russian regime to conduct cyberespionage in order to swing the 2016 election to Trump were baseless. The Jan. 5 Oval Office meeting was held to enable intelligence agency chiefs to brief President Obama on their assessment that Russia had interfered in the 2016 campaign. The intelligence chiefs were scheduled to brief President-elect Trump the following day in New York City. After the presentation, Obama asked Comey and Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates to stay for a follow-on meeting with Obama, Rice and Vice President Joe Biden. Previously disclosed sections of Rice’s memo indicated that both counterintelligence and law-enforcement considerations were discussed. The principal topic, Obama explained, was the need to consider a rationale for withholding Russia-related intelligence from the incoming Trump team. As far as any law enforcement aspect was concerned, Rice took pains in her memo to stress Obama’s adamancy that it should proceed “by the book.” Flynn was central to the Oval Office meeting. A week earlier, on Dec. 29, 2016, he had a phone conversation with Ambassador Kislyak, during which the topic of economic sanctions Obama had just imposed on Russia had been discussed. It was entirely appropriate for Flynn – as the incoming Trump national security adviser – to engage in such conversations with foreign counterparts. On the call, Flynn had discouraged Russia from escalating tensions with the U.S. – just as we would want any American official engaged in foreign relations to do. Tellingly, just a day before the Oval Office meeting, the FBI had completed a memo closing its Crossfire Razor investigation of Flynn because no evidence had been found to support the absurd suspicion that he was a clandestine agent of Russia. Nevertheless, even though Flynn’s conversation with Kislyak had been proper, Obama officials seemed determined to use it as a pretext for extending the investigation of Flynn. The Flynn-Kislyak conversation would also be used to rationalize withholding from Flynn and other Trump officials Russia-related intelligence – which was in the possession of the White House National Intelligence Council that Flynn would soon be leading. With that as background, the newly disclosed paragraph Rice wrote about the Comey-Obama discussion is illuminating. It begins: “Director Comey affirmed that he is proceeding ‘by the book’ as it relates to law enforcement.” The emphasis on law enforcement relates to potential criminal prosecution, as distinguished from counterintelligence, which is about gathering information about foreign powers, such as Russia. In that light, one wonders what “book” Comey and Obama had in mind. There was no evidence that Flynn had committed any crimes. Consequently, as shown by documents recently disclosed by the Justice Department, Comey was reduced to discussing the possibility that Flynn might have violated the Logan Act. The Logan Act is a moribund, unconstitutional 18th-century prohibition against unauthorized diplomacy has never been used in a successful prosecution, has not been invoked since before the Civil War, and has never been the subject of an indictment in the 150-year history of the Justice Department. There could be nothing “by the book” about a law enforcement investigation of a purported Logan Act violation. According to Rice, Comey then moved on to “a national security perspective” – a reference to the counterintelligence probe. Again, it turned out that the FBI director had no concrete grounds for suspicion. Comey said he had “some concerns that incoming NSA Flynn is speaking frequently with Russian Ambassador Kislyak.” Even if this were true, the number of contacts would be irrelevant – especially for an incoming national security adviser – as long as nothing nefarious was discussed. On that score, Comey had no disparaging information, even admitting that he had “no indication thus far that Flynn has passed classified information to Kislyak.” On top of that nothing, Rice says the FBI director piled more nothing, observing that “the level of communication is unusual.” It is not unusual, however, for one of a new administration’s top foreign relations officials to engage at that “level of communication” with foreign counterparts. Kislyak, moreover, was a notoriously ubiquitous Washington figure, who rubbed elbows constantly with U.S. government officials and other diplomats. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Thus, Rice claims, when Obama asked whether Comey “was saying that the NSC should not pass sensitive information related to Russia to Flynn,” Comey could only respond by saying “potentially.” That is, there was not a solid basis at that point for restricting Flynn’s access. The meeting is said to have concluded with the understanding that Comey would report to Obama “if anything changes in the next few weeks that should affect how we share classified information with the incoming team.” Rice, to repeat, was writing on Jan. 20, 2017 about what supposedly happened on Jan. 5. She includes no indication that Comey ever reported back to Obama. We are left to understand that nothing about withholding Russia intelligence was really resolved at the meeting, and to assume that nothing happened afterward that would have caused President Obama to do anything further. Translation: If it came to pass that Russia information was withheld from President Trump, National Security Adviser Flynn and the incoming Trump team, blame Comey. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Of course, the palpable reason for concealing Russian intelligence from the new president and his national security team would be to obscure the fact that the Obama administration had monitored the Trump campaign and planned for the investigation to continue even after Trump took power. That is not something an FBI director could have pulled off on his own. Counterintelligence investigations, after all, are done for the president. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Uproar over Trump taking hydroxychloroquine. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  After President Trump told the world he was taking a prescribed drug – hydroxychloroquine – to potentially protect him from COVID-19, the media flipped. Chris Cuomo said on CNN: “I don’t know that it will help with his health, but it certainly helps to cover up his weaknesses.” Don Lemon said on CNN: “This is really deadly serious. It is quite dangerous, really quite dangerous.” DR. SIEGEL ON TRUMP'S HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE USE: 'IT IS A DOCTOR-PATIENT DECISION, IT SHOULD NOT BE CHALLENGED' Joy Behar said on “The View”: “He says he’s been on this thing for two-and-a-half weeks or something. But when you read the side effects – psychosis, paranoia, hair loss – I think he’s been on it for three-and-a-half years. Apparently, all those dopes know better than the White House doctor, who prescribed the drug. They're acting like Trump is ingesting peyote in a yurt But here’s the big story: Trump is taking a drug – and he shared the info with you. The media and politicians – they'd never do that. Ever. That’s why they were shocked. Trump shares. They hide. And how dare Trump ask his White House doctor about a tried and true medication that's currently being used off-label by other docs? How dare he make an informed decision as a patient, after assessing the science, medical opinion and risk ratio? If you believe Trump's wrong, show us your cost-benefit calculations or shut up. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Of course, the media won't. Because they're smarter than you – and Trump is a symbol of you, a bumpkin who should stay home indefinitely. It’s only the morally superior media who get to work – and also know all that secret info about hot stocks, real estate and meds. They get the courtside tickets and the best tables. Then give you the lectures. The media always have the inside scoop – they're mad Trump shared it with you. It’s funny: The media condemn using a prescribed drug during a pandemic. But they’re fine with way weirder stuff. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP You know: you'd think an industry where people inject poison into their faces would sit this one out. And they'd never let you, Joe Schmo, tell them they can't smooth their wrinkles with a toxin. And they'd fight you to the death over their balding drugs, diet pills, Adderall and performance enhancers. They can have it all. Inject your forehead with goat pee if you must. America will save lives. While you save face.  Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 19, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

 A funny thing happened on the way to the gallows. It was discovered that the condemned man was actually innocent. But the sentence would be carried out, reasoned the hanging judge, because the partisan mob must not be left disappointed. (It would also be a waste of good lumber.) A metaphorical story, yes. But the underlying facts bear a disturbing resemblance to the treatment of Gen. Michael Flynn, President Trump’s former national security adviser.  In early 2017, the retired three-star general was deviously set up and framed by James Comey’s FBI for a crime he did not commit. Thereafter, he was coerced by special counsel Robert Mueller’s unscrupulous prosecutors into pleading guilty to the charge of lying to the FBI, even though the evidence now shows he did not lie.   ANDREW McCARTHY: BARR'S OBAMA-BIDEN REMARKS – AG IS MAKING THIS IMPORTANT POINT The presiding federal judge in the Flynn case, Emmet Sullivan, is utterly unbothered by the newly revealed evidence of the defendant’s innocence. He seems determined to carry out the sentencing to satisfy the partisan media mob and Democrats who agitate for the punishment of a Trump ally. Ready the scaffold.  But wait. On Tuesday, Flynn’s attorneys resorted to a higher court for relief by filing a writ of mandamus before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit. They correctly argue that Sullivan should be kicked off the case and/or ordered to follow the law by dismissing the criminal charge against Flynn. It is highly likely that the defense will prevail, notwithstanding the best efforts of Sullivan to turn the law upside down. This is because the trial court judge has no authority whatsoever to usurp the power of the Department of Justice (DOJ), which uncovered the exculpatory evidence of Flynn’s innocence and decided to drop the case entirely. Judges are impartial and disinterested referees; they resolve disputes that arise at trial. They neither initiate prosecutions nor perpetuate them. Judge Sullivan might want to revisit Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution. It circumscribes the role of a judge to preside over “controversies to which the United States shall be a party.” Normally, there are only two parties to a federal controversy — the prosecution, represented by the DOJ, and the defendant, who is charged with an offense. The judge is not a party at all. He or she acts as a neutral arbiter on issues that may arise in court and maintains order.    What happens when, during the course of litigation, there is no longer a “controversy” between the two parties because it is discovered that the case has no merit? Naturally, the charge is dismissed and the case ends. The judge cannot suddenly commandeer the matter and arrogate the role of the prosecutor by pursuing a charge that, in the judgment of the feds, has lost its evidentiary value and proof. It is a simple question of the separation of powers. The judicial branch (judges) may not supplant the authority of the executive branch (prosecutors). To do so would undermine the constitutional constraints imposed by the Framers. This is true, even if the prosecutor is wrong in his assessment. The unfettered discretion belongs to the prosecutor alone. A judge may disagree with the decision to dismiss but has no legal authority to change it. It is a simple question of the separation of powers. The judicial branch (judges) may not supplant the authority of the executive branch (prosecutors). To do so would undermine the constitutional constraints imposed by the Framers. Sullivan surely knows this but intends to ignore it.         These fundamental principles are sacrosanct, which makes it especially confounding that Sullivan has taken it upon himself to appoint a retired judge, John Gleeson, to oppose the DOJ’s plan to dismiss the Flynn prosecution. Forget that third parties are not permitted to intervene at the trial court level, Gleeson certainly knows that Sullivan is acting well beyond his judicial authority. Yet, inexplicably, he will argue otherwise.  In a July 1, 2013, memo and order, Gleeson wrote that “The government has near-absolute power to extinguish a case that it has brought.” Citing well-established case law (ICC v. Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers, 482 U.S. 270, 283, 1987), Gleeson pointed out that “it is entirely clear that the refusal to prosecute cannot be the subject of judicial review.” In other words, the decision to drop a case is none of the judge’s business. Period. His written approval is a merely ministerial act.     How exactly will Gleeson now argue against himself, not to mention the clarity of the law and Constitution? A recent op-ed by him in the Washington Post gives us some clues. In it, he argued that Sullivan should proceed to sentencing because the DOJ’s motion to dismiss the Flynn case represents a “miscarriage of justice” born of “corrupt reasons” and “reeks of improper political influence.” Except that it does not.  The Justice Department decided to end the Flynn debacle because it uncovered documents revealing that the FBI never had a legitimate legal reason to interview him a mere four days into the Trump presidency and because the interviewing agents concluded that Flynn did not lie. Shockingly, the FBI sought to “get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” It was a classic and unconscionable perjury trap. All of this was concealed from his defense team in violation of the law and a judicial order to produce every scrap of exculpatory evidence. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In truth, the only corruption and political influence were committed by Comey’s FBI and Mueller’s prosecutors. They are the ones who perpetrated a miscarriage of justice by weaponizing law enforcement for political reasons. Flynn was their victim.  It is disgraceful that Sullivan is unconcerned about such abuses of power by government operators. Why isn’t he recommending that prosecutors be charged for lying to the court when they insisted repeatedly that no exculpatory evidence existed? Why isn’t he demanding that the FBI be investigated for knowingly making false accusations and pushing a wrongful prosecution?   To compound the injustice, Sullivan wants Gleeson to make the case that Flynn should face a new charge of perjury contempt for seeking permission from the court to withdraw his forced guilty plea. This is ludicrous on its face. Under the law, confessions and pleas must be “voluntary.”  Flynn’s was not. This, too, was hidden from the court in contravention of the law. A confession under threat or duress is no confession at all. Flynn’s coerced capitulation does not magically create a secondary crime. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The defense had no alternative but to seek a writ of mandamus from the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals to direct Sullivan to follow the law by dismissing the case and ordering him removed from any further proceedings. The chief judge of that very court ruled four years ago that a trial court judge cannot countermand the decision by prosecutors to dismiss criminal charges (U.S. v. Fokker Servs., B.V., 818 F.3rd 733, 740, D.C. Cir., 2016).          Sullivan’s own outrageous bias, demonstrated time and again during his handling of the Flynn case, is an embarrassment to the federal bench. Like the hanging judge, he is determined to punish an innocent man. The mob, after all, is demanding it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREG JARRETT

 Ken Osmond, who died Monday at the age of 76, never escaped the indelible character of Eddie Haskell, the trouble-making, smooth-talking teenager he played on the 1950s and ‘60s hit television sitcom “Leave it to Beaver.” In fact, Osmond was so synonymously linked to the portrayal of the schmoozer suck-up that he decided to leave television and forge a new identity, signing on with the Los Angeles Police Department in 1970. “I’m not complaining, because Eddie’s been too good to me, but I found work hard to come by,” he once told an interviewer. 'LEAVE IT TO BEAVER' STAR JERRY MATHERS REACTS TO CO-STAR KEN OSMOND'S DEATH: 'I WILL GREATLY MISS HIM' “In 1968, I bought my first house, in ’69 I got married, and we were going to start a family and I needed a job, so I went out and signed up for the L.A.P.D.” 
      UNITED STATES - AUGUST 19: LEAVE IT TO BEAVER - "Misc." 1957-1963 Jerry Mathers, Ken Osmond (Photo by Walt Disney Television via Getty Images Photo Archives/Walt Disney Television via Getty Images)
       As a motorcycle officer, Osmond grew a mustache to become less identifiable and survived a shooting in a dramatic 1980 car chase. Fired on three times, one of the bullets deflected off his belt buckle and another off his protective vest.   CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Jerry Mathers, who played the Beaver alongside Osmond’s two-faced teenage character on television, paid tribute to his longtime friend in a Tweet. “I have always said that he was the best actor on our show because in real life his personality was so opposite of the character that he so brilliantly portrayed,” Mathers wrote. As a fan of “Leave it to Beaver,” Osmond’s Eddie Haskell was the character I loved to hate. Well-mannered to the extreme in front of adults (“My, that’s a lovely dress you’re wearing Mrs. Cleaver. By chance is Wallace available?”) and insulting to every one his own age or younger (“Hey, Duncan Hines, get your little grubby paws off the food!”), the Haskell persona was predictably disingenuous and self-centered. There was only one Eddie Haskell on television, but there are a lot of Eddie Haskells everywhere else. If I’m honest, there’s probably a little Eddie in me, too, those painful and regrettable times when I’ve said one thing and thought or done the other. 
      FILE - This Dec. 10, 1982 file photo shows members of the original cast of the "Leave It To Beaver," from left, Ken Osmond, Tony Dow, Barbara Billingsley and Jerry Mathers during the filming of their TV special, "Still The Beaver," in Los Angeles. Osmond, who played the two-faced teenage scoundrel Eddie Haskell on TV’s “Leave it to Beaver,” has died. Osmond's family says he died Monday, May 18, 2020, in Los Angeles. He was 76. (AP Photo/Wally Fong, File)
      (Wally Fong/AP) Like Eddie, too many folks love to tell you what they think you want to hear – serving up heaps of patronizing praise and flattering compliments – all while running a scam behind your back. It’s always a little silly to psychoanalyze a fictional sitcom character, but one gets the impression that Eddie Haskell was, not unlike many of us in real life, somehow wounded early in childhood. In the fourth season, in a rare moment of self-introspection, we learn that Eddie was embarrassed in kindergarten when he was sent to school with a horrifically bad home permanent hair style. Rather than empathizing with him, his father joined in the mockery. Eddie said that was the last time he ever confided anything to his dad. I think it’s safe to say that many of the people who lash out in our society were once lashed at – wounded in some form or fashion. Often, they’re longing to be loved, heard or simply understood.   "If you can make the other guy feel like a goon first, then you don't feel so much like a goon," he explained to Wally. I remember my mom telling me very much the same thing, explaining that too many people try to make themselves tall by cutting down the metaphorical legs of others. “The best way to get even with people like that is to ignore them,” she would say. I’m no psychologist and I don’t pretend to play one, but I think it’s safe to say that many of the people who lash out in our society were once lashed at – wounded in some form or fashion. Often, they’re longing to be loved, heard or simply understood. We’re all the product of the influences of other people – good and bad. 
      Actor Ken Osmond arrives at the Paley Center for Media's PaleyFest: Rewind - "Leave It To Beaver" at The Paley Center for Media on June 21, 2010 in Beverly Hills, California. (Photo by Paul Archuleta/FilmMagic)
       The “Eddies” of the world are always been with us. From dictators to pompous blowhards of all kinds, hypocrites and narcissists are a timeless slice of humanity. How we navigate them often spells the difference between a happy life or one marked by chronic misery. Which is why it’s so refreshing when we come across sincere straight-talkers of genuine good character – people who are the same in person as they are in private – what you see is what you get. When you find a friend of such standing, never let him or her go. Psychologists have coined a phrase in a nod to the Eddies among us – the “Eddie Haskell Effect” – to explains why the wrong people often get promoted. They are the employees who talk down to those below and kiss up to those above, thereby enraging subordinates but somehow endearing themselves to the decision-makers. But that’s no way to live and no way to win. In the end, Eddie’s insecurity ultimately seeped through. Despite all his bluster, it was Haskell the bully who admired Wally – the good guy friend played by Tony Dow who did things the right way and put up each week with his conniving buddy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Eddie Haskell character will live on in rerun infamy – and so will the type, probably for as long as men and women walk the earth. Rest in peace, Ken Osmond. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As of this writing, more than 80,000 Americans have contracted and died from the coronavirus. But how many have or will die from what some call "despair"? Consider the following call to my radio show: "Hi, Larry. I was calling about people who have called suicide hotlines and different things with this loss of income. I am a widow of somebody who did commit suicide because of income. It was not now, during the epidemic, but it was because of dwindling income and hopelessness, which he hid from me. TUCKER CARLSON: AMERICANS ARE REBELLING AGAINST NEUROTIC, DUMB LEADERS AND EXTREME CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS "I had no idea this was going on in his business life. And I came home from work one day and found him hanging in the garage. He did leave a note about the different debts and things like that, but financial problems are a horrible thing – just a horrible thing that's worse than the virus." No doubt going back to work increases a person's chances of exposure to the COVID-19 virus. More will contract the virus and die from it than would have been the case under continued lockdowns. But this, of course, is not the full picture. A new report, "Projected Deaths of Despair During the Coronavirus Recession," suggests as many as 75,000 Americans could die from "despair" due to unemployment, depression from isolation, and fear of the indefinite and uncertain nature of the pandemic. One of the study's authors, Benjamin Miller, chief strategy officer for Well Being Trust in Oakland, Calif., said: "Deaths of despair are tied to multiple factors, like unemployment, fear and dread, and isolation. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, there were already an unprecedented number of deaths of despair. We wanted to estimate how this pandemic would change that number moving forward." The study estimates that there could be 75,000 coronavirus-related "deaths of despair" from drug or alcohol abuse and suicide. Miller explained, "The isolation is causing people to lose boundaries on their behaviors. ... People have to be working and we have to get people connected to other people." Unemployment stands at 14.7 percent, with over 20 million Americans in April filing for unemployment. The number of unemployed Americans is likely understated. About the study, Dr. Elie Aoun, vice chairman of the American Psychiatric Association's Council on Addiction Psychiatry, said: "I've been seeing this in practices and my colleagues have been talking about it, too. ... Addiction patients are relapsing, and a lot of patients who don't have drug use or alcohol problems are drinking more now, sometimes every day from 4 or 5 p.m., and they don't stop until they sleep." Earlier this year, I wrote about the connection between suicide and unemployment. A British journal, The Lancet Psychiatry, published a study associating worldwide suicides to unemployment. "Our findings reveal that the suicide rate increases six months before a rise in unemployment," said study author Carlos Nordt. "Our data suggest that not all job losses necessarily have an equal impact, as the effect on suicide risk appears to be stronger in countries where being out of work is uncommon." The study said that between 2000 and 2011, there were an estimated 233,000 suicides in 63 countries, and that the number increased during the last recession: "While the number of unemployment-related suicides increased by about 5,000 during the recent economic crisis in 2008, this analysis shows the risk of suicide among jobless people is high even in good economic times." Unemployment stands at 14.7 percent, with over 20 million Americans in April filing for unemployment. The number of unemployed Americans is likely understated. Betsey Stevenson, former member of the Council of Economic Advisers as well as the chief economist of the U.S. Department of Labor, says due to an incorrect classification of "people who were employed (but) absent from work due to COVID-related reasons as temporarily unemployed," the actual number of unemployed is likely over 20 percent. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER A new ESPN documentary about the Chicago Bulls' last championship season describes how Michael Jordan broke his foot early in his pro career, during the third game of the 1985-86 season. Defying his doctors' expectations, the foot healed faster than expected, and Jordan itched to return to the court despite team owner Jerry Reinsdorf's fear not only that Jordan could reinjure the foot but that such a reinjury could end his career. Reinsdorf said to Jordan, "If you had a terrible headache, and I gave you a bottle of pills, and nine of the pills would cure you and one of the pills would kill you, would you take a pill?" CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Jordan responded, "It depends on how bad the f---ing headache is." America's economic headache from the coronavirus stay-at-home orders is f---ing bad. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LARRY ELDER

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. How it must hurt to have to admit: Jerry Falwell Jr. was right. No doubt this explains why we’re not reading stories about how the president of Liberty University kept his Lynchburg, Va., campus open while keeping his community safe from COVID-19. The doomsday predicted when Falwell announced Liberty students would return after spring break never came to pass. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER On March 16, three days after that announcement, Falwell had to abandon his plans for in-person classes when Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam banned gatherings of more than 100 people. So Liberty moved its classes online. Thanks to long experience with such instruction — Liberty already had 100,000 online students — the move wasn’t as wrenching as it was for others. Meanwhile, students could still come back to campus if they chose, and about 1,200 of them did. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP From the reaction, you would have thought returning to Liberty was a death sentence. An emergency-room physician told the Daily Beast, “If Liberty University reopens, people will die.” CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING WILLIAM McGURN'S COLUMN IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Ravi Zacharias's passing is more than just the death of a man. It is the end of an era. The end of a life that millions looked to for spiritual guidance and inspiration. But like all endings, it can signal a new beginning; a new chapter. Ravi, my spiritual friend and mentor, died this morning, succumbing to the cancer that had crept into his life just a few months ago.  A simple surgery to relieve some back problems revealed the much more sinister malady. 
      Ravi Zacharias died Tuesday, May 19, 2020, from a rare form of cancer.
      (Ravi Zacharias International Ministries) Cancer, to me, is right out of Satan's arsenal. It comes at us from all angles of our being and nestles into our bodies on the cellular level, feeding off its healthy host, eventually destroying it. LAUREN GREEN: MY TRIBUTE TO RAVI ZACHARIAS, A SPIRITUAL MENTOR AND FRIEND But if there's one thing that Ravi preached and believed, is that death...even from cancer... cannot separate him or any other believer, from the love of Christ. Ravi's daughter, Sarah Davis, wrote on the morning of his passing, that a few months ago, before death was even a shadow of a reality, Ravi recited the stanza's of a more than a 300-year-old hymn, the first verse begins: “Lord, it belongs not to my care Whether I die or live; To love and serve Thee is my share, And this Thy grace must give." Such a man as Ravi was ready to meet the Lord on whatever day was ordained. His daughter said that even when he had so little breath left in him, he wanted only to talk of the love of Jesus Christ. That is how he lived... for the joy that was set before him (Hebrews 12:22). And in dying he has taught us also how live. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER On the news that his death was imminent, I wrote a tribute to him for Fox News Opinion. In it, I told how his book "Can Man Live Without God?" had had a tremendous impact on me. Although it was written more than 25 years ago, so much of his commentary about the spiritual state of our world still rings true. 
      Ravi Zacharias died Tuesday, May 19, 2020, from a rare form of cancer.
      (Ravi Zacharias International Ministries) CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I would encourage anyone who wants to live a life filled with purpose and meaning, to get that book and not just read it but ingest it into your very soul. It will open up a whole new world for you. It did for me.  Thank you, Ravi, for being a light in a darkened world.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LAUREN GREEN

New poll reveals more Americans are losing confidence in the press. A new poll on the reliability of journalists comes from Pew Research Center, which makes sense, because it stinks for the press. Less than half of Americans have a great deal of confidence in the news media. I wonder why. Anchors and guests on MSNBC, CNN, NBC and elsewhere have been predicting the end of the Trump presidency and making unsupported claims about the president for years, including false claims about allegations of Trump collusion with Russia.  Americans rank the press behind lawyers and above elected officials. That’s like saying you're worse than vermin but not as bad as lice. GUTFELD ON ANOTHER MEDIA HYSTERIA But the numbers would've been worse were it not for Fox News. The reason: we’re awesome. Which is why the other guys hate us so much. It seems like other cable networks exist just to watch Fox. Over and over again, you hear people at MSNBC and CNN talking about what was aired on Fox News. My God, what if we stopped working? CNN would have to actually cover news. But then, who could they blame everything on? On CNN, Chris Cuomo complained about President Trump not wearing a mask when he was out in public and said of the president: “Everyone around him has a mask on. Now, he doesn't because he wants to keep up the Fox farce, this BS that COVID-19's overrated. I guess the anti-elitists over there are OK with 10,000 more dead.” What a child. So this guy has the gall to blame us for future death. What about death that already happened. That is, the actual thousands of people in rest homes he failed to ask his brother – New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo – about because he had other things on his mind? For example, in an interview with Gov. Cuomo, Chris Cuomo asked: “Do you think you are an attractive person now because you’re single and ready to mingle? Do you really think you are some desirable single person, and that this is not just people’s pain coming out of them?” Andrew Cuomo replied: “I think beauty is in the eye of the beholder.” And 5,200 people died in rest homes. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Anyway, the Pew poll suggests the media don't act on behalf of the public. Probably because they dislike the public. The press is over-educated, cloistered, far removed from people who make things. Their idea of slumming it is non-organic quinoa. I wonder: if the media became truly diverse – especially in perspective – would they have gotten so much wrong? Would they have missed Trump's victory, or seen through the collusion and obstruction hoax, the impeachment travesty? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Would they have seen the coronavirus coming instead of drooling over Rep. Adam Schiff's lies? Would they have seen former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn for what he was: a hero getting screwed? The fact is, we know the media are broken, and the only entity not reporting it is the media. We need a 12-step program for the press; the first one would be to buy them a mirror. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Give” on May 14, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

 Attorney General William Barr’s remarks on Monday, signaling that the Justice Department anticipates no criminal charges against former President Obama and former Vice President Biden, should come as a surprise to no one (certainly, ahem, to no one who read "Ball of Collusion"). As I noted less than a month ago, the AG observed during a wide-ranging interview with Hugh Hewitt that the subjects of the Durham investigation are not candidates for public office; thus, they were not affected by a Justice Department guideline against bringing charges close to Election Day. DOUG SCHOEN: FLYNN CASE – WRONGDOING ON BOTH SIDES. HERE'S WHAT JUDGE SHOULD DO NOW By then, Biden was already the putative Democratic presidential nominee. Obviously, if serious consideration were being given to an indictment of Biden, Barr would not have made the point about the guideline. To be sure, the media reporting will portray Barr’s latest comments as indicative of a rift between the AG and President Trump, whose latest “Obamagate” rhetoric frames Obama-era investigative abuses as “crime.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Barr’s remarks will also be applauded as an “exoneration” of Obama officials — consistent with the media approach that portrays Democrats as innocent victims of right-wing smears if they manage to evade indictment, while a “guilty until proved innocent beyond any doubt” standard is applied to Republicans. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Barr’s comments will feature in the “nothing to see here” storyline, the press’s counter to stunning revelations about the baselessness of the Russia collusion narrative willfully peddled by Democrats, and the exploitation of counterintelligence powers — powers that are supposed to protect us from jihadists and hostile regimes — for partisan political purposes. To the contrary, my sense is that the AG believes there is plenty to see and be outraged about. It simply may not be criminal. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The problem with assessing political candidates is you never really know what they're like until they get ahold of power. And by then, of course, it's too late. TRUMP TELLS GOVERNORS FEDS 'WILL STEP IN' IF GOVERNMENT DISAGREES WITH STATE REOPENING PLANS The decent ones wield power with restraint and humility. They understand the limits have their own wisdom -- human wisdom -- and they also understand the inevitability of unintended consequences, which are the rule. They know they won't be in charge forever, and so they tread lightly. But the bad ones, they go crazy. And the more power they get, the crazier they go. Power is the drug they've been searching for. It's why they went into politics in the first place -- not to help you or their fellow citizens or to improve our society, but to fill the empty space inside themselves. These are profoundly damaged people. Not a single one of them has a functional relationship with their fathers, not one. Unfortunately, people like that run a lot of this country right now. They've never had more power at any time in our history. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As this coronavirus pandemic recedes, it's becoming clear that cities and states that have cautiously reopened did the right thing. They are reaping the benefits of that. Nowhere has the virus surged back. Hospitals haven't been overwhelmed, death rates have not spiked. The time for mass quarantines is passed. And yet in some places -- and this is the measure of bad leadership --lockdowns are becoming more restrictive, not less, and much, much weirder. In Illinois for example, J.B. Pritzker, an aging ne'er-do-well who bought the governor's title a year and a half ago for $172 million in inherited money, has issued yet another emergency order. This time, Pritzker vows to imprison business owners if they try to reopen. This is what happens when neurotic dumb people get power. They do neurotic dumb things and then throw you in jail if you complain about it. Meanwhile, in New York City, pothead Mayor Bill de Blasio has announced that anyone who dares to swim will be yanked out of the water, of course, because the virus spreads so easily in the ocean. Pothead Bill. In Los Angeles, as we told you on Friday night, the mayor there has told the beachgoers they can walk on the wet sand,-- totally fine -- but not the dry. Dry sand is dangerous. On Long Island, Nassau County Executive Laura Curran has banned doubles tennis. Laura Curran, Nassau County executive: I will fill you in on what those rules are. Singles only, no doubles. Only every other court. You have to have a court between players, between people -- sets of people playing. Every player, unless they're from the same household, has to bring their own tennis balls so that you don't touch other people's tennis balls. Singles only, no doubles. She wants you to know that in Nassau County, it is illegal to touch other people's tennis balls. This is what happens when neurotic dumb people get power. They do neurotic dumb things and then throw you in jail if you complain about it. Thankfully, in spots around the nation, people are starting to remember that this is America. Just because morons like J.B. Pritzker would like to stage a flu d'etat does not mean that the rest of us have to play along. Several sheriffs in Illinois have now announced they will no longer enforce J.B. Pritzker's orders. They're too stupid. They're absurd. They're also unconstitutional. Many others -- individual Americans -- are standing up for themselves in quieter ways. Here's how we know: Because it controls your smartphone, Apple can track travel across the country. Now, that's scary. But in this case, it's interesting. Here's why. Over this past weekend, for the first time since the lockdowns began in mid-March, nationwide driving trends were well above the baseline average. And that means Americans are voting with their feet. They're ignoring the orders. They're breaking their isolation. Last week on the show, we talked to a New Jersey gym owner called Ian Smith. Smith vowed to reopen his gym on Monday, no matter what. Tucker Carlson: So, [New Jersey Gov. Phil] Murphy clearly doesn't know what to do to keep people safe. So many in New Jersey have died. He has arrested people for attending weddings.  You're openly defying him on television. What do you think is going to happen to you when you do this? Ian Smith, gym owner: We're prepared for any and all consequences. Our actions on Monday are going to be grounded in the ideals of civil disobedience. What we intend to showcase is that we reject the premise of essential versus nonessential businesses. So Smith wasn't joking. His gym reopened, and a big crowd arrived when it did. The police arrived, too. Here's what happened next. Police officer: We are and we're only here for everybody's safety today. We plan for the worst, hope for the best, and that seems like that's what we have out here today. Normally, you're all in violation of the executive order. On that note, have a good day. Everybody be safe. Kind of a touching exchange. A happy ending. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But it didn't last long. The police, as you just heard, preferred to leave citizens in peace. They weren't hurting anybody. But then their supervisors forced them to return with threats. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 18, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON 

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Quarantine is getting old. In many places, restrictions are beginning to lift, but it’s clear we’re nowhere close to returning to business as usual. In parts of California, the stay-at-home order is now expected to last through July. I miss going to the beach. I miss traveling to see my parents. I miss hair appointments and sitting in a restaurant and walking mindlessly through a store. I am fully aware of how superficial my wish list sounds in light of a pandemic. But I just wish the coronavirus would go away. SUZANNE HADLEY GOSSELIN: CORONAVIRUS HOMESCHOOLING IS HARD — HERE'S WHAT'S HELPING ME GET THROUGH IT The first six weeks of staying at home felt purposeful. We were working together to flatten the curve so we could return to normal life. While technically that still may be the case, the season of unknowns seems to be lengthening daily with reports that the crisis may not be resolved for two years or more. In the absence of actionable solutions and a clear blueprint of the future, feelings of hopelessness can set in. We may or may not take that long-planned summer vacation. Our children may or may not return to school in the fall. Will our church meet together again in 2020 or 2021? Living in these uncertain times is exhausting. The new has worn off and many of us are in desperate need of a quarantine reset. Here’s are two things I think can help. Settle in. During the past few months, I’ve been living in survival mode, missing my old life and doing everything I can to get back to it. With projections of “the worst being over” sometime next year, it’s time to adapt to the new normal and establish routines that will withstand months not days. During the sixth century BCE, the Jewish people were exiled from their country and living in captivity. Their circumstances seemed bleak, and there was no way they could go back to their former lives. With the novelty of quarantine long gone, we must find a new way forward.  Through Jeremiah the prophet, God gave them this message: “Build houses and live in them; plant gardens and eat their produce” (Jeremiah 29:5). Essentially, “keep living.” That solution is deceptively simple, but it requires an intentional choice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Live with purpose and hope. Last week, Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti said, “We’re not moving past COVID-19, we’re learning to live with it.” For many, that’s a tough pill to swallow. With the novelty of quarantine long gone, we must find a new way forward. And Jeremiah offers us this encouragement: “For I know the plans I have for you,” declares the Lord, “plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future” (29:11). Even in prolonged seasons of adversity and unknowns, we can find hope. Instead of viewing the coronavirus as the end of something, maybe we need to view it as a starting point. Every day my third-grade son, who is on the spectrum, tells me, “I want to go back to school.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “I know you do, Buddy,” I say. As much as I wish I could grant his request and right all that’s wrong in his little world, I can’t. That’s when I notice a grin spreading across his face. “School is closed,” he says in a sing-song voice followed by a belly laugh. I pull him in for a hug and know he’s going to be OK. We’re going to be OK. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SUZANNE HADLEY GOSSELIN

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In the pantheon of great lines suitable for induction into “Bartlett’s Familiar Quotations” is Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s 2010 comment about Obamacare: “We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it.” While that seemed outrageous and even comical to many at the time it has become an all-too-familiar pattern for legislators who focus more on TV appearances, fundraising and their reelections than on the laws they pass without reading them first. The latest bank-breaking measure to narrowly pass the House (even some Democrats voted against it) is a $3 trillion package styled “coronavirus relief.” It is more than 1,800 pages long. The disingenuous title is an effort to position it as something that will be more acceptable than honest descriptions such as “boondoggle” and “vote buying.” ALEX BERENSON: CORONAVIRUS TRUTH AND WHY THE MEDIA ESTABLISHMENT HATES ME SO MUCH The package is supposed to help people struggling due to lost jobs and closed businesses, but it is more favorable to Democrat constituencies and left-leaning interest groups that rely on their party for bailouts. There have been efforts, especially in recent years, to lengthen the time between when a bill is written (usually by staff members and lobbyists) and when members vote on it, giving everyone plenty of time to read the bill. The latest stimulus bill is only the most recent example of what happens when that doesn’t take place. Passed by the slim margin of 208 to 199 – an argument for a Republican House majority in the coming election – the measure contains significant amounts of cash for states with Democratic governors and legislatures, which have misspent taxpayer money and now find themselves in deep debt. Commenting on efforts to allow more time for members of Congress to read bills before voting on them, Quentin Kidd, Department of Political Science professor at Newport University has said: “I, unfortunately, don’t think that members of Congress will use that time reading the bill. They will use that time doing other things, and they will continue to do what most of them do right now, which is to pay attention to their staff or listen to what lobbyists say.” Among the many outrageous components of this latest bill, as if $3 trillion we don’t have and must be borrowed isn’t outrageous enough, is a provision that gives money to Democrats’ newest constituency, non-citizens or undocumented immigrants, which is how Democrats like to refer to them, who now have tax identification numbers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In saying the bill is “dead on arrival,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., added, “It’s a parade of absurdities that can hardly be taken seriously.” And yet part of it will be taken seriously. Even McConnell acknowledged the inevitability of more spending (he’s also up for reelection) when he told The Wall Street Journal another bill is probably necessary. Whatever the Senate negotiates with the House will certainly add to the previous $2 trillion measure, which didn’t trickle down to some of the neediest individuals and small businesses, but contained horror stories such as checks going to dead people or to multimillion-dollar businesses or millionaires who didn’t need it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Rapper and reality TV star Maurice Fayne, aka “Arkansas Mo,” received $2 million. According to the U.K. Daily Mail, Fayne spent part of it on a Rolls Royce, a Rolex watch and child support, rather than retaining workers in his transportation business. He had applied for $3 million, so perhaps the government can claim it saved money. Thankfully, Fayne has been arrested, but will he be forced to return what remains of the money? Anyone curious as to why in March the Gallup poll found public disapproval of Congress at 74 percent (it was 64 percent in April possibly because of the stimulus money) need look no further than the way the professional class operates. In too many instances, they act more in their own self-interest instead of the long-term public good. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. I was asked recently if I thought we would be able to watch college football this fall. My flippant answer: “I couldn’t tell my good friend Randy Evans (the U.S. ambassador to Luxembourg) that his beloved Bulldogs would not be playing in Athens this fall, so yes, we will have college football.” Then I got to thinking about the question. LIZ PEEK: AS CORONAVIRUS AND BIDEN FADE, TRUMP AND ECONOMY GET THIS GOOD NEWS It is a commentary on the dominance of the dire, defeatist public health pundits that whether there will be football more than 100 days from now could even be a question. The question instead should be: “How will we operate so that all sports – college football, professional baseball, professional football, etc. – can be played safely more than three months from now?” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In fact, we should expect that by Labor Day baseball games will be played with socially spaced crowds, and the World Series attendance will be close to normal. Simply put: America should be addressing these challenges with a “yes, and” attitude instead of “no, because” attitude. As I am writing this, Italy is reopening stores. After nine long weeks, the Italians have begun to beat the coronavirus decisively enough to move beyond only allowing grocery stores, pharmacies and gas stations to operate. Of course, there will be initial restrictions, mask-wearing, personal spacing and other measures. On Sunday, Callista and I walked around the Villa Borghese park with thousands of people spacing themselves. There were children riding bikes, and more than a dozen little food stands were busy serving people. The workers were wearing masks and gloves. This morning, the Vatican announced St. Peter’s Basilica would be open as of Monday. We also just got the great news that my favorite restaurant, Il Matriciano, was opening tonight. We already have a reservation. The Italian prime minister apparently changed his mind on Saturday and bumped restaurant openings up to May 18 from June 1. In fact, Italy has announced that it will be open to tourists beginning in June. Similarly, Greece has announced it will be open to tourism in July. As Ambassador Evans wrote me from Luxembourg, “High schools [are] open now. I can see them every day from CMR. All schools start back on May 25. There are many countries in Europe with schools open.” When you think about the scale and complexity of the United States, the idea that there might be a nationwide ban on sports is just crazy. It might be necessary to move some games out of the most dangerous cities. But in most of the country, sporting events should be completely manageable. Yes, New York City has had more than 15,000 COVID-19 deaths. New York state has had more than 22,000 deaths. By contrast, the second-largest state in the country, Texas, has had roughly 1,300 COVID-19 deaths. Florida is the third-largest state in the county – and it has a large elderly population. Florida has had 1,900 deaths. Liberalism has become an ideology of fear. Remember, global warming will kill us in the next decade – just as it was supposed to kill us this decade as of last decade, according to some liberals. So, New York, our fourth-largest state, has had about seven times as many COVID-19 deaths as the second- and third-largest states combined. It has also had nearly seven times as many deaths as the largest state, California. Meanwhile, Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp has led his state into a controlled reopening. So far, Georgia has had a little more than 1,600 deaths. It says something about the intense liberal and anti-Trump bias of the news media that New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo – who has presided over almost 14 times as many COVID-19 deaths as Kemp – is a hero of the media while Kemp is disparaged and attacked. The most amazing example of this clear bias was The Atlantic’s April 29 article entitled “Georgia’s Experiment in Human Sacrifice.” Let’s be clear about what’s happening. Liberals, including many in the media, would like to keep the economy closed as a key step toward defeating President Trump in November. Furthermore, liberalism has become an ideology of fear. Remember, global warming will kill us in the next decade – just as it was supposed to kill us this decade as of last decade, according to some liberals. Catastrophism has been a hallmark of the left since Stanford Professor Paul Ehrlich warned in the 1970s that Britain would starve to death by 2000 (his astonishingly wrong prediction did not cost him tenure or status as an expert in the liberal community). As Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., just proved in her absurd $3 trillion legislation, Democrats are not interested in Americans succeeding. Democrats have become the party of noncitizens taking American jobs, American taxpayers subsidizing non-work for everyone, and a government-dominated system of decay and dependence. From a liberal standpoint, sports involve winning and losing. They often involve intensely competitive behavior that violates the socialist norm of everyone being equally mediocre, passive and dependent. The classic American “can do,” risk-taking, entrepreneurial spirit has the opposite bias from liberalism. Americans who took wagon trains west were risk-takers. Americans who invented flight were risk-takers. Americans who landed on the Moon (and now plan to go back to stay) are risk-takers. The question of restarting sports and other activities by this fall or hiding and cowering is a classic example of classic American values versus liberal values. However, there are enemies who must be defeated before we will be able to get school and professional teams back on the field – those trial lawyers who want to sue everyone they can. Europe does not face the litigation crisis about reopening that America faces. Trial lawyers play a limited role in Europe because may countries have “loser pays” systems. The kind of class action suits that would bankrupt U.S. colleges and professional teams trying to reopen simply are not a factor in Europe. So, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., is exactly right to insist that litigation reform protecting businesses and institutions from the destructive attack of trial lawyers must be part of the next serious COVID-19 legislation. If we really want America to bounce back – and we want to see competitive sports revived – we must insist on the McConnell litigation reform as part of the next pandemic legislation. We clearly must plan to reopen the schools and athletic facilities and get back to being a free country by Labor Day. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This is the great challenge to America and to our leaders. Go Dawgs! CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. When the four horseman of the apocalypse ride, Plague and War often gallop side by side. The last time nations battled a pandemic of this scale and severity, they also were fighting a world war. Foreign mayhem doesn’t stop while we care for our sick at home. For months now, America’s headlines have dealt with little else than the COVID-19 and high-stakes politics. But there are plenty of other problems in this wide world that might well hit American lives and livelihoods just as hard. They should not be forgotten or ignored. What about our top four antagonists going into the pandemic? The good news is, things don’t seem to have gotten much hairier — at least for now. REP. STEVE CHABOT: CORONAVIRUS DEATH TOLL – RECOGNIZE THIS SIMPLE TRUTH ABOUT CHINA, AND ACT ACCORDINGLY  Yes, the U.S. and China continue the diplomatic sparring and name-calling over Beijing’s misbehavior that allowed the coronavirus to spread throughout an unsuspecting, ill-informed world. But this hasn’t escalated into anything more than that, and China’s stock around the world has dropped quite a bit. Meanwhile, Iran remains under enormous pressure. Reeling from the virus at home, its forces are being hounded by Israeli airstrikes in Syria and are increasingly unwelcome in Iraq. And matters could soon get worse for Tehran. The U.S. is ramping up pressure to extend the U.N. embargo on arms sales to Iran or reimpose “snapback” sanctions on the regime. Russia may be far more damaged by the virus than Moscow is letting on. Meanwhile, its economy has been badly battered by the plunge in oil prices. As for North Korea … it remains as inscrutable as ever. Elsewhere in the world, however, mayhem has not taken a timeout to cope with the coronavirus. Here are three places Washington needs to keep a worried eye on. No. 3. It’s lousy in Libya   Europe, as well as the U.S. has a lot riding on stability in the Greater Middle East, and Libya is highly unstable. The country remains trapped in a civil war between the forces of Gen. Khalifa Haftar, whose forces are stalled in the suburbs of Tripoli, and the interim Government of National Accord (GNA), internationally recognized as the country’s legitimate government. While the war is at a stalemate, Haftar’s forces increasingly are shelling civilian areas, perhaps taking advantage of the coronavirus lockdown to more efficiently terrorize civilians who can no longer move. It is hard to see how Libya gets sorted out without the U.S. playing a more prominent diplomatic role.  Meanwhile, interested powers like Turkey, Italy, France, Russia, Egypt and the UAE, remain deeply divided. Some are even supporting mercenaries and militias; that will only help spread misery and increase the potential for the return of terrorism. It is hard to see how this gets sorted out without the U.S. playing a more prominent diplomatic role. No. 2. There is a modicum of hope in Afghanistan   This is not our war. But Washington continues to provide advice and support to the Afghan people, and Washington needs to still care about the future of the country. Instability and a resurgence of transnational terrorism in the region would not be in America’s interests. Last, week the country suffered a horrific terrorist attack, staged by ISIS, on a maternity hospital near Kabul. ISIS’s goal is to derail peace talks between the Taliban and the Afghan government. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Nevertheless, the Afghans announced they are formally establishing a unity government, and there are signs that inter-Afghan talks may start after Ramadan. If the cause of peace does continue to move forward, it will only be because of continued American support for the Afghan people. No. 1. What’s up in the Western Balkans?  The scars of the collapse of Yugoslavia and the outbreak of the Balkan wars in the 1990s are still visible and quite ugly. In particular, the animosity and distrust between Serbia and Kosovo continue unabated. And Bosnia-Herzegovina is a barely functioning state. Russian and Chinese meddling doesn’t help. A prosperous, free and secure Europe remains a vital U.S. interest, and we can never feel secure in the continent’s future when parts of Southern Europe remain excluded and mired in past hatreds. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Recently, the U.S. has significantly ramped up its diplomatic efforts to bridge the gap between Serbia and Kosovo. Washington needs to sustain that effort and partner with the European Union and key nations, like Germany, to press for a better future for the Western Balkans. The U.S. is the leader of the free world, a global power with global interests. We don’t get a timeout from our global responsibilities to deal with COVID-19. The good news: We are a great nation; we are up to the task. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

 When the news broke that Fred Willard died, someone tweeted that he was the most naturally funny person ever. That comment struck me as hyperbole. But then I started thinking, maybe the tweet’s right. I came upon Willard, on a show called “Fernwood Tonight,” which later became “America Tonight.” It remains one of the great surreal comedic experiments of its time -- a fake talk show with bogus guests, a disgruntled bandleader in Frank De Vol and lurid backstories concerning its main host Barth Gimble (played by Martin Mull).  Sounds like “The View.” The show was an exquisite wreck, largely due to its co-host, played by Willard, who invented a new kind of external interior dialogue. His stream of conscious thoughts were journeys in idiocy -- like a cheerful guy who sits next to you on the bus and tells you his sociopathic desires -- in between humming show tunes. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Willard showed you the banality of evil. And made it hilarious. He went on to movie fame, “Spinal Tap,” “Best in Show,” “A Mighty Wind,” playing the same character over and over: an idiot. When I was editor of Stuff magazine, we invited Fred to be our guest editor. Normally, this is a publicity ploy -- you do it to get free media for both the magazine and the star. Fred Willard showed you the banality of evil. And made it hilarious. No celebrity ever edits a thing. Maybe they'll drop by the office and take a picture. But they want nothing to do with us lowly scrubs. But not Fred. We had to send him all the issue pages. And he read them. And made notes on every single page! They were genuinely helpful, super funny, and 100 percent Fred. We ended up just running his comments all over the magazine. They were that great. The fact is, you have to be super smart to play dumb so good. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And man, he was the best. R.I.P.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  No, President Donald Trump is not ranting and raving about Obamagate to keep himself center stage or to distract attention from COVID-19, as liberal media are suggesting. They still don't get Trump.       Two recent columns contend that Trump has ulterior motives in harping on Obamagate – the notion that the Obama administration tried to destroy Trump with the myth that he colluded with Russia to steal the 2016 election. Wrong. How about we draw the most obvious inferences from Trump's statements instead of the liberal establishment's theories, which are far more outlandish than the Obamagate conspiracy they're ridiculing. SALLY PIPES: CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE – BUY AMERICA PUSH WOULD HURT US. HERE'S HOW Everyone knows that Trump has long been outraged by the Russia hoax, and with good reason. Even after he has been thoroughly vindicated of this frame job, the perpetrators have escaped accountability, and the left still pretends Trump is the guilty party. Trump was effectively exonerated when the vaunted, high-powered and obscenely funded team of Special Counsel Robert Mueller couldn't find a shred of evidence to tie Trump to Russian election meddling. Now, with the revelation that Obama administration officials and the FBI collaborated to incriminate former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn, the retired Army lieutenant general, we have a smoking .357 Magnum in the hands of scores of those officials.  It is the liberal media – not Trump – who are trying to divert the public's attention from a story – the one showcasing the Democrats' complicity. If we had never heard of COVID-19, Trump would be railing against this corruption even more vigorously than he is now, because most of his day is consumed by virus-related health and economic issues. But don't bother telling that to Trump-obsessed journos. CNN's Oliver Darcy writes that although the virus has killed more than 82,000 and left millions unemployed, Trump and his conservative media allies are "constructing a separate alternate reality to keep their fans distracted from the news and outraged at the long-standing villains in the right-wing media universe." Though this might stun Darcy, we hayseed Trump deplorables are capable of walking and chewing tobacco simultaneously. Notwithstanding our diminished capacity, we stay abreast of virus and economic updates, which constitute 99.9 percent of the news, even with coverage of the Obamagate story the liberal media are trying to suppress. No matter how much you mock it, no matter how much you want the country to focus solely on the virus, life has to go on, and other issues, especially Obamagate, still matter.   Actually, Trump wants us to focus on the virus and on out-of-work Americans because he is determined to prudently reopen the economy precisely to help the same people these journos claim he is ignoring. If Trump were trying to shift our attention from the economy or the virus, why would he publicly disagree with Dr. Anthony Fauci on the reopening of schools in the fall? Moreover, it is inconceivable that he could avoid virus-related issues during the campaign even if he tried. The media's diversion claim is patently absurd. Politico's Jack Shafer is promoting the bizarre theory that Trump is pushing Obamagate and other "outrageous claims" because he wants the spotlight on himself, even if only for critical coverage: "Making him the subject of our conversations is almost as good to Trump as making him the video camera's focal point. ... Obviously, he'd like it better if the commentariat praised him, but if they're going to criticize him, he's content to annotate the insults and censures and repurpose them as offensive weapons. ... Baseless charges like these (Obamagate, China, Joe Scarborough, QAnon) are the perfect refuge of a rhetorical arsonist like Trump, who scorches the earth with controversy and confusion so nobody knows where to find the truth." Sorry, Mr. Schafer, but Trump truly believes he was set up with the Russia hoax, and the evidence supports him. That's why he's ranting about it even while COVID-19 is still with us. No matter how much you mock it, no matter how much you want the country to focus solely on the virus, life has to go on, and other issues, especially Obamagate, still matter. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER There must be a reckoning for the political party that abused governmental power to engineer a coup against the other party. In a saner world, Democrats would agree with this, as it was the premise upon which the bogus Russia-Trump investigation was based. Progressives pounded the table for three years over Trump's alleged theft of the election, and they now expect us to shuffle docilely into the night when we have his opponents dead to rights doing the very thing they accused him of doing? So, no, gentlemen, you are hopelessly off base. Trump intends to keep the coronavirus-related issues on the front burner. They must be if he is to lead America back to health and wealth. Unlike the left, he is not ignoring the economic devastation caused by this virus. Unlike the left, he is taking action instead of engaging in "rhetorical arson," if I may humbly borrow Schafer's incendiary term. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The left can smear Trump from their basements for not waving his wand and immediately accelerating our COVID-19 testing capacity to a billion per month and for the economic devastation caused by shutting down the economy. But they show unprecedented audacity blaming him for a death count that would have been worse and for an economic shutdown that would go on indefinitely if they were in charge. Unhappily for the media, President Trump is alert, engaged and proactively addressing a comprehensive range of issues affecting Americans. He is fully capable of calling attention to this Democratic corruption of shocking magnitude without impeding his efforts to make America well and prosperous again. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID LIMBAUGH

 Freedom and the rule of law are fundamental cornerstones of our democracy. They are facing existential threats.  Liberal elites, aided by some media, continue to weaponize government in an effort to attack both people and ideas they disagree with – especially those connected to President Donald Trump.   Recently, a coordinated conspiracy by members of a Democratic administration to take down President Trump, weaponizing government to frame former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn, was exposed.  ANDREW McCARTHY: OBAMAGATE – WAS FLYNN IDENTITY UNMASKED OR NEVER MASKED IN CALL WITH RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR? Internal FBI documents that were recently unsealed reveal that retired Army Lt. Gen. Flynn was used as a pawn by Democrats, apparently with the sanctioning of then-Vice President Joe Biden, to ignite the Russia hoax and subsequent investigation. As a result of these new facts, Attorney General William Barr’s Department of Justice correctly moved to have Flynn’s case dismissed.   Handwritten notes from top FBI officials reveal their motivations going into their January 2017 interview with Flynn, "to get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired."  As any member of the legal community understands, you cannot investigate and prosecute someone based on facts or information that are not obtained in good faith. Certainly, members of the Obama administration in 2016 were aware of this longstanding legal doctrine when the decision was made to have the FBI conduct its interview with Flynn without a legitimate investigative basis and with the ultimate goal of trapping him in a lie.     It is even more appalling that former President Obama reacted to DOJ’s motion to dismiss Flynn’s case by telling former aides that “our basic understanding of the rule of law is at risk.” It is time for Obama to revisit his dictionary.  The “rule of law” restricts arbitrary exercises of power, which is exactly the opposite of the Russia hoax scheme that seems to have been cooked up by him, Biden and numerous other leading Democrats in power at the time who were “unmasked” this week.   America’s justice system was designed to protect citizens from becoming victims of a political weaponization of government or to be crucified by an unfriendly media before being granted due process.   The rule of law and due process should be revered. It is why my Republican attorneys general colleagues and I consider ourselves America’s “last line of defense,” meaning that we work every day to uphold the Constitution, defend the laws in each of our states, and hold perpetrators of massive abuses of power accountable.   America’s justice system was designed to protect citizens from becoming victims of a political weaponization of government or to be crucified by an unfriendly media before being granted due process.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As more facts come to light on Flynn’s case, it is becoming clear that if you are a conservative, liberals and their allies in the media shape the court of public opinion to find you guilty until proven innocent. When new facts show you are innocent, you might get a private apology. However, if you are a liberal, you are innocent until found guilty and a conviction might warrant only a footnote in paragraph 18 on page B12.   We deserve truthful investigative reporting about the role of both Democrat presidential candidate Joe Biden and former President Obama in the framing of Flynn and the Democrats’ futile attempts to take down the Trump presidency.   CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Editor’s note: Author Alex Berenson first posted this essay on Twitter, but given its length, he decided to run it as a single piece of commentary on his website, AlexBerenson. In a note to readers, he writes: "'Blue-checks’ is Twitter slang for people with verified accounts, who are often prominent reporters. As is sometimes pointed out, I also have a blue check, though I am no longer part of the media establishment." I’ve thought a bit about why the media blue-checks hate me so (and, let’s be honest, they do hate me so). I’m nobody, really; I don’t have a prime time news show or a syndicated column; I have all of 103,000 followers on Twitter. But I am a particular burr for three reasons: I’m a class traitor. Not just because I worked for The New York Times for 10 years and wrote lots of hardball pieces about companies (not to mention our failures in Iraq) that make me tough to dismiss as a right-wing nutter, much as they’d like to try. No, I’m a class traitor in another, arguably more important way, too; the media/academic left tries to cudgel its opponents with an attitude of mocking scorn and intellectual superiority. The president has been a useful foil for them in this (as they have been for him). DOZENS OF CHURCHGOERS DEFY ILLINOIS' CORONAVIRUS STAY-AT-HOME ORDER, CHICAGO MAYOR TO ISSUE CITATIONS But that game doesn’t work with me; I’m as credentialed as the people shouting at me, only I follow the facts where they go. (This is why these people hated my book, “Tell Your Children,” so much; one can know cannabis has serious mental health risks and still want it legalized, but the blue-checks had been telling each other the same nonsense for so long they genuinely didn’t understand that cannabis was dangerous. They’re still trying to figure out what to do with that news. And they can’t stand knowing it.) So yelling at me to shut up doesn’t work, and trying to bait me into arguments doesn’t work, and telling me my tone is wrong doesn’t work (even when it is); I keep on merrily presenting studies and facts, and even if the media won’t pay attention, other people will. And the email I get – which is overwhelming, and overwhelmingly in favor of this effort – suggests many, many people – some fancy, some not – are sick of feeling mocked and told they’re stupid for their sincere beliefs about the dangers of the lockdowns. The second reason is I think it’s clear by now that my wife and I practice what we preach; we don’t fear #COVID, not for ourselves or our kids. So accusing us of being hypocrites won’t fly. As for those folks calling me a grifter? I’ve done this for free the last two months, with one minor exception, Hillsdale College paid me to make the video about the failure of the models. Maybe I’ll write a book one day, maybe not, but financially this has been nothing but a distraction. (No matter; I never imagined John Wells would have the career he did, and I was always careful with the novel money, which was… surprising. And we are a two-income family.) CLICK HERE TO GET OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The third reason is the most obvious: the hysterics have been wrong. They know it, whether they admit it or not. Except for the most at-risk populations – who should be the focus of our protective efforts – #COVID looks to be a minor risk. And with every day that goes by, every state and country that reopen without catastrophe, the lockdowns appear more insane. We should all be THRILLED about this fact, but too many of us aren’t. So the media (and the lockdown governors) are stretching further and further to try to scare people – the recent pediatric stuff being only the grossest example. I’m going to keep calling them out. Plenty of other people will too, but not necessarily as aggressively. And now we come back to tone. Well, I’ll be honest… CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As far as I’m concerned, I bite my tongue a lot of the time. If these blue-checks knew what I REALLY thought of them or the damage they have done AND ARE STILL DOING by refusing to accept the data and facts and science… They’d hate me even more. This essay first appeared on AlexBerenson.com.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. One of the most frightening things about the Russia revelations of the last few days is how the establishment and their media lackeys dismissed them. Ali Velshi, MSNBC host: The "Obamagate" conspiracy theory that President Obama, Vice President Biden and others were somehow involved in an illegal effort to target [Michael] Flynn or something like that. It is a conspiracy theory. NJ GYM OPENS IN DEFIANCE OF GOVERNOR'S LOCKDOWN: 'WE WILL NOT STAND DOWN' They pushed the Russia conspiracy theory for years. And now we have actual evidence that the Russia collusion story was fantasy, that the Mueller investigation was an illegitimate fiasco, that leading Democrats like Adam Schiff, deliberately lied for years to the American people, that the fearsome apparatus of law enforcement was deployed by the state to take down political enemies on phony pretext. That instead of upholding the centuries' long tradition of peaceful transition of power, the losing side in the last presidential election tried to cripple its successor, that the permanent Washington establishment aided and abetted by shameless propaganda arm, the establishment media, colluded in this orgy of norm-destroying and rule-breaking driven by condescending contempt for Donald Trump and his supporters. Who are these people? What is this? It's not democracy. It's the tyranny of the technocrats -- regardless of actual election results, power in the hands of a ruling elite who think they're smarter and better than you, but they're not. Obama, Biden, Brennan, Clapper, Comey, Holder -- all of them used law enforcement against their political rivals. This is the behavior of a police state. Sure they're all for democracy and the Constitution as long as it delivers the right result, more power to them. Who are these people? What is this? It's not democracy. It's the tyranny of the technocrats -- regardless of actual election results, power in the hands of a ruling elite who think they're smarter and better than you, but they're not. Their ideology -- globalism, open borders, endless war -- it failed. That's why people voted for Trump in 2016. Ever since then, the technocrats have been plotting to get their power back, first, with Russia, then with Mueller. After that, impeachment. Now, they're using this corona crisis to grab power. Of course, they are trying to blame Trump. Barack Obama, former president of the United States: This pandemic has fully finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge, know what they're doing. But look what actually happened. The reason we have a pandemic in the first place is because the outbreak was covered up by the authoritarian dictatorship in China. Who spent the last 50 years sucking up to them? Not Trump, but the technocrats. The reason we couldn't contain the outbreak and had to shut down our economy was because we didn't have tests that worked right at the start. Who screwed that up? No, not the evil Trump, but the saintly public sector, CDC -- the technocrats again. Has there ever been a more catastrophic case of technocrat bungling? Why is this man by the way, still in his job, "Dr. Death and Destruction" Robert Redfield of the CDC?. Now, we do have testing. It is because Trump got rid of regulation so the private sector could do it. Why were we running around desperately trying to get ventilators and PPE and whatever? Because the technocrat geniuses shipped manufacturing overseas and let other countries control the supply. It was Trump and Jared Kushner and his team who turned that around in record time. So now we are shipping ventilators to other countries. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Trump was right about the shutdown. They told us to flatten the curve, and we did. They told us to slow the spread and we did. So why are we still shut down? Here's the toll -- and no, it's not a choice between life and livelihood, between health and the economy. Even if you ignore the economic catastrophe, the health cost of the shutdown is reason enough to end it. Dr. Harlan Krumholz, Yale University: My hunch is that it may be a good third of the toll of people dying out of the hospital, maybe because of preventable illnesses that are not the direct result of the virus but actually indirect result of people being fearful about getting care. How long do they think we can keep going like this? They seem to think the government can be a substitute for real life. But where do they think the money will come from if they shut down the economy? Dementedly, the technocrats still push the shutdown. It saved lives, they say. Yes, but it costs lives, too. In New York, it looks like the shutdown actually added to the death toll. Sixty-six percent of New York hospital admissions were from people who are locked down at home. And that's before you get to the suicides, the substance abuse, the child abuse, the loss of health insurance, the lower life expectancy caused by shutdown-induced poverty. The shutdown fanatics say they're following the data. That's a complete lie. When have you ever heard a single one of them give you data about the health costs of the shutdown? Liz Cheney weighed in to back the technocrats this week. "Dr. Fauci is only interested in saving lives," she tweeted, adding cliche to injury. No, Dr. Fauci is only interested in saving lives from coronavirus. Of course that's important, but it can't be the only concern. What about saving lives lost by the shutdown? How long do they think we can keep going like this? They seem to think the government can be a substitute for real life. But where do they think the money will come from if they shut down the economy? Of course, for them, the 37 percent work-from-home elite, the economy isn't really shut down anyway. But for the majority of Americans who can't earn a living from their laptop, this is a disaster. And where real people try to earn a living, the technocrats punish them, like that salon owner in Texas, the game store owner in Florida or that gym owner in California. You see it with the creepy surveillance drones and the bullying cops, the arrest of people trying to get fresh air. It is the true face of today's establishment -- a leftist technocratic elite with increasingly authoritarian instincts. Last week, they said the shutdown in Los Angeles would go on until August. Who said that? Was it the mayor? The elected board of supervisors? No. It was the LA County public health director, Dr. Barbara Ferrer. When I talk about leftist technocrats, I'm not kidding. Dr. Barbara Ferrer is a registered Democrat who has made multiple donations to Obama, Elizabeth Warren, Kamala Harris and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Still, Dr. Barbara Ferrer, right? We've got to listen to the doctors except guess what her doctorate is in? Medicine? Epidemiology? Public health? Sorry, she is a doctor of social welfare. But it's OK -- she has also got a BA in community studies. Perhaps she can study the community she is destroying right now with her unscientific summer long shutdown. Oh, and guess what she is paid for putting millions of people out of work? It's a big city, a big job -- maybe 150 grand? 200? Guess again. Not 200, not 250, not 300, not even 400 grand is enough for her. Ka-ching! That's her salary right there -- $465,000 a year. And you can only imagine, a luxury pension that goes with that, paid for by us. Here's an idea: No federal money for any state unless every public official who keeps the shutdown going agrees to have their pay stopped and given to local food banks for the duration of their shutdown. They can apply for unemployment along with the rest of their victims. It's called "skin in the game." This technocrat takeover is not even competent. Look at those stupid, capricious, unscientific reopening rules. You can go on the wet sand, but not the dry sand. Keep schools closed even though the data shows they should be the first things reopened. Temperature checks when that misses most people who do have the virus and catches people who don't. Contact tracing after a pandemic, when it's far too late. They don't know what they're doing. They talk like scientists, but act like novelists. They're making it up as they go along. A few weeks ago, I said this is like Friedrich Hayek's "Road to Serfdom." He warned in 1944 that wartime mobilization would lead to a massive expansion in government and a disastrous loss of freedom. Well, it's happening again, just read Nancy Pelosi's $3 trillion far-left wish list. The worst of it is, it's all so unnecessary. Right from the start, we said to protect the vulnerable. But now, we're all vulnerable to the technocrat tyranny. That's why what Attorney General William Barr is doing is so important. He is taking a stand against the arrogant technocratic establishment. America wasn't designed like this. America wasn't designed to be run by these people. It was designed to be run by the people, by we the people. Not you, James Comey; not you, John Brennan, not you, Dr. Ferrer; not you Dr. Fauci. Not the technocrats, not the bureaucrats, not this snooty new breed of insufferable McKinsey Americans with their hubristic master plans and bloodless wonkery. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Of course, with Biden, they would all be back. And since he barely knows what day it is, with his constant mental malfunctions, he'd be the puppet of Pelosi and the puppet of the technocrats. We must fight back. Curb their power. Cut their pay. Kick them out. Beat them in November. That's the next revolution we need. Adapted from Steve Hilton's monologue from "The Next Revolution" on May 17, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM STEVE HILTON

 When news broke that Fred Willard died, someone tweeted that he was the most naturally funny person who existed. To me, that comment resonated as the hyperbole you bestow on someone who just died. But then, I honestly can't think of a funnier person in my own life than him. Chris Elliott comes damn close, and I might even call it a tie, but I'll wait till Elliott croaks before I change my opinion. I came upon Willard, like many people, on a show called “Fernwood Tonight,” which later became “America Tonight.” 
      April 26, 2011: This file photo shows actor Fred Willard arriving at the fifth annual BritWeek in Los Angeles.
      (AP) It remains one of the great surreal comedic experiments of its time -- a fake talk show with bogus guests, an amazing disgruntled bandleader in Frank De Vol, and lurid backstories concerning its main host Barth Gimble (played by Martin Mull, who also played his twin Garth Gimble on "Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman"). GREG GUTFELD: ESCAPING THE KID'S TABLE – WHY EVERYONE GOT THE PANDEMIC WRONG, ESPECIALLY THE EXPERTS The show was an exquisite wreck, largely due to its co-host played by Willard, who may be the one person who invented slapstick dialogue.  Meaning, his stream of conscious thoughts were exercises in idiocy -- like a weird guy who sits next to you on the bus and confesses to you his strange, sociopathic desires -- in between humming show tunes. Never mind the examples -- you can find them on YouTube. Willard went on to movie fame, playing essentially the same character over and over: an idiot. He was David Brent before David Brent. He was Michael Scott before Michael Scott. I never met him personally, and I wonder if the character Fred Willard plays is just Fred Willard. CLICK HERE TO GET OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER My connection to him was brief. When I was editor of Stuff magazine, we invited Fred to be our guest editor. Normally this is a publicity ploy -- you do it to get some free media for both the magazine and the celebrity. Magazines used to pull this gimmick all the time, and it was as fake as you'd expect it to be. No celebrity ever edits a thing.  Maybe he or she will drop by the office and take a picture. That's it. They want nothing to do with us lowly scrubs. Not Fred. We had to send him ALL the page proofs of the issue. And he read them. And he made notes on every damn single page! We got them, and they were genuinely helpful, super funny, and 100 percent Fred. We ended up just running his comments all over the magazine, with speech bubbles coming out of a picture of his face. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It was great. He was great. He was awesome. RIP FRED.

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. An article in Nowhere Magazine several years ago explored the ways ancient cultures dispatched the elderly, a practice known as senicide. Author Justin Nobel recounted several gruesome rites that made the Inuit habit of putting Granny on an Arctic ice floe seem humane. DR. NICOLE SAPHIER: IN BATTLING CORONAVIRUS, WE MUST DO MORE TO PROTECT NURSING HOME RESIDENTS At one point, Nobel mentioned that his own grandparents had moved “to a fancy nursing home in the suburbs of New York City.” That made me shudder. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER If they are honest, historians judging the American experience during the coronavirus pandemic will excoriate our barbaric failure to protect the elderly. We think of ourselves as civilized, but mindless policies and bureaucratic indifference turned many nursing homes and rehabilitation centers into killing fields. At least 28,000 residents and workers in long-term care facilities already have died from the ­virus, according to a New York Times analysis done more than a week ago. That represented one out of every three COVID-19 deaths recorded in the United States at the time and was likely an undercount because of reporting lags and varying state methods. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This massacre of a helpless population shames America and Washington must find out why it happened and who is responsible. Elderly people in these institutions could not protect themselves, and because most states banned visitors early in the outbreak, the institutions, their regulators and elected officials were fully obligated to shield them against infection. They failed miserably. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. To date, it’s estimated that more than 85,000 Americans have died from the coronavirus. We owe it to these Americans to let the pandemic also kill the last vestiges of the notion that China is our friend. Since the 1970s, Washington and Wall Street have believed that giving China a stake in the international system would lead to a China that respected the rule of law and was moving toward democracy. While many foreign policy experts pursued this counterfactual pipedream, Beijing was building its economy on the backs of American workers, developing a world-class military, and seeking in countless other ways to displace the United States as the dominant power in Asia. The coronavirus starkly demonstrates just how wrong this theory was. NEWT GINGRICH: CHINA LET CORONAVIRUS SPREAD – COMMUNIST PARTY SHOULD BE HELD LEGALLY LIABLE AND PAY DAMAGES Let’s face facts. Senior Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership knew about the coronavirus – knew that left unchecked it would become a global pandemic – and had enough evidence to suspect human-to-human transmission was possible well before they let the world know. Moreover, Beijing’s failures to halt international travel out of Wuhan created a pandemic that has infected 4.5 million people across the globe. And as time goes on, we keep learning that the CCP knew more, and earlier, about the virus, and they hid that knowledge from the rest of the world. Of course warning the world would have hurt China’s reputation and slowed its economic growth, the prime source of CCP legitimacy. But this is the world the CCP wants to live in – a world where its interests overrule any concerns about human life or international obligations. While our national security establishment has woken up over the past few years, the coronavirus highlights just how much the economy is still blind to these facts. We are far too dependent on China, and our critical supply chains are thoroughly entangled with its economy. Before the pandemic, there were growing alarms about dependence on China. In 2018, a Department of Defense report found the U.S. military was becoming dangerously dependent on China for critical components and hardware. And as recent trade tensions show, this dependence extends to many sectors of the U.S. economy. The current pandemic, however, has brought into sharp, ugly focus just how dependent we are. With headlines blaring that we rely on China for personal protective equipment and pharmaceuticals (often substandard), the American people are realizing firsthand just what dependence truly means. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER All rich economies are trading economies. That said, many benefits of trade go missing if one side – in this case, China – is a perpetual cheater. For decades, the CCP has prevented American companies from fairly competing in China. They have stolen our intellectual property worth trillions of dollars either through hacking, unfair rules or spying (yes, they have even tried to hack our coronavirus vaccine research). They bully airlines and the NBA when they don’t follow the CCP party line on Taiwan or Hong Kong. And worse for American workers, the CCP has decimated our manufacturing sector through currency manipulation, dumping products like steel and aluminum, and policies designed to corner the market on key industries. This has stolen untold sums from our economy and deprived middle- and working-class Americans from countless good-paying jobs. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When President John F. Kennedy promised Americans that our nation would put a man on the moon by the end of the 1960s, he knew we could rely on supply chains in the free world. But imagine if, when he made that pledge, our rocket engines and rocket fuel depended on the Soviet Union. We are in an analogous position with China today. China is our number one strategic competitor. When it comes to supply chains, our economy hasn’t behaved like it. Now more than ever, we owe it to all the Americans who have died from the CCP-turbocharged coronavirus, to change that. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. STEVE CHABOT

 Michael Flynn’s brief yet controversial roles in Donald Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign and as national security adviser at the beginning of the Trump presidency were disasters from the start. Trump made a mistake hiring Flynn for his administration, and was right to subsequently fire Flynn for lying to Vice President Mike Pence. Trump would have been justified firing Flynn for other reasons as well. On the 2016 campaign trail, the retired Army lieutenant general was extremely provocative, leading chants of “Lock her up!” in reference to Hillary Clinton. He was also quoted as saying that “if I did a tenth of what [Clinton] did I would be in jail today.” ANDREW McCARTHY: OBAMAGATE – WAS FLYNN IDENTITY UNMASKED OR NEVER MASKED IN CALL WITH RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR? Flynn’s extreme partisan behavior was outrageous and highly detrimental to the national security apparatus he was appointed to lead. If Flynn served any longer, there would have been serious danger of politicizing national security. That being said, I believe the Justice Department’s recent decision to drop its prosecution of Flynn on charges of lying to the FBI – charges Flynn pleaded guilty to – was justified, because of misconduct by the Obama administration, the Justice Department and the FBI in its handling of his case. In a highly unusual move, U.S. District Judge Emmet Sullivan refused last week to approve the Justice Department’s request to close the case against Flynn. Instead, Sullivan appointed a retired federal judge to argue against the Justice Department motion to dismiss charges against Flynn. But because the actions by Obama administration officials, the Justice Department and the FBI (part of the Justice Department) in 2016 and 2017 to build a case against Flynn are deeply concerning, the best way to rectify these missteps is to drop the case. The case against Flynn is rooted in the decision by President Barack Obama’s administration to impose sanctions on Russia in December 2016 for that nation’s interference in our presidential election that year. Flynn established a backchannel with the Russians, making calls to their ambassador to the U.S., Sergey Kislyak. Recordings secretly made by U.S. intelligence officials show that Flynn urged Kislyak that Russian should not retaliate for the U.S. sanctions. But Flynn later denied making that request of Kislyak when he was interviewed by FBI agents. Flynn then proceeded to falsely state to Vice President-elect Pence what he discussed with Kislyak and subsequently lied to the FBI as well on two occasions. Pence – apparently believing Flynn – then vouched for Flynn by repeating Flynn’s false statements during a TV interview. In December 2017 Flynn pleaded guilty to charges of making false statements to the FBI. However, in January this year, Flynn’s attorney claimed the prosecution breached the plea agreement by recommending prison time, and Flynn sought to withdraw his guilty plea. From the latest developments we know now about the role of the Obama administration and the FBI and Justice Department in the Flynn case, it’s clear that there has been wrongdoing on both sides.  Any unmasking of an American who is caught on surveillance of a foreign official for political purposes is not only wrong but extremely dangerous.  The unmasking of Flynn by Obama administration officials, as evidenced by the memo that acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell gave to the Senate last week, was also wrong. And it’s clear now that the FBI investigation of Flynn was clearly designed to set him up for prosecution. Any unmasking of an American who is caught on surveillance of a foreign official for political purposes is not only wrong but extremely dangerous. As the Justice Department announced last week, the FBI did not have sufficient reason or basis to interview Flynn when he lied about the content of his discussion with Kislyak. The department said, for this reason, it wants to drop charges against Flynn. In a court filing last week, U.S. Attorney Timothy Shea stated: “The Government is not persuaded that the Jan. 24, 2017 interview [with Flynn] was conducted with a legitimate investigative basis and therefore does not believe Mr. Flynn’s statements were material even if untrue. Moreover, we do not believe that the Government can prove either the relevant false statements or their materiality beyond a reasonable doubt.” The move by the Justice Department to drop the charges against Flynn was necessary given that we now know the FBI effectively entrapped him. The FBI’s interview with Flynn should never have taken place.  Former federal prosecutor Andrew McCarthy agrees with this Justice Department’s move to drop charges and says that “the government wouldn’t have a prayer of convicting Flynn at trial.” Flynn was not exactly a model public servant, but in fairness to him, he has suffered a great deal – losing his job, being hit with big legal bills that forced him to sell his house, and defending himself against a possible prison sentence. That amounts to a lot of punishment he has already endured. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER With our nation struggling to deal with the worst pandemic to hit us since World War I and the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, rehashing the conduct of Flynn, the Justice Department, the FBI and officials in other parts of the Obama administration in 2016 and 2017 has become a distraction from far more important matters. Judge Sullivan shouldn’t force the Justice Department to prosecute Flynn. Let the case against him end. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The New York Times recently ran a piece declaring that a pandemic can end “not because a disease has been vanquished but because people grow tired of panic mode and learn to live with a disease.” According to the article, that’s what history tells us, and that seems to be where we are now. People in the Northeast are celebrating the arrival of summer weather by meeting up outside bars at happy hour and streaming to local beaches. Families are gathering in back yards to cook outside while their kids play with garden hoses. The relief is palpable. People in other states that have lifted lockdown regulations are venturing out to restaurants and back to work, happy to be free. Yes, we still have to protect the vulnerable and be careful, but increasingly, people seem ready to challenge this virus and get on with their lives. What joy. DARRELL ISSA: CALIFORNIA SPECIAL ELECTION – GOP WIN SUGGESTS THIS FOR NOVEMBER 2020 This is great news for the economy, for our well-being and for President Trump. The lift in spirits was confirmed recently by the latest University of Michigan consumer sentiment reading, which came in better than expected. The index rose to 73.7 in May, up from 71.8 in April and well above the Dow Jones estimate of 65.  Moreover, the index of current economic conditions soared to 83 from 74.3. Undoubtedly some of the gain reflected the dispersal of CARES checks, but it also likely reflected the reawakening of activity. Nothing could be more important. It is confidence that drives spending, which in turn drives growth. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Rising optimism and a snapback in the economy are also essential to Trump’s reelection prospects. He was set to campaign on booming job creation and rising incomes when the virus upended our society and threw millions out of work, all in the space of just a few months. Democrats of course have fastened onto the crippled economy and massive unemployment, hoping the collapse would unseat the president. Campaign junkies on the Left have been busily writing the incumbent’s political obituary, confident the coronavirus will bring him down. Jennifer Rubin at the Washington Post recently published a piece entitled “Trump’s damage is already done. He may not be able to save himself.” As a result, presumptive Democrat nominee Joe Biden has focused on making the 2020 election a referendum on President Trump. He and his media allies are convinced that voters will punish the president for our nation’s 80,000-plus COVID-19 deaths, the horrific economic costs of the shut-down and also, well, for being Trump. Are they right? No. A few data points suggest the president remains on solid ground. First, the latest Gallup poll puts Trump’s approval rating at 49 percent, matching the highest level recorded during his time in office. At this same point in his presidency, Barack Obama stood at 47 percent approval. Also, two recent congressional elections delivered good news for the GOP, and for President Trump. Republican Mike Garcia flipped a Democrat-held seat in California’s purple 25th District, an area north of Los Angeles, defeating State Assemblywoman Christy Smith. The race was to fill a seat left vacant by the resignation of Katie Hill; the election for the full term will be held in November. It was the first time since 1998 that a Republican had taken back a California seat held by Democrats. Though historically a GOP stronghold, the suburban area now hosts 6 percent more registered Democrats than Republicans; Hillary Clinton won the district by seven points. Clinton, Obama and other Dem notables came out to support Smith, to no avail. If Democrats expect Biden to glide into office on a wave of misery, or if they think Trump is going to be flayed for his management of the virus, they may be in for a surprise. Garcia not only scored what the New York Times described as a “significant win,” but he chalked up a 12-point margin of victory. He ran on lower taxes and “Sacramento dysfunction.” He also ran on supporting Donald Trump. In another special election, Tom Tiffany, a Republican Wisconsin state senator backed by Trump, won a U.S. House seat left vacant by the retirement of Sean Duffy. Tiffany was the favorite in the heavily Republican district and won by a resounding 14 points. Democrats noted that Tiffany’s margin of victory was less than Trump’s 20-point win in 2016, and suggested the drop augured ill for the president’s prospects in the important swing state in November. The conclusion is disingenuous; Dems know that having the president at the top of the ticket this fall is a whole different ball game. It’s nearly six months to the election, and a lot can and will change. But if Democrats expect Biden to glide into office on a wave of misery, or if they think Trump is going to be flayed for his management of the virus, they may be in for a surprise. By November, voters may have decided COVID-19 is over, even as it continues to move through the population. Also, by the fall, the candidates will have reemerged from their coronavirus lockdown. That will be a plus for Trump, who will surely work out some way to host his best and most effective outreach to voters – those huge rallies where he is at his most relaxed and persuasive. And Biden will finally have to face the rigors and exposure of the campaign trail. He will no longer be able to hide behind teleprompters or have his wife Jill hosting virtual events in his place. The former vice president will have to make his case to the American people, and it will have to be more than just slamming Trump. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP President Trump will argue he is the best person to rebuild our shattered economy, and to take on China. That is Trump’s strong suit; a recent CNN poll showed voters trust the president over Biden on managing the economy 54 percent to 42 percent. We’re still waiting to hear what Joe Biden wants to do for the country. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LIZ PEEK

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio discusses why the state needs over $7 billion in the coronavirus stimulus package on ‘Sunday Morning Futures.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. Want to know why Washington balks at sending the city money? Read Julia Marsh’s Post story last week on the $2 million Mayor Bill de Blasio just spent on new hires and pay hikes. Even as he threatens layoffs and furloughs, de Blasio brought in or promoted at least 10 people, many with six-figure salaries, boosting payroll costs by $2 million. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER ThriveNYC spokesman Joshua Goodman, for one, got a nice $45,000 raise (upping his pay to $175,000) when he became the Sanitation Department’s assistant commissioner for public affairs. Ashley Ross-Teel came on board as City Hall’s $160,000 chief content officer. The mayor’s “unfettered spending” never stops, rails City Councilman Robert Holden, D-Queens. The city claims it’s in a hiring freeze, yet “we see nothing but high-paying hirings and promotions” — even as the mayor threatens layoffs. As Councilman Eric Ulrich, R-Queens, notes, many of the hires and raises surely could have waited. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP A city spokeswoman argues that there’s an exception for COVID-19-related hirings, and some were slotted pre-crisis. Yet since 2014, de Blasio has bloated the city head count by more than 30,000, or 10 percent, putting it at 330,000. Couldn’t any of them do the work assigned to the new folks? No, $2 million isn’t much in a $90 billion budget. But de Blasio predicts a $6.6 billion drop in revenue for the fiscal year that starts June 1, thanks to the pandemic. So why boost staffing costs at all? CLICK HERE TO READ THE FULL EDITORIAL IN THE NEW YORK POST

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. The World Health Organization botched its response to the novel coronavirus. It legitimized China’s early and misleading claims about the disease, which set back the initial response to the virus in other countries, including the United States. As the pandemic has worn on, the WHO has continued its slavish praise for Beijing and failed to get to the truth about the origins of the virus, or its early spread. President Trump announced his administration will soon unveil a policy to address the organization’s shortcomings. This week, member countries will gather for the annual meeting of the WHO's decision-making body, the World Health Assembly. The United States should use the gathering to press for an accounting of the WHO’s actions during the current pandemic, as well as reforms to the organization. NEWT GINGRICH: CHINA LET CORONAVIRUS SPREAD – COMMUNIST PARTY SHOULD BE HELD LEGALLY LIABLE AND PAY DAMAGES The WHO suggests it will seek an “after action report” of its response to the coronavirus pandemic. But such a review can’t wait and shouldn’t be conducted internally. What’s needed is an independent investigation of the WHO’s reaction to the coronavirus crisis and, in particular, an accounting of the interactions between the WHO’s leadership and China’s government. We should be particularly concerned about how the cozy relationship between WHO leader Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and Chinese President Xi Jinping may compromise the organization’s ongoing response to the pandemic. A news report recently suggested that German intelligence officials found that Xi personally asked Tedros to delay declaring the coronavirus a pandemic and to withhold information regarding the human-to-human transmission of the virus. If true, Tedros’ willingness to accede to Xi’s request casts doubt on the WHO’s ability to put public health concerns ahead of political ones for the duration of this crisis, and future ones. 
 
We wouldn’t be alone in demanding this review – the Australian government also argues such action is needed now. Time is of the essence because the WHO continues to make pronouncements about the current pandemic and we must have confidence that its future recommendations are presented honestly and without favor any member country. Also, the investigation should be independently run to ensure its completeness but also so that Tedros, or Beijing, do not simply dismiss its findings or hide them from plain view. The WHO’s member countries can benefit from Taiwan’s experience in fighting the virus. But for years, China has blocked Taiwan’s participation. 
 
The U.S. should also use the WHA meeting to push for Taiwan’s inclusion in the WHO. The organization continues to stonewall its participation, even though Taiwan’s response to the coronavirus has been exemplary. In fact, Taiwan has limited cases and deaths from the virus, all while eschewing the economic lockdowns that have become all too common in countries across the globe. Taiwan's success stems, in part, from an inherent suspicion of the communist apparatus in Beijing. Taiwan was aggressive early in imposing travel restrictions from the mainland. It also queried the WHO in late December about the possibility of human-to-human transmission of the coronavirus, weeks before China admitted it was possible.     
 
The WHO’s member countries can benefit from Taiwan’s experience in fighting the virus. But for years, China has blocked Taiwan’s participation not only in the World Health Assembly but also in over one hundred technical meetings where the real work of improving global public health is done. 
 
A bipartisan coalition in Congress, in concert with the Trump administration, has led a group of like-minded countries like Japan and New Zealand to convince the WHO to allow Taiwan to participate in this week’s WHA meeting. But the effort failed last week when the WHO announced Tedros had “no mandate” to invite Taiwan to the meetings. This despite the fact that Taiwan was granted observer status at WHA meetings from 2009 to 2016. Then, when a more China-friendly administration was in power in Taipei, it seems there was a mandate. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Clearly, Beijing pulls Tedros’ strings when it comes to political questions such as Taiwan’s inclusion. But Taiwan’s participation is not a matter of politics, but of public health.
 
Finally, the U.S. should use this week's meeting to make it clear that we want a new leader for the WHO. Although Tedros isn’t up for reelection until 2022, it’s never too early to make him a lame duck. Tedros has eschewed transparency in a number of critical decisions, all while showing fealty to Beijing on critical matters. Sidelining him now would allow us to identify a successor we can support while empowering others at the organization who will emphasize values like accountability and openness in the WHO’s ongoing efforts. 
 
The U.S. has, until recently, been too absent from fights over the leadership of international organizations like the WHO. The Trump administration deserves credit for taking these organizations – and China’s influence in them – more seriously. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In March, a U.S.-backed candidate was elected the head of the World Intellectual Property Organization after a campaign that had China crying foul about U.S. influence. We need more of that influence, not less, in future elections for the leadership of international organizations like the WHO. If we're unable to achieve these goals, the U.S. should consider creating an alternative venue for advancing the cause of improved public health around the world. Such an endeavor will take time.  For now, we must do all we can to push the WHO to do the right thing. Because as long as the organization plays the role it does, lives here in America and around the world are at stake. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LANHEE CHEN

 Do you ever hear people talking about their prayer lives and feel at a loss? They might say things like, ‘God told me” or “God confirmed” something, and you sit and wonder why you don’t hear from God that way. I often felt this way before my relationship with Jesus began to flourish. I sensed there was something missing in my relationship with God – but the prayers I did say seemed to go unanswered; I had no idea what I could do differently. Maybe you are currently stuck in this type of cycle; you pray but don’t seem to hear back from God. I want to encourage you, first, by assuring you God sees everything you are feeling and does hear all of your prayers. PAUL BATURA: 'MAN PLANS AND GOD LAUGHS' – A SUDDEN FAMILY HEALTH CRISIS PROVED THAT OLD SAYING TRUE Proverbs 5:21 reminds us, “For the ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, And He watches all his paths.” Second, people say the key to maintaining a healthy relationship is healthy communication. Our relationship with God is not exempt from this statement; in order for our relationship with Jesus to grow, we have to consistently communicate with Him. But what is different about this relationship – as opposed to human connections – with Jesus, we can and should focus more on what He can do for the relationship rather than dwelling on our shortcomings. By this I mean, your prayer life might be suffering because you are viewing it as any other relationship, thinking that when you stay out of touch for a while, God gets offended or sick of the excuses and gives up on you. If that is the case, you are unaware of the fullness of God’s endless love and mercy – but, on a more practical note, you are also failing to realize the profound possibilities of all you can ask from God. If you are unaware of what is keeping you from developing a deeper connection with God – and most of us are – you can ask Him! There are all types of forces working to distract us from communicating well with our Creator –shame, pride and distraction are just a few. It is crucial to identify these barriers in order to overcome them – but did you ever stop to consider that even the barriers to communication with God can be solved by God? If you are unaware of what is keeping you from developing a deeper connection with God – and most of us are – you can ask Him! The Psalmist did this very thing in Psalm 139:23-24, saying, “Search me, God, and know my heart; test me and know my anxious thoughts. See if there is any offensive way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Many of us struggle to “go deeper” with God because we are afraid to fully put our trust in Him. We love to control our circumstances and our very nature makes us question if we can have full faith in God and His plans. But, amazingly, even our faith is not entirely up to us. Yes, we must ultimately choose to give our lives to Jesus, but God will take even the smallest act of faith and submission and will multiply it. This is what Jesus meant when He said, “Because you have so little faith. Truly I tell you, if you have faith as small as a mustard seed, you can say to this mountain, ‘Move from here to there,’ and it will move. Nothing will be impossible for you” (Matthew 17:20). And what’s more, you can ask God to give you more faith! The disciples asked Jesus in Matthew 17:5, “Lord, increase our faith!” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Whatever is holding you back from experiencing the fullness of God, know this is not a problem you have to solve on your own. Remember you are dealing with the Creator of the universe, who is desperate to grow closer to you, and who will help you every single step of the way, no matter how small or large your obstacle may seem. “So let us come boldly to the throne of our gracious God. There we will receive his mercy, and we will find grace to help us when we need it most” (Hebrews 4:16) CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CHRISTEN LIMBAUGH BLOOM

 The results from last week’s special election in California’s 25th Congressional District should serve as a wake-up call for national Democrat partisans. I’d know: I’ve represented part of Southern California for almost 20 years. The 25th District sits just north of Los Angeles and includes parts of Los Angeles and Ventura Counties. It’s turned blue in recent years and is similar to the districts where Democrats have gained a foothold in their current majority in Congress. The district is suburban, professional and has a higher-than-average educational attainment level. Hillary Clinton won the district by nearly seven points in 2016; disgraced former Congresswoman Katie Hill won handily in 2018; and, the Democrat challenger from last week’s election, Assemblywoman Christy Smith, represents a state assembly district that covers half of the 25th District and beat an incumbent Republican in 2018. NEWT GINGRICH: PELOSI'S CRAZY $3T CORONAVIRUS SPENDING BILL MAY HAVE SECRET PURPOSE – DON'T UNDERESTIMATE HER And at the risk of stating the obvious: we’re talking about California. Republicans have not flipped a congressional seat in the state since 1998. Despite all this, first-time candidate and former Navy fighter pilot Mike Garcia beat Smith. Christy Smith was Democrats’ first-round draft choice and lost anyway. She had high name ID because of her time representing the area in Sacramento and a huge amount of money spent on her by national Democrats and outside liberal groups. Smith's campaign also got a sizable lift from our Democrat governor, Gavin Newsom, who tried to put his thumb on the scale in this race. Newsom allowed for in-person polling locations in favorable parts of the district despite recently signing an executive order to conduct elections by mail due to the threat of COVID-19. And yet Garcia defeated her soundly. The idea that this was due to Katie Hill doesn’t wash. Smith did everything she could to distance herself from Hill. And we also have the election results the same night from California’s 28thSenatorial District, in another part of the state, which showed Democrats taking a similar nine-point hit among voters. I believe there’s something at work in this district, and something brewing in districts all over the country, that portends poorly for Democrats in the November elections. No, I believe there’s something else at work in this district, and something brewing in districts all over the country, that portends poorly for Democrats in the November elections. In the lead-up to the 2018 midterms, we saw special elections that went strongly for Democrats. In hindsight, those sweeping Democrat wins were the first wave of a Democrat tsunami. It started in districts and in states similar to the 25th and I believe this could be the first wave of a very good election year for Republicans. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What’s happening is that 2020 voters are beginning to realize Republicans want to begin to responsibly open the economy back up and get Americans back to work, while Democrats want to remain shut down in perpetuity. Republicans rightly blame China for lying about COVID and endangering the world. But increasingly, Democrats want only to blame President Trump and the United States for the coronavirus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Opening the economy and blaming a totalitarian communist regime for COVID are two potent messages that Republican candidates can and should focus on. And I sense that voters are ahead of us in already coming to terms with these political realities. With all the built-in advantages Democrats enjoy in the 25th and the margins with which they’ve been winning elections in similar districts, this result should be a bright red light to national Democrats. It waits to be seen if they heed it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DARRELL ISSA

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Dear graduates of the Class of 2020. For reasons you already know, you are part of history. You comprise one of the most unusual graduating classes ever. And may I offer a confession on behalf of the adults in your lives? You? You probably can't become whatever you want. It’s a ... fib. And people who have loved you for a long time have repeated it over and over. PAUL BATURA: 'MAN PLANS AND GOD LAUGHS' – A SUDDEN FAMILY HEALTH CRISIS PROVED THAT OLD SAYING TRUE “Just dream big and before you know it you'll be playing in the NFL or the NBA or performing at the Grammys with Billie Eilish!” Or my big dream — winning a gold medal in table tennis. (I didn't.) CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER You should know that you're probably not going to play in the Super Bowl and you're probably not going to dunk on Lebron James and you're probably not going to sing a duet with Billie Eilish. But here's what you can do. Instead of focusing on the what you become, you can worry more on the who you become. The who in you. Now sure, some dreams are absolutely worth hanging onto and if you're dreaming of hitting a home run in game seven of the World Series, who am I to tell you to stop? But your legacy? That thing that you leave behind? It isn't going to be about money in the bank or professional accomplishments or how many Instagram followers you have. Your legacy isn't tied to the what, it's anchored in the who. What good is it to have millions in the bank and be wealthy, but to treat people poorly? What good is it to crush it on Apple Music if the messages of the music aren't meant to move and motivate people? What good is winning the Nobel Peace Prize or a Pulitzer if people are not put first in your life? In five or 10 years you're going to come back and have one of the most bizarre high school reunions in history. You'll stand around some stale hotel ballroom or under a pavilion in a pretty park and most of you won't be talking about prom or senior skip day or what it was like when your obnoxious uncle blew that fog horn at your graduation. But you'll still remember plenty of your high school experiences. I remember plenty of mine. And I remember my own reunions. What does this all mean for you? It means that as you transition through one of the strangest seasons of your lives, it's time to ask yourself not what you want to be, but who you want to be. I remember thinking how much we’d all grown. What I didn't remember — and honestly I'm not sure anyone else did either — was who was prom king or queen. I also don’t remember whether or not we beat our rivals or who starred in the spring musical. It's certainly not as if those things didn't matter — of course they did. But there is so much that matters so much more. I remember looking around the room at the aged and experienced faces like mine and remembering how they treated me and how they treated one another. Were they kind? Were they forgiving? Were they generous? Were they honest? Did they stand up for the little guy? And, of course, I asked myself the same questions. Sure, they were discussions about college and careers and kids and who's changing the world. But I can't really tell you what they'd become, I only have a sense of the who. They’re people who love their families. People who care for their communities. People who donate time and money to movements that matter to them. People who love their neighbors, their country, their God. So, what does this all mean for you? It means that as you transition through one of the strangest seasons of your lives, it's time to ask yourself not what you want to be, but who you want to be. Yes, go to college or trade school and get a degree and earn a living and make a name for yourself. Sure. But don't become so focused on what you are and titles and bank balances that you forget who you are. A few years ago I spoke at a more traditional high school graduation ceremony with thousands of people and hundreds of grads and all the pomp and circumstance. In the months and weeks and even minutes before I spoke, the administration communicated that I needed to be careful about not injecting religion in any way into my remarks. Perhaps understandable, it was a public school and that particular school in that particular community represents dozens of nationalities and faiths or no faith from around the world. But today? Today there isn't a principal looking over my shoulder waiting to cut my mic or tackle me from behind. So let me say this. As you focus on who you're becoming, don't lose sight of who you already are. You are a son or daughter of a literal, loving, everlasting God. The world will do everything it can to persuade you as you roll into adulthood and independence that the traditions and faiths of your fathers — and mothers — are false. Now the easy thing to do would be to tell you to take it from someone who knows, right? Take it from me, someone who has asked a lot of questions and studied and pondered and come to my own conclusions and so heavens to Murgatroyd you should trust me! No, don't take it from me. Take it from Him. When you wonder if you can become the who you want to be? Look up and ask who you already are. A son or daughter of a literal, loving, everlasting God. He will tell you. Graduates of the class of 2020. Go be great. Go change the world with the who inside you. On behalf of your family and friends and people who love you more than you can possibly know, we think that the who in you is already pretty great. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We love you. We're proud of you. And we cannot wait to see you days or decades from now. Not because we're worried about what you'll become, no, we're so confident in who you'll become. Feel loved. Because you are. Congratulations — you did it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JASON F. WRIGHT

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  It is expected that any day now, the White House will release an executive order requiring certain drugs to be manufactured in the United States. It's part of a wider push by both the administration and Congress to force the federal government to buy more American-made goods and reduce reliance on countries like China. This push is misguided. The administration's "Buy America" agenda would derail our response to COVID-19 and could have long-lasting negative consequences for our economy. The best way to maintain efficient, high-quality production of drugs and other medical equipment is to embrace a dynamic, global supply chain. The White House's draft executive order would require federal agencies to "maximize domestic procurement of essential medicines." Congress has gotten in on the act, too. Sens. Tim Kaine, D-Va., and Marco Rubio, R-Fla., have introduced the Strengthening America's Supply Chain and National Security Act, the most prominent of several Buy America plans circulating Congress. NEWT GINGRICH: CHINA LET CORONAVIRUS SPREAD – COMMUNIST PARTY SHOULD BE HELD LEGALLY LIABLE AND PAY DAMAGES Both plans would restrict federal agencies' abilities to import crucial medical supplies from abroad. The executive order would force the Departments of Defense, Veterans Affairs and Health and Human Services to purchase all vaccines, pharmaceutical ingredients and more from American suppliers. Advocates claim we need to take drastic measures to protect the country's health and safety. They think COVID-19 proves the dangers of relying on foreign countries – particularly China – to source essential medical goods. When the world locks down, the argument goes, we should have everything we need to produce drugs and other essential medical goods on our shores. These Buy America plans would do more harm than good. Only 28 percent of plants that make active pharmaceutical ingredients for FDA-approved drugs are located in the United States. If drug makers were suddenly unable to import these ingredients, the country would face a severe shortage of everything from painkillers to cancer drugs. Shifting production to the United States would leave the country short of more than drugs. Last year, the United States imported more than $3 billion worth of gloves, masks and other medical supplies from China, Germany and Mexico. A diverse global supply chain helps American companies produce affordable, high-quality drugs.  Shortages like these would be particularly dangerous now, amid the COVID-19 pandemic. That's why more than 200 of the nation's top economists petitioned the White House to abandon the Buy America order. Moreover, moving a single pharmaceutical plant can take over a decade and cost over $2 billion. Rushing through this process would be dangerous. But it doesn't even make sense to repatriate the supply chain over time. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER A diverse global supply chain helps American companies produce affordable, high-quality drugs. Producing an active pharmaceutical ingredient in India can cost up to 40 percent less than doing so in the United States, thanks to the subcontinent's abundance of raw materials and lower costs of production. Sourcing these materials entirely from the United States would increase costs for manufacturers, which they'd pass on to consumers in the form of higher prices. The global supply chain is hardly as dangerous as Buy America advocates suggest. China accounted for just 1 percent of pharmaceutical imports to the United States in 2019 and only 18 percent of active pharmaceutical ingredient imports. Further, China is home to just 15 percent of the manufacturers of active pharmaceutical ingredients that U.S. drug makers rely on to produce drugs on the World Health Organization's Essential Medicines list. More importantly, global supply chains help the United States in times of crisis. When Hurricane Maria struck Puerto Rico in 2017, it damaged 50 pharmaceutical plants. The United States only avoided a drug shortage because it was able to rely on foreign manufacturers. Global supply chains have similarly aided our nation's efforts against COVID-19 – and will help us endure future crises as well. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If lawmakers want to strengthen the supply chain, they can do so by defending U.S. intellectual property abroad and investing in advanced manufacturing techniques at home. Neither of these reforms would jeopardize the health of the American people. The rapid spread of COVID-19 shows just how globalized our world is. Despite what Buy America advocates claim, global problems require global solutions – and supply chains. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SALLY PIPES

Neurosurgeon Dr. Paul Saphier on the warning signs to look for. Texting, emailing, instant messaging, and posting on Twitter, Facebook and other social media sites have become the go-to means of communication for many of us today. Talking? So old-fashioned. Who needs it? I do. In fact, I prefer it – and the value of talking via an old-fashioned phone call hit home for me after a conversation with my brother just before he was hit with a frightening health crisis. Saturday, May 9 began in fairly typical weekend fashion. I had a list of things to do, including mowing the lawn and running some errands around town for Mother’s Day. As I went about the chores with our boys, I began thinking about my brother, John, who was at home recovering from endocarditis – an infection and inflammation of the heart’s inner lining. PAUL BATURA: AMID CORONAVIRUS CRISIS, LOOK FOR THESE MESSAGES OF HOPE AND INSPIRATION I made a mental note to call him later in the day, just to check in and maybe offer some encouragement. I have three older brothers and an older sister, and John is the middle sibling. Growing up, I used to jokingly refer to him as “Golden Boy,” because he seemed to sail through life unscathed. He never gave my parents any real trouble, and in fact, wound up helping them with all kinds of technical tasks as I stood watching and feeling quite helpless. Even at 11 or 12 years of age, John was rewiring things – fixing the toaster, radio or television, and installing surround-sound before it was popular. He graduated on a Navy scholarship from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute with a degree in electrical engineering and spent nearly a decade in the Navy before moving on to civilian jobs. Our parents’ last wish was that all five of us kids would remain close after their deaths. “When parents die,” my dad said, “the kids tend to drift apart. Please don’t let that happen.” John took my mom and dad’s urging seriously and set up a conference call for the five Batura siblings on the first Sunday of every month. We are spread across four time zones, but we almost always manage to gather for a chat of an hour or more. A good conversation is like a beautiful piece of architecture – it’s layered with multiple points of interest. My brother’s recent heart problems came on suddenly – high fever, aches, chills, restlessness. Thankfully, he tested negative for COVID-19. His heart infection landed him in the hospital for a week, but the prognosis was positive. I tried phoning John several times May 9 and finally reached him on the third attempt. The pace of his speech seemed slow, but we caught up with one another and had a lovely chat. We even reminisced about old neighbors and teachers, and the time he put me in his bike basket and pedaled up Grand Avenue to Dunkin’ Donuts. We talked about matters of faith, including one of my mom’s favorite observations: “Heaven is my home, but I’m not yet homesick.” I was at my desk in my basement home office this past Monday morning when my phone rang, revealing my brother as the caller. It struck me as strange that he’d be ringing me in the middle of a workday, but I answered with enthusiasm. It wasn’t John – it was his sweet wife, Robyn. “John’s just been taken by ambulance to the hospital,” she began, her voice full of emotion. “We think he had a stroke.” Unfortunately, she was right. Emergency surgery soon followed, successfully removing the blood clot from my brother’s brain. Doctors say strokes are like forest fires – clearing the clot stops the fire, but the damage remains. An MRI revealed the stroke attacked the communication center of John’s brain. The damage has been deemed as “moderate” – but it’s still too early to know what that means in practical terms. John is still not yet out of the woods regarding other ailments. It would be an understatement to say that I'm so glad I called my brother last weekend. A good conversation is like a beautiful piece of architecture – it’s layered with multiple points of interest. And as buildings take on new dimensions and appeal depending upon the light and time of day, so do our chats according to circumstances and our willingness to reveal a part of ourselves with another person. My friend Jim Downing, who died at age 104 and who was one of the oldest survivors of the attack on Pearl Harbor that brought America into World War II, used to say there are three levels of conversation. The lowest is trivia – things like the weather. The second is people – gossip, of a sort. But the highest and most rewarding level is the exchange of ideas – deeply personal and meaningful thoughts. In hindsight, I wish my brother and I talked longer just before his stroke. But of course, we had no idea a stroke was awaiting him. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Life can change in an instant. It sounds a bit woo-woo to say there’s no such thing as “tomorrow” – but it’s technically true. The only time we’re guaranteed is right now. There’s an old Yiddish saying that sums it up: “Mann tracht, und Gott lacht,” which translates to “man plans, and God laughs.” According to statistics, an average of more than 8,000 people die each day in the United States – a number that is undoubtedly higher now due to the current coronavirus pandemic. I suspect many who pass away today didn’t think yesterday that would happen – but it did. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Is there someone you’ve been meaning or wanting to talk with? Is there someone you love who you feel compelled to let them know it? Stop putting it off. I’d encourage you to call them today. And if you’re a praying person, we'd be eternally grateful if you might say a prayer for my brother and his family. Thank you. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

Fox News contributor Newt Gingirch weighs in on allegations that Chinese President Xi pressured the World Health Organization to delay a global warning about COVID-19. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  It’s clear by now that China badly mismanaged the outbreak of the coronavirus and lied to the world about what was happening. But what responsibility should China’s Communist dictatorship bear for the devastation the virus has caused around the world? To what extent should Beijing be held accountable – and even legally liable? I explore these critical questions in detail in this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World.” As the third part of my series looking at China and the spread of the coronavirus, I speak with Eric Schmitt, the attorney general of Missouri. His state is taking legal action against China for deceiving the world and causing the virus to become a global pandemic. POMPEO SAYS CHINA POSES REAL 'RISK' TO US, IN NEW INTERVIEW On April 21, Schmitt filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri against the Chinese government, Chinese Communist Party, and other Chinese officials and institutions. The 47-page complaint alleges that during the crucial weeks of the initial outbreak, Chinese authorities “deceived the public, suppressed crucial information, arrested whistleblowers, denied human-to-human transmission in the face of mounting evidence, destroyed critical medical research, permitted millions of people to be exposed to the virus, and even hoarded personal protective equipment – thus causing a global pandemic that was unnecessary and preventable.” The lawsuit fleshes out these allegations in incredible detail, showing the extent of Beijing’s malfeasance. The suit also details how the pandemic caused hardship in Missouri and across the globe – death, isolation from sick and dying loved ones, massive unemployment, economic dislocation, uncertainty, and trillions of dollars of economic losses. Schmitt estimates that China should pay the people of Missouri upwards of $44 billion if he wins the case. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The evidence indicates that China should be held legally responsible for the coronavirus pandemic. Missouri is taking a courageous lead in this effort. It strikes me that Missouri’s lawsuit presents an opportunity to sidestep concerns about Chinese sovereignty by directly targeting the Communist Party, which really controls China and makes all important decisions. And none of the major decisions concerning the virus were made without Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Communist Party, who should be specifically targeted in these lawsuits. If China’s Communist dictatorship can cause the deaths of hundreds of thousands of people and the destruction of trillions of dollars of economic activity and face no consequences, it would teach Chinese leaders a terrifying lesson that they can get away with almost anything. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I hope you will listen to this week’s episode to learn about this important lawsuit and what concrete, practical steps we the people can take to hold China accountable. And I hope you will listen to my next episode, set to air Wednesday, on House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s $3 trillion stimulus package, which seems to be more of a Democratic wish list than any attempt to address the fallout from the coronavirus. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

 Despite Wednesday’s blockbuster news about the dozens of Obama administration officials who “unmasked” then-incoming Trump National Security Adviser Michael Flynn, there remains a gaping hole in the story: Where is the record showing who unmasked Flynn in connection with his fateful conversation with Russian Ambassador to the U.S. Sergey Kislyak? There isn’t one. There is no such evidence in the unmasking list that acting National Intelligence Director Richard Grenell provided to Sens. Chuck Grassley, R- Iowa, and Ron Johnson, R-Wis. ANDY MCCARTHY: MISSING FLYNN 302 CASE REPORT COULD HAVE 'MANY ITERATIONS,' NOT NECESSARILY REPRESENTATIVE OF FLYNN'S STATEMENTS I suspect that’s because Lt. Gen. Flynn’s identity was not “masked” in the first place. Instead, his Dec. 29, 2016 call with Kislyak was likely intercepted under an intelligence program not subject to the masking rules, probably by the CIA or a friendly foreign spy service acting in a nod-and-wink arrangement with our intelligence community. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER “Unmasking” is a term of art for revealing in classified reports the names of Americans who have been “incidentally” monitored by our intelligence agencies. Presumptively, the names of Americans should be concealed in these reports, which reflect the surveillance of foreign targets, primarily under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. Broadly speaking, FISA governs two kinds of intelligence collection. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The first is “traditional” FISA – the targeted monitoring of a suspected clandestine operative of a foreign power. If the FBI shows the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC) probable cause that a person inside the United States is acting as a foreign power’s agent, it may obtain a warrant to surveil that person. If the foreign power’s suspected agent communicates with Americans, the latter are incidentally intercepted even though they are not the targets of the surveillance. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. You will have heard by now of Ahmaud Arbery, the 25-year-old black man shot dead on a street in Brunswick, Ga., in February. Prosecutors initially declined to press charges in the case, saying that the alleged perpetrators, a white father and son, Gregory and Travis McMichael, had used legitimate force. Then video surfaced of the incident in which the unarmed black man is seen running down the street, seems to be confronted by the McMichaels, and is shot at point-blank range by the men, both of whom have now been charged with murder. You probably haven’t heard of Paul and Lidia Marino. The couple, 86 and 85 years old, were shot dead a week ago while visiting a veterans’ cemetery in Bear, Del., where their son, who died in 2017, is buried. The authorities have so far been unable to establish a motive for the killing, but they identified a suspect, Sheldon Francis, a 29-year-old black man, later found dead after an exchange of fire with the police. MARYLAND COUPLE SLAIN AT DELAWARE VETERANS CEMETERY VISITED SON’S GRAVE ALMOST DAILY, SURVIVING SON SAYS As far as I can tell, from news databases and online searches, other than local newspapers and TV, and a brief story by the New York Post, the death of the Marinos, who were white, has gone as unremarked as their lives. Mr. Arbery’s death, by contrast, has become one of those crimes that some who control our public discourse have decided is a “teachable moment.” Millions of words have been devoted to exploring and explaining the moral of the killing. It has been widely described as a “lynching.” We have been reminded once again of the prevalence of unequal and violent treatment of minorities. We’ve been told once again that the killing reflects the daily reality of life in America for young blacks. This teaching moment has turned into a continuous, ubiquitous lecture series on the unalterably racist nature of America. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We don’t yet know the full facts behind either of these killings. Mr. Arbery’s certainly looked ugly, and whatever his killers and some neighbors allege he may have been doing on that street on a sunny afternoon, he clearly did not deserve to be gunned down. We will learn no doubt soon whether his killers did indeed have racist motives. Perhaps, meanwhile, the murder of the Marinos was a random act of violence, a deranged killer, a robbery that savagely escalated. But whatever the motive, I’d be willing to wager a small fortune that we won’t hear much more about it.  CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

A panel of law enforcement officers open up on 'Fox &amp; Friends' on how their jobs have changed during the pandemic. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.   Few people may realize that the Department of Homeland Security is the nation’s largest law enforcement organization, with about one-third of our 240,000 employees serving as peace officers and nearly 70 percent performing law enforcement functions. As the leader of this department, I have a special admiration and appreciation for those who put their lives on the line every day to protect our communities and our nation. Every year, DHS joins each of the over 18,000 other law enforcement organizations from across the country for Police Week, which concluded Saturday. WOLF CALLS OUT CHINA FOR TRYING TO STEAL US CORONAVIRUS VACCINE RESEARCH: 'WE NEED TO STAY ON IT' Over the course of seven days, we honor and reflect upon the men and women of law enforcement who lost their lives in the line of duty the year before. We not only reflect upon their heroic sacrifice – we commemorate their remarkable lives as well. This year, as the deadly COVID-19 pandemic continues to sweep through our country, Police Week went virtual in order to mitigate the risk of further spread. The fact that we couldn’t be together physically was an important reminder for Americans to pay thanks to the men and women who wear the uniform each day, risking their own health and safety to protect our communities. Due to the very nature of police work, social distancing isn’t always an option for our nation’s law enforcement heroes. This fact makes me even more proud of our own officers and agents from Customs and Border Protection, the Secret Service, the Federal Protective Service, Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the Coast Guard, and the Transportation Security Administration. They are still on the frontlines to protect our borders, waterways, skyways, facilities, currency, cyberspace, and so much more. Each of these components has law enforcement officers working around the clock to support the Trump administration’s Whole of America response to the COVID-19 pandemic. For example, CBP officers and agents are standing watch at our ports of entry – and along the often unforgiving terrain between them – to stop the travel-related spread of the coronavirus and keep non-citizens from impacted areas from entering the country. ICE Homeland Security Investigations agents are carrying out Operation Stolen Promise, targeting unscrupulous criminals attempting to exploit the pandemic to peddle counterfeit – and often dangerous – medical supplies. And the Secret Service is leading the charge to combat cyber-enabled financial crimes related to the coronavirus, disrupting criminals and helping protect the vulnerable. I want to thank all of these brave men and women who continue to fight on the frontlines of this pandemic and all of our other law enforcement personnel who continue to serve each and every day. Sadly, there are inherent risks associated with the job of a law enforcement officer, and some make the ultimate sacrifice each year. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER During this year’s police week, DHS memorialized three of these outstanding officers: Border Patrol Agent Donna Doss, whose watch ended on Feb. 2, 2019; Border Patrol Agent Robert Hotten, whose watch ended on Oct. 6 last year; and Federal Air Marshal Michele Paul, whose watch ended Nov. 7, 2018.  The names of these three will join the more than 22,000 other law enforcement officers included on the National Law Enforcement Officers’ Memorial Wall in Washington.  Agents Doss and Hotten and Air Marshal Paul exhibited the dedication, selfless service and integrity that has come to define who we are as a department and a nation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP While their loss is tragic, it is also a reminder and an opportunity for us to celebrate and appreciate the law enforcement officials who serve us every day. “In valor there is hope” is inscribed on the marble walls of the police memorial in Washington. By reflecting upon the valor displayed by each of those lost in the line of duty, we can certainly find hope as a nation, especially in these trying times.

Dr. Nicole Saphier reacts to the testimony on COVID-19 on 'Outnumbered.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  While only 1.6 percent of the U.S. population – 5.1 million people as of 2016 – lives in nursing homes and other residential care facilities, an estimated 40 percent of deaths from COVID-19   have occurred in these facilities, excluding the New York City area. The dramatically disproportionate death toll from the disease caused by the novel coronavirus in nursing homes holds true in many countries around the world. Researchers at the International Long Term Care Policy Network report that in Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Hungary, Ireland, Israel, Norway, Portugal, Singapore, and Sweden, 49.4 percent of reported COVID-19 death have taken place in nursing homes. DEROY MURDOCK: STARK DIFFERENCE BETWEEN CUOMO AND DESANTIS' HANDLING OF NURSING HOMES DURING CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC These statistics make it obvious that we need to pay special attention to protecting nursing home residents to help reduce the terrible death toll the coronavirus pandemic is taking. As of Saturday, the confirmed death toll from the pandemic in the U.S. topped 87,000 people. Nursing home neglect is a tragic but common occurrence in our country. Although elder abuse can happen from in-home care as well, it all too often occurs when caregivers feel overworked and exhausted. Since reports of negligent and substandard care at any nursing homes across the country show this is a serious problem, this may be the time for Congress to consider the importance of adequate staffing and compensation for long-term care facility employees – as well as transitioning some of our elderly and disabled to in-home care settings. Policy implications moving forward must pay significant attention to infections in assisted-living facilities, especially focusing on staff who work at multiple sites, patients coming directly from the hospital and visitors to the facilities. As I discuss in my book, “Make America Healthy Again,” while our medical advancements have provided us with a longer lifespan, many elderly Americans are living with diseases and medical conditions that make them especially susceptible to the most severe effects of COVID-19. “Our increased longevity is one of the greatest medical achievements of the modern era,” I wrote in my book. “On average, Americans today can expect to live nearly thirty years longer than did our predecessors at the turn of the twentieth century…. As medical advancements continue to improve health, and more baby boomers enter their retirement years, the demand for long-term medical services is growing.” According to the Alzheimer’s Association, nearly 5.7 million people in the U.S. are living with dementia. Similar to the global trends, these numbers are expected to rise as life expectancy increases. Additionally, almost all recipients of Medicare with dementia (95 percent) have at least one other preexisting chronic health condition. And because of their impaired memory and reasoning ability, people living with dementia cannot solely manage or direct their own care. This requires them to live with a caregiver or in an assisted-living facility. According to Robert  Egge, chief public policy office of the Alzheimer’s Association: “While there is a significant number of priority actions to take during a global pandemic like this, it has been increasingly clear that nursing homes and other long-term care communities are ‘hot spots’ for COVID-19. And their residents with dementia are particularly susceptible due to their age, their increased likelihood of coexisting chronic conditions, and the community nature of these settings. These issues have likely been overlooked due to an inability to access the necessary testing and inaccurate reporting. There is an urgent need, and there has been for some time, to address the disproportionate vulnerability of this population.” The Alzheimer’s Association is urging policymakers to implement new policy solutions that will address the immediate and long-term issues impacting care facilities during the COVID-19 pandemic, including: Testing Each nursing home and assisted living community should have the onsite capability to verify that all residents, staff and visitors are free of COVID-19 infection, whether or not they are symptomatic. Access to testing should be the “White House Standard,” where staff members are tested frequently. Government support is needed to ensure accelerated production and delivery of testing material to nursing homes, with rapid turnaround testing staffed by trained personnel. Reporting All cases of COVID-19 at nursing homes and assisted living communities need to be reported immediately and accurately. Additionally, these reports should be updated upon remission, death, transfer or other appropriate status update. With all appropriate privacy safeguards for individuals, this reported data should be freely and immediately accessible to all, down to the facility level. Surge Activation  As “hot spots” occur, they must be dealt with urgently and effectively. Any reported cases should trigger careful, ongoing monitoring. If conditions warrant, “strike teams” should be employed to a facility to provide needed support until the outbreak is appropriately contained and eliminated.  Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) All nursing homes and assisted living communities should have full access to all needed PPE, testing equipment, training and external support to keep them COVID-19 free. Sharply increased unemployment and other economic fallout caused by measures to slow the spread of COVID-19 are taking an increasing toll on the mental and financial health of the American people. Almost all states around the nation are at least partially lifting stay-at-home orders and restrictions on businesses because officials realize we can’t continue to keep our country locked down for months or perhaps even years while we await the availability of a coronavirus vaccine and effective treatments for COVID-19. As a result, state and federal officials must ensure that measures are in place to protect the most vulnerable people in our country while we reopen. As the statistics on COVID-19 deaths in nursing homes make clear, the risk of death from this new disease is not spread evenly across our population. Some 94 percent of our nation’s workforce is under age 55, and those without serious medical conditions are at far lower risk of dying from COVID-19 than are elderly Americans. In addition, children having the lowest severity profile of COVID-19 deaths. So it makes sense that if we can focus on protecting the most vulnerable among us, our country can regain a level of normalcy while carefully reopening. A crucial mission will be to limit asymptomatic spread amongst the elderly, near-elderly and those with preexisting conditions. There is little doubt that even under the best of circumstances, when stay-at-home orders are loosened (as they should be), there will be increased COVID-19 cases. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What’s important is whether we are capable of identifying and reporting new cases and decreasing the amount of virus transmission. The good news is that officials at every level of government have the information to strategically reopen our country by acknowledging the fact that the elderly and the near-elderly who also have other chronic diseases are at the greatest risk of deaths and severe illness caused by COVID-19. The key to moving forward is ensuring that nursing homes and assisted-care facilities have adequate PPE supplies, universal access to perform enhanced surveillance and point-of-care testing, reporting measures in place, and protocols listed for new COVID-19 case surges. Additionally, as “excess deaths” in the home setting are reported, ensuring the safety of the most vulnerable Americans being cared for at home would only be feasible if caregivers were provided the necessary resources to care for their family members at home. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Investing more resources so that nursing homes are better-positioned to respond to and contain virus outbreaks won’t eliminate the threat posed by COVID-19 and other viral diseases, but it could significantly reduce the death toll of these diseases. If the coronavirus pandemic results in increased safety and hygiene measures throughout our nation’s nursing homes – and increased home-care resources for our elderly and disabled with the closure of facilities providing substandard care – we will be able to save lives and be better prepared to deal with viral diseases far into the future. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. NICOLE SAPHIER

Ohio Governor Mike DeWine unveils plan to gradually reopen state amid coronavirus outbreak. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In the middle of March, when our nation first started taking steps to fight the COVID-19 virus, doctors were strongly discouraged from performing any medical procedures that weren’t deemed urgent. This was in response to a March 16 public health order seeking to free up as many hospital beds as possible to handle the expected high volume of COVID patients. In addition to governors and hospitals, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the U.S. surgeon general and many medical organizations such as the American College of Surgeons and the American Society of Anesthesiologists recommended interim cancellation of elective surgical procedures. Physicians and health care organizations across the country responded appropriately and canceled nonessential cases. As most of you know, I am married to an orthopedic surgeon and approximately 90 percent of his surgical cases are elective. These are things such as rotator cuff tears, meniscus tears and ACL’s that need to be reconstructed. ROBERT O'BRIEN: VENTILATORS FOR CORONAVIRUS — US IS ARSENAL OF HEALTH IN WAR ON COVID-19 I remember my husband calling his patients and telling them that because their surgeries were elective, but not urgent and deemed essential, they had to be postponed due to the pandemic.  Although the patients fully understood, that didn’t take away their pain or their worry. Many states are starting to reopen nonessential businesses, a sign that restrictions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic are slowly easing. In California, where I live, we are now allowed to return to the beaches (with some restrictions) and pick up merchandise bought online from some retailers curbside. In many other states, hospitals are making plans again to allow elective surgeries to be performed. California Gov. Gavin Newsom cleared the way this week for hospitals throughout the state to resume some discretionary surgeries. He urged providers to work together to ensure that resuming non-urgent services “doesn’t affect their abilities to respond to any surges of COVID patients.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER I agree with the governor and with those doctors and hospitals who feel it’s time to move forward with elective procedures. And I say this for a few reasons: CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The bottom line is many hospitals have the beds and supplies to accommodate both the patients and the staff. Conversations with hospital operators throughout the nation convened earlier this week show many are ready to move forward. The doctors are ready and patients want their pain or their situation to be changed or improved. If we are concerned about our nation’s health both physically and financially, and if all conditions are met by hospitals and the health care providers, it is time to take a step forward and allow our nation’s physicians to do what they were trained to do. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LESLIE MARSHALL

John Roberts reports from the White House with the details as stay-at-home protests continue. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released guidelines this week on how schools, businesses, and other venues can reopen as the coronavirus subsides. Already Washington politicians like Senator Chuck Schumer are crying cover-up and demanding the agency release its earlier 17-page draft guideline, which they claim was held up by the White House. TUCKER CARLSON: LEADERS SHOULD BE THRILLED ABOUT ENDING CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS. BUT THEY ONLY CARE ABOUT POWER President Trump's critics imply that the draft guidelines were too rigorous and the president is making safety a low priority. Nonsense. The real problems with the draft guidelines were that they took a one-size-fits-all approach despite the huge differences between rural counties and dense cities like New York and that they were outdated. They could have been written 50 years ago, ignoring technologies available now that can control the spread of disease and make returning to work or school safer. The final guidelines are shorter, but still a half-century behind the times. Agency guidelines for schools and offices, for example, recommend placing desks six feet apart and encouraging frequent hand hygiene. Fine, but the agency should also be informing employers and school administrators of the many other tools available. They could upgrade to antimicrobial surfaces, including doorknobs, computer keyboards, handrails and other frequently touched surfaces. Numerous studies show how viral traces deposited on a doorknob can be spread by touch, infecting many people in just a few hours. Copper naturally destroys viruses and bacteria. Several manufacturers produce molded polymer products embedded with copper, including desktops, keyboards and chair arms. Antimicrobial coatings can also be painted on existing floors, furniture and equipment. All of these high-tech approaches are already used in hospitals. Now is the time to inform the public about their usefulness in combatting the coronavirus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The CDC also recommends that schools, offices and other venues open windows and doors to increase air circulation. Research finds that air conditioning can spread viral droplets from an infected person to other people across the room, depending on the direction of the airflow. Bringing in fresh air is better. Makes sense, but opening the windows is not always an option. The agency should at least mention that there are more effective options available, including continuous, nontoxic disinfection devices that can be installed in the HVAC system. These technologies are already used by professional sports teams in their locker rooms, and by manufacturers and hospitals. They deactivate viruses in the air and reduce traces of virus or bacteria on surfaces. The side benefit is a healthier workforce and lower absenteeism even if the coronavirus fades soon. The CDC guidelines never once mention public restrooms. But reducing the risk of viral spread when toilets are flushed is important. The key is to be sure all toilets have lids. Research indicates that coronavirus is carried in feces. When a toilet is flushed, the virus can become aerosolized. New findings in the journal Emerging Infectious Diseases suggest the virus is found in heavy concentrations in restrooms. President Trump has built a huge force of private sector companies to help with ventilators, masks, therapeutics and hopefully vaccines. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At his press conferences, he stresses the importance of private sector innovation and capacity to beat the coronavirus. Now is the time to take the same approach in reopening America – deploying innovative technologies. That is why the CDC’s current guideline should be shelved. It’s lacking in this approach. And no wonder. Federal regulators are free to talk with university scientists or government scientists any time. But scientists who work for industry have to wait for “vendor day.” The result is a federal bureaucracy literally unaware of what industry has to offer. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BETSY McCAUGHEY

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo discusses how he plans on stopping Iran from acquiring arms and selling arms to Tehran A new coalition government headed by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and Defense Minister Benny Gantz is expected to take office in Israel Sunday, soon after U.S. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo visited the Jewish state. Pompeo met with Netanyahu and Gantz on Wednesday week to discuss Israel’s plan to annex part of the West Bank and the Trump administration’s Israeli-Palestinian peace plan. Netanyahu said he was “confident” President Trump will honor his commitment to help Israel carry out the annexation, which will be done in coordination with the U.S. POMPEO DISCUSSES WEST BANK ANNEXATION WITH ISRAEL'S NETANYAHU: 'THERE REMAINS WORK YET TO DO' But while American support for Israel remains strong, the same can’t be said for European nations. Even as the coronavirus pandemic rages globally and is hitting several European countries fast and hard – and when the global economy is teetering in response – Europe still has time to engage in one of its favorite pastimes: criticizing and opposing Israel. It is not surprising to see the European Union and some of its member states trying to outrace each other on warning Israel’s new government against annexation of part of the West Bank. A major provision in the new Israeli coalition’s agreement includes a July 1 green light on annexation of territory in the so-called Area C in the West Bank, an administrative section delineated in the 1993 Oslo Accords. It is administered by Israel, and contains several clearly defined Israeli population centers, most of which are contiguous to Israel. But while European nations are quick to criticize Israel, they are passive about the real threats to stability in the region. Just last week, Mohsen Rezaei of Iran’s Expediency Council threatened to “raze Israeli cities to the ground” even in the event there is a U.S. response to Iranian attacks against American forces in Iraq. These threats – to destroy Israeli cities filled with civilians and wipe out “the Zionist entity” and the “Zionist cancer” – are made on a regular basis by leading Iranian officials like Rezaei. The response in Europe to such genocidal rhetoric is essentially a collective yawn. It reminds one of similar language used by the Palestine Liberation Organization in the years when it was hijacking airliners, attacking synagogues in Rome and Antwerp, planting bombs in buses in Israeli cities, and calling for Israel’s destruction. At the time, much of this was dismissed by European governments as “Israel’s problem,” or minimized as just being for “home (Palestinian) consumption.” In other words, don’t take it seriously. That, while Iran continues its malign presence in Syria, attacks American bases in Iraq, re-stocks the arms depots of the terrorist group Hezbollah, counts the terrorist group Hamas as a willing ally, sends a military satellite into space, and marches on in its ultimate goal of developing nuclear weapons. Indeed, most European states are still not sure whether or not to call the nuclear deal with Iran – the JCPOA (Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action) – a failed enterprise, even while Iranian efforts to dominate the Middle East proceed apace. And yet, Europe always has time to express bias against Israel. Pronouncements out of Brussels from the European Union’s top foreign policy chief, Joseph Borrell, called annexation by Israel “a serious violation of international law” and said the EU “will act accordingly.” Similar warnings have come from Paris, Berlin and other capitals. Threats of imposing sanctions on Israel and the recall of ambassadors are being made, all in the name of protecting a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Europe’s admonitions against Israel ring hollow. Since the-then European Economic Community (the forerunner of the EU) 1980 Venice Declaration that endorsed Palestinian self-government, Europe has been largely supportive of the Palestinian narrative to the conflict. When the EU has imposed discipline of voting at the United Nations, member states often abstain on Israeli-Palestinian issues, which to the Palestinian camp is seen as wavering support in Europe for Israel. Europe’s admonitions against Israel ring hollow. When left to vote on their own, some European countries have voted with the Palestinian side on issues concerning Jerusalem, for example, at UNESCO or even at the World Health Organization. There is also an interesting breakdown when no EU bloc voting is imposed at the U.N. Most countries in Central and Eastern Europe are more inclined to be supportive of Israel. But instances of such “open voting” are few and far between. If Europe wanted to be helpful it would have been pushing the Palestinians from the time of the 1993 Oslo accords to resolve their conflict with Israel by going to the negotiating table and making reasonable and reciprocal compromises with the Jewish state. It has been repeated often, but bears saying again: opportunities for the Palestinians to make a deal have been presented numerous times over many years – at Camp David, after Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza, at Annapolis and with then-Secretary of State John Kerry’s initiative. But the Palestinians have always walked away, because making peace would require their taking less than the zero-sum result they have been promising their people. The Europeans know full well – as the Palestinians certainly do – that the Israeli population blocs close-in to Israel will not be relinquished in any negotiated settlement. This became clear during the Annapolis conference in 2008 and at all attempts at talks since then. And even if annexation were to occur, that would not preclude the formation of a Palestinian state at some point in the future. For the past almost four years, the Palestinian Authority has given a cold shoulder to the Trump administration’s efforts to get peace negotiations with Israel started, and then shut down completely on Trump’s “deal of the century” peace plan. The Palestinian Authority made it clear that it would simply wait out the Trump administration. The old line that “the Palestinians never miss an opportunity to miss an opportunity” has never rung truer. In the meantime, the world has moved on. Iranian aggression in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and Yemen has recalibrated threats and challenges in the region. Regional strategic alignments are changing, and Israel’s place in the region – in that camp that recognizes the Iranian threat to what we used to call pro-Western countries – has marginalized the decades-long urgency to place the Palestinian issue front and center. Except in Europe. Its recent threats and bullying of Israel suggest a disconnect from the strategic reality on the ground. A two-state solution today may mean something different than it did 10 or 20 years ago. The decades-long absence of goodwill on the Palestinian side, and the continued presence of Hamas in Gaza, means Israel must have a security presence in the Jordan Valley. For the same reasons, demilitarization of whatever Palestinian entity that may result from a negotiation is now a given. And a right of return for Palestinians and their descendants who fled the state of Israel when it was created in 1948 will not happen. Two months out, we still have no clear indication of exactly what “annexation” will actually mean. It might include the Gush Etzion bloc and the city of Maale Adumim only, both large population centers very close to Jerusalem. Other options abound. Or, the whole idea could become moot, with the can being kicked down the proverbial road. What we do know is that Europe, which has nothing to show for its now four-decade support of Palestinian statehood, has failed in getting any return on its investment by convincing the Palestinian leadership to drop its nihilistic war against the existence of a Jewish state and negotiate an end to the conflict. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As important, Europe seems incapable – or worse, unwilling – to persuade the Palestinians to do what they’ve refused to do until now, which is to finally level with their people about what is do-able and what is fantasy. Only by doing this will Palestinian leaders begin bettering the lives of those they’ve used over decades to advance their own positions of status and power. The way to do this is by ending the conflict with Israel. Europe has not held the Palestinians accountable, despite protestations to the contrary. As they give a free pass to the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank – which continues to glorify and venerate those who have carried out acts of terror not only against Israelis, but Europeans and Americans as well – European governments have retreated into their familiar role of hectoring Israel. Whatever one might think of annexation, Europe’s sanctimonious threats to Israel of sanctions, recalling ambassadors and worse will not move the conflict one inch closer to resolution. Israel deserves better from Europe, where anti-Semitism is rife. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Much of European anti-Semitism is connected to the steady drumbeat of anti-Israel rhetoric on the Internet and over the public airwaves – and from statements of political figures – that have created a threatening environment for Jewish communities across the continent. To use a cliché from our times, it’s time for Europe to get real. With all the uncertainty swirling around us, are bluster and threats to a sister democracy – which happens to be sandwiched in the midst of chaos on all sides – a constructive use of its time?  Better to level with the Palestinian leadership, rather than indulging it and raising its expectations. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DANIEL MARIASCHIN

White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany responds to a reporter question at Friday's White House press briefing. There is strong evidence that President Barack Obama’s administration improperly weaponized U.S. intelligence agencies in multiple and shocking ways against Donald Trump and other political enemies. It appears the Obama administration did this in a number of ways, including: fraudulently obtaining Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act warrants to spy on American citizens; promoting the Democratic National Committee-funded dossier assembled by former British spy Christopher Steele that was filled with lies about Trump; politicizing intelligence analysis; leaking intelligence; and spying on political opponents and journalists. In the period when he was a presidential candidate and president-elect, Trump and his aides seemed to have been the major targets of this misuse of American intelligence for political purposes. But they were not the only targets. KAYLEIGH MCENANY SCOLDS MEDIA FOR LACK OF 'JOURNALISTIC CURIOSITY' IN FLYNN CASE It is imperative to uncover the extent of the Obama administration’s abuse of U.S. intelligence for political purposes. This must include a full list of every American unmasked from intelligence reports – Trump aides, members of Congress, and ordinary Americans – and who made these requests. It would be irresponsible for the intelligence community and Congress to turn a blind eye to this abuse simply because it happened years ago. Wrongdoing by the Obama administration in this scandal – which President Trump has dubbed “Obamagate” – must be exposed to ensure such actions never take place again. This week’s revelation that an astounding 39 Obama administration officials – including then-Vice President Joe Biden – made 53 requests to unmask incoming Trump National Security Adviser Michael Flynn’s name from National Security Agency phone intercepts between Election Day on Nov. 8, 2016 and Jan. 12, 2017 was a bombshell. The stunning revelation regarding Obama administration spying on Flynn by secretly recording his conversations with the Russian ambassador to the U.S. at the time appears to confirm allegations by President Trump and his supporters of a broad effort by the Obama administration to weaponize intelligence to undermine the Trump presidency shortly before it began. Flynn was simply carrying out his duties by making contact with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak during the transition period after Trump was elected president. It is perfectly routine for incoming members of a new presidential administration dealing with foreign affairs to contact foreign officials to introduce themselves before taking office. Making this worse, the 53 unmasking requests by Obama administration officials are probably the tip of the iceberg of the Obama administration’s abuse of National Security Agency intelligence to target Trump aides. House Intelligence Committee ranking member Devin Nunes, R-Calif. confirmed this in a Fox Business interview this week on “Lou Dobbs Tonight” when he said the Flynn unmasking scandal is “even worse than this” because “a whole lot” of other Trump associates were unmasked. With this in mind, it is frustrating to see former Obama officials, the mainstream media and some former intelligence officials brush off the Flynn unmasking requests by claiming such requests are “normal and routine” and that all relevant rules and laws were complied with. As a former CIA officer who helped process requests to unmask the names of U.S. citizens from National Security Agency reports, I know that unmasking requests are not normal and routine. And I believe these requests raise serious civil rights and legal issues that have not yet been addressed. From my 25 years working in U.S. government national security jobs, I know how sensitive and rare unmasking requests are. Names of U.S. citizens mentioned in U.S. intelligence reports – often National Security Agency communications intercepts – are redacted because under U.S. law, America’s foreign intelligence services are normally not permitted to spy on U.S. citizens. Although senior U.S. officials are permitted to ask for the identity of a redacted name in an intelligence report (an unmasking request), such requests are unusual and the requestor must have a “need to know” the identity of the U.S. person to understand the foreign intelligence information or assess its importance. When the request is approved, the unmasked identity is released only to the person who requested it – not to everyone who might have seen the original version of the report. For example, during my time at the State Department from 2001-2006, Deputy Secretary Richard Armitage made about 100 demasking requests. Then-Under Secretary of State John Bolton only made 10 in four years. Ironically, Senate Democrats made Bolton’s unmasking requests an issue during his 2005 nomination to be U.S. ambassador to the United Nations by falsely claiming these requests were improper and made to intimidate people and gain political advantage. Then-Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., said at the time that unmasking requests were “rarely requested” and made “infrequently” by “non-career political appointees such as Mr. Bolton.” An April 14, 2005, New York Times article said this about unmasking requests in connection with the Bolton confirmation hearings: “The identities of American officials whose communications are intercepted are usually closely protected by law, and not included even in classified intelligence reports. Access to the names may be authorized by the N.S.A. only in response to special requests, and these are not common, particularly from policy makers.” The above statements about the rarity of unmasking requests are consistent with what I witnessed during my government career. In addition, the National Security Agency tightened the rules in 2005 on unmasking because of the controversy over such requests caused by the Bolton hearing. The Obama administration, however, appeared to weaken the unmasking rules. It is imperative to uncover the extent of the Obama administration’s abuse of U.S. intelligence for political purposes The Obama administration expanded access to National Security Agency information in February 2016 and on January 12, 2017. Both changes appeared to allow larger numbers of government officials to have access to unmasked names of Americans in intelligence reporting. Even more troubling was a major rollback by the Obama administration in rules protecting members of Congress from unmasking requests. I know from my five years on House Intelligence Committee staff of longstanding sensitivity by lawmakers that U.S. intelligence agencies could be used by the executive branch to spy on a president’s political enemies. For this reason, until 2013 there were strict limits to keep members of Congress out of intelligence reporting and to prevent unmasking their names. Under a policy in effect in the 1990s, unmasking requests of the names of members of Congress were extremely limited and generally had to be reported to the House and Senate Intelligence Committees. According to the Wall Street Journal, these rules were tightened further with “a 2011 NSA directive [that] required direct communications between foreign intelligence targets and members of Congress to be destroyed, but [gave] the NSA director the authority to waive this requirement if he determines the communications contain ‘significant foreign intelligence.”” However, in 2013 the Obama administration significantly weakened rules on unmasking the names of members of Congress from intelligence reports. The requestor’s reason could now merely be “to fully understand the intelligence.” Rules on notifying Congress also were weakened. National Security Agency officials henceforth would notify Congress when members were unmasked from intelligence reports “as appropriate” and would determine “whether and to what extent congressional notification would take place.” The Obama administration appeared to take advantage of these rules changes in 2015 when it obtained private conversations from National Security Agency reports of U.S. lawmakers who opposed the Iran nuclear deal in meetings with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.  The rule changes on unmasking the names of members of Congress have a direct bearing on the Obama administration’s unmasking of Trump aides. Since there no longer was a prohibition on using U.S. intelligence agencies to spy on members of Congress, Obama officials probably reasoned there was nothing to prevent them from spying on members of a presidential campaign or an incoming presidential administration. This helps explain the hundreds of unmasking requests regarding Trump aides in 2016 and early 2017. So what should happen now? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In addition to an investigation of spying on American citizens by the Obama administration, all Obama administration rule changes making it easier to unmask the names of members of Congress and ordinary Americans from intelligence reports need to be reversed immediately. There also should be a requirement in the law restricting when U.S. officials can unmask the names of members of a presidential campaign or incoming administration from intelligence reports or otherwise spy on them. These rules should include a requirement for congressional notification if such spying is deemed necessary in the future. Finally, I want to know why career intelligence officials cooperated with unmasking Trump campaign and transition officials at the request of the Obama administration. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Since the prohibition on spying on American citizens and keeping the names of U.S citizens out of intelligence reports are cardinal rules of the U.S. intelligence community, how could career intelligence officers agree to process hundreds of these requests? Why did none of them file complaints with their inspector general or the congressional intelligence oversight committees?  The hundreds of unmasking requests of Trump campaign and transition officials made by the Obama administration were in no way routine and necessary. I believe carrying out these unmasking requests was a huge ethical lapse by dozens – maybe hundreds – of U.S. intelligence community employees that must be addressed by the White House and the leaders of our intelligence agencies. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY FRED FLEITZ

Utah Sen. Mike Lee, Republican member of the Senate Judiciary Committee, joins Shannon Bream on 'Fox News @ Night.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  When House Speaker Nancy Pelosi announced the $3 trillion coronavirus spending bill she and her allies had written – a bill passed by House Democrats Friday night with only a single Republican vote in support – my first reaction was that it would be dead on arrival in the Senate and that the move made no sense. The bill is the most expensive spending bill ever passed in the history of the House of Representatives, but Pelosi took no public comment, no Republican input, and didn’t consult with the Republican-controlled Senate or the White House on the bill. As we learned about the nuttier parts of the bill after it was introduced, it struck me almost as a joke. JUSTIN HASKINS: $3T CORONAVIRUS RELIEF BILL PASSED BY HOUSE DEMS FUNDS MOST RADICAL PROGRAMS IN US HISTORY In fact, I tweeted: “How do you explain a House Democratic Party so crazy that their new $3 trillion proposal has 68 references to Cannabis and only 52 references to jobs? Maybe Speaker Pelosi of San Francisco believes ‘California Dreamin’ could become the new national anthem.” There are a remarkable number of impossible-to-explain provisions in the bill. Some of them would: Provide money to people in the country illegally. Allow illegal immigrants to work when more than 30 million Americans are out of work. Provide taxpayer funding for abortion, even though Americans oppose taxpayer funding for abortions by 55 percent to 29 percent. Block voter identification laws – even though 80 percent of Americans favor such laws.  Give state and local governments, which already collect your tax dollars, $1 trillion more of your tax dollars. Give a tax cut to the richest Americans in blue states. Impose a host of other liberal fantasies on Americans. In fact, the bill is so bad that I had also tweeted: “Trump District Democrats need to be pushed on their support or opposition to the Pelosi $3 trillion bill.” As we learned about the nuttier parts of the bill after it was introduced, it struck me almost as a joke. This bill could become a disaster for Democratic candidates if Republicans bear down and focus on it. Republicans will hate the bill. Independents and moderates will find large parts of the bill totally unacceptable. There will be an entire series of issues in which 75 percent or 85 percent of the country will be deeply opposed to the Pelosi bill. I f this choice of which country we should become was the centerpiece of the U.S. House and Senate elections, it would probably guarantee a Republican landslide this fall. In this bill, Pelosi and the Democrats are advocating deeply unpopular issues. Yet, we know Speaker Pelosi has had a long career in Congress (she was first elected 1987) fighting and earning her way to become the first woman speaker of the House (2007-2011), and then endured eight years as minority leader to become speaker for a second time. Pelosi is a survivor. She is tough. She is hardworking, and she has been through a lot of campaigns – and seen and executed a lot of maneuvers. Therefore, you must assume there is a sound strategic reason for Pelosi to bring forward a bill that is this radical, expensive, and controversial. After spending days trying to figure out why she would lead her party into such an exposed position, let me offer this three-part proposition. First, Pelosi probably believes this is going to be a base turnout election, and she knows from all the polls that Republicans are more excited about the election than Democrats. Pelosi had this reinforced by the special elections for House seats in Wisconsin and in California. In Wisconsin, the GOP handily kept a House seat in an important swing state for the presidential election. California should have been a special shock to Pelosi, because the Republicans had not converted a Democratic seat in her home state since 1998. This breakthrough, after 22 years, came in a district Hillary Clinton had carried in the 2016 presidential election. The GOP win was clearly a function of a much more energized Republican base. From Pelosi’s perspective, mobilizing the cannabis users and liberal investors is a useful move, too. They are as much part of the Democratic base as traditional small business owners are part of the Republican base. Arousing the hardcore, pro-abortion activists helps Pelosi with turnout and donations. Disciplined repetition of the word “diversity” appeals to her ideological activists and – to a lesser extent – minority communities. Appealing to the illegal immigrant community is a useful thing for Pelosi. And Democrats are working to make it possible for illegal immigrants to vote in a number of states. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Giving a tax cut to the richest people in the bluest states is a direct favor to her donor base and helps the public employee unions in those states by making state and local taxes more bearable. Pouring extra cash into the worst-run blue states with the biggest pension debt (think Illinois and New Jersey) directly helps Pelosi’s public employee union allies and the Democratic politicians in those states. Pelosi has likely calculated that – as usual – the Republican candidates will forget to focus. She also must be betting that in a few weeks the Republican and independent voters will have forgotten this monstrosity of a leftwing wish list. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Yet, Pelosi’s base will be fired up to elect former Vice President Joe Biden and Democratic majorities in the House and Senate so they can get the ideological and financial goodies she has woven into this bill. It is a major gamble on Pelosi’s part. If the Republicans have enough discipline and endurance, she will pay a substantial price for it. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

Some states are using science to guide their decisions and cautiously beginning to relax their lockdowns. But power-drunk politicians in the other half of the country are tightening their lockdowns even now. Get the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The country appears to be splitting into two hemispheres before our eyes: There are those places where public officials are allowing science to guide their decisions; states like that are cautiously beginning to relax their lockdowns and finding no spike in illness as they do it. Those are the free states. And then there’s the other half of the country, the places where you’re glad you don’t live right now. In those places, power-drunk politicians crow about science but resolutely ignore its findings. They don’t read studies. They don’t care what the data say. TUCKER CARLSON: LEADERS SHOULD BE THRILLED ABOUT ENDING CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS. BUT THEY ONLY CARE ABOUT POWER Their decisions are driven by ambition, political calculation and the pure animal joy of controlling other people’s lives. Places like that are tightening their lockdowns even now. Maybe no place in the country represents the authoritarian approach, the Chinese approach, more starkly than Los Angeles does. L.A. County has more residents than New York City. But while New York has had close to 200,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, L.A. has had only about 35,000 in the whole county. Now, the real figure is certainly much higher than that, that’s what we find every time widespread testing takes place. But that’s the point: so few people in LA have died, relatively speaking, that we’re not certain how many are infected. We know they’re not sick enough to crowd hospitals. The city’s health care system has never come close to collapsing. In Los Angeles, the curve is now flat, and it has been flat for weeks. It could reopen tomorrow and it should and it would if its leaders were following the science. But it’s not reopening. Just the opposite is happening. Los Angeles Mayor Gil Garcetti has now extended the lockdown through the end of July, which means at least two and a half more months of it. He’s using law enforcement, liberally, to make certain that his citizens obey his orders. Police say they’ve brought criminal charges against at least 60 “non-essential” businesses for the crime of going to work. Countless other businesses have shut forever. They’re not coming back. The citizens who remain stuck in Los Angeles are effectively hostages of the mayor. Garcetti has demanded that anyone who goes outside, for any reason, as the heat rises in L.A.,  must wear a mask. It goes without saying there no science to back up this order — or any of Garcetti’s so-called health decisions. In fact, it’s possible that requiring masks outside will not prevent a single from being infected in Los Angeles. But Garcetti doesn’t care. Anyone who disobeys this order will be punished. It’s nuts. But it’s just the beginning of Garcetti’s thoroughly bizarre restrictions. The more you know, the weirder it is. Watch, for example as Garcetti explains that anyone who goes to the beach must make certain not to touch dry sand. Wet sand is fine. Dry sand is now illegal: MAYOR ERIC GARCETTI: Beaches will open up this week for exercise and active recreation only -- in the wet sand, I guess, is a good way of thinking about it, not hanging out and tanning in the dry sand. What’s the science behind this? Once again, of course, there is none. None. This isn’t reasoned thoughtful policymaking. It’s the expression of an autocrat who decided he must look tough by “doing something” to get elected president which has always been Eric Garcetti’s primary goal. It’s scary if you think about what this means. It means that America’s second-largest city has fallen under the total control of a neurotic megalomaniac, who’s terrified of dry sand. Eric Garcetti’s personal phobias are now law in Los Angeles. It makes you think of the final days of Nicolae Ceaușescu in Romania: ranting at his subjects from the podium, imposing his strange obsessions on a helpless population. America’s second-largest city has fallen under the total control of a neurotic megalomaniac. It would not be surprising to learn that Garcetti is a compulsive hand-washer with a very strange personal life. Guys like this are always the same once you scratch the surface. So how long will Los Angeles have to live like this? Possibly forever, Garcetti announced this week: GARCETTI: We’ve never been fully closed, we’ll never be completely open until we have a cure. But I do believe that we can take steps, but monitor those numbers, listen to the scientists and the medical professionals, and make the tough calls even when there’s criticism. Yeah, this can’t go on. It’s too crazy. Now you may mock Los Angeles, and in some cases, it’s deserved, there are some flaky people who live there. -- Barbra Streisand’s in Malibu. But there are also an awful lot of normal, decent people in Los Angeles. Millions of them. Some of them understand where Garcetti is taking them and their city and they’ve had enough. A couple of days ago, a group of them came together. It’s totally bipartisan. Some of them are well-known liberal Democrats. Some are conservative Republicans and have been all their lives. Others are labor leaders or middle-class voters. The one thing they all have in common is the dead-certain knowledge that Mayor Eric Garcetti is poison. He’s hurting their city, he’s hurting their families. Garcetti has allowed tens of thousands of mentally ill drug addicts to live on Los Angeles sidewalks and under overpasses – if you’ve been there recently, you know about this. He’s also tolerated flagrant corruption in his own administration. Now he’s shut the entire city down simply because he feels like it. This group of citizens is going to try to bounce Garcetti from the mayor’s office. And they can! Under California law, politicians can be recalled by voters. You remember that Californians did it to their governor, Gray Davis, 17 years ago. It worked. Now a recall petition in California requires 330,000 signatures. And that, unfortunately, is where Garcetti has the advantage. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Thanks to his extended shelter in place orders, citizens aren’t allowed to gather these signatures. So, under the guise of public health, Garcetti has stopped his political opponents from opposing him. And he’s not the only one. You’ve seen this happen in many states, Michigan, New Jersey, others. Politicians around the country are doing this. As long as there is no vaccine, for the Wuhan coronavirus, they can remain in power -- unchallenged -- forever. It’s nice for them. They’re enjoying it. But in Los Angeles Garcetti may have gone too far. The future of the city is at stake. The recall-Garcetti forces are taking the issue, the issue of signatures, to court, trying to win the right to gather the signatures online. We’ll keep you posted on how they do because it’s important. But the bigger point is, these people not passive. These are Americans who understand what has been taken from them, and they are trying to get it back. As they should. We’re seeing this happening around the country, thank God. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In New Jersey, for example, citizens are still banned from assembling to worship together as they choose. That’s a direct violation of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. We asked the governor of New Jersey, Phil Murphy, about this when he came on our show. He said he wasn’t even really even thinking about the Bill of Rights when it comes to controlling his population because it’s in the way. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Republicans say the bill is dead on arrival in the Senate; reaction from House Minority Whip Steve Scalise, Rep. Lee Zeldin, American Conservative Union Chairman Matt Schlapp and Fox News contributor Charlie Hurt. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Americans should be outraged and frightened by an unprecedented rule change backed by Democrats and approved by the House on a 217-189 vote Friday night allowing for proxy voting and remote committee meetings to guard against the spread of the coronavirus. While the duration of the rule change – which drew strong objections from Republicans – was labeled as “temporary” for 45 days, in government there is rarely a “temporary” duration to any new centralization of power. Under this new House rule, Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has more control over the House than any previous speaker in American history. HOUSE PASSES PLAN FOR PROXY VOTING, DESPITE GOP OBJECTIONS House members now no longer have to travel to Washington to cast votes. We can vote from the comfort of our air-conditioned living rooms and avoid any questions from reporters or constituents. We can vote by proxy. Only a small number of House members are required to be in the chamber for future votes, and each member can be armed with proxies from other members who decided against traveling to our nation’s capital to cast their own votes. Until now, each member was responsible for casting his or her own vote, and none of us could allow another member to vote for us. The tradition and transparency of this process has now been turned completely on its head thanks to Speaker Pelosi. Under the new rule change, we can’t make parliamentary inquiries to ask questions of the chair about the bills we are voting on. We also can’t make a motion to adjourn the House. These two important changes severely handicap the already fading rights of the minority party. The vote Friday night was not only unprecedented in our nation’s history – it was completely unwarranted. Even in the midst of a public health emergency, the Senate – which has access to the same health information as does Speaker Pelosi – has been resuming its constitutional responsibilities. Americans should applaud Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., for refusing to play Pelosi’s game by opposing remote voting for his own chamber. Worse still, Pelosi and her Democratic colleagues expect essential workers in their home districts to show up to their health care clinics, hospitals, grocery stores and other crucial assignments to provide services and resources to members of Congress in our homes. How could Pelosi refill her luxury freezer with ice cream without these essential workers? GINGRICH RIPS PELOSI'S LATE-NIGHT TV ICE CREAM VIDEO: MOST 'TONE-DEAF' THING EVER FROM A HOUSE SPEAKER Why do Democrats think that members of Congress are more entitled to remain in the comforts of our homes to discharge our constitutional responsibilities? The American people deserve better – and they should demand better from their representatives. Pelosi and House Democrats have sent a horrific message to Americans in the midst of a national crisis. Over 36 million Americans are unemployed thanks to their state local government responses to this coronavirus pandemic, but Democrats can’t be bothered to travel back to Washington to do the jobs they were elected to do. Calls to suicide hotlines are up; domestic violence and abuse may be on the rise; kids are out of school. But House Democrats don’t want to send a unified message that they are standing with their constituents from the capitol. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Our vote Friday night was a mockery and a disgrace for members who voted to affirm Pelosi’s remote and proxy voting system. America has faced more severe challenges and crises in our past. Even members of Congress have faced more difficult physical challenges to be in person, in Washington, to do the people’s business. As members of Congress, we must uphold our constitutional obligation and tradition to work from our nation’s capital. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In spite of House Democrats’ cowardly actions Friday, I will continue to exercise the constitutional duties my constituents sent me to Washington to carry out. I will be in Washington on a regular basis, waiting for Speaker Pelosi and my Democratic colleagues to join me to perform the business our constituents expect of us. I implore all of my colleagues: let’s show the American people that Congress is essential and ready to do the people’s business. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. ANDY BIGGS

The founder of Ravi Zacharias International Ministries on his new book, ‘The Logic of God.’ It is with a heavy heart that I write these thoughts about a man who has been my spiritual mentor and friend, Ravi Zacharias. The news of his inoperable cancer has forced me and thousands--if not millions-- to face the reality that the world will soon be without one of its strongest theological minds for Christianity. It was Ravi's book, "Can Man Live Without God?" that was so mind-blowing to me that I approached the CEO of Fox News Channel to do a special on the topic. They did. RAVI ZACHARIAS, CHRISTIAN SCHOLAR, ON THE 'TOUGHEST' QUESTION FOR FAITH TODAY That special, called "Can We Live Without God?" featured Ravi and aired more than a decade ago. It was my first foray into covering faith and religion. It was Ravi's philosophical and logical mind that helped open up a world of belief that I had never encountered. It is Ravi who said that all humans, regardless of what religion they practiced or whether they had no religious beliefs, had to answer four basic questions: Where do I come from? Why am I here?  How should I treat people? Where am I going? Origin, Meaning, Morality, Destiny.  Ravi wrote in the book, "The issue, then, is not whether the belief system you espouse-monotheistic, atheistic, pantheistic or otherwise--is exclusive.  The issue is whether the answers to the four basic questions of life pertaining to origin, meaning, morality, and destiny within the context of each of these world-views meet the tests of truth. Are they logically consistent, are they empirically adequate, and are they experientially relevant?" Ravi and I talked a lot about that on the "Lighthouse Faith" podcast last year in connection with his recent book, "The Logic of God." It is Ravi who said that all humans, regardless of what religion they practiced or whether they had no religious beliefs, had to answer four basic questions: Where do I come from? Why am I here?  How should I treat people? Where am I going? Origin, Meaning, Morality, Destiny.   It is Ravi who maintained that "People are equal, ideas are not."  It's a very difficult concept in a world where pluralism abounds and is valued above any one truth. Ravi is a product of the East, born in India, in a Christian household. But, like so many of us when we're young, he never took the faith seriously and found it difficult to relate it to daily life. MAX LUCADO: CORONAVIRUS ANXIETY -- YOU CAN'T CONTROL THE CIRCUMSTANCES BUT HERE ARE 4 THINGS TO DO It was as a despondent teenager that Ravi attempted suicide and came to faith in his hospital bed. He set out on a journey to truly know Jesus Christ and devote his life to serving Him. Ravi's global ministry, Ravi Zacharias International Ministries (RZIM.org), now sends speakers out into the world. One of them, Abdu Murray, co-wrote his latest book called, "Seeing Jesus from the East." Ravi wasn't able to do the podcast on the book so Abdu filled in solo. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The book is a fresh look at the Eastern and Middle Eastern culture that Jesus grew up in; walked and breathed in. It is Ravi's culture as well. Even though he immigrated to Canada and eventually set up RZIM headquarters in Atlanta, his Indian accent made it apparent his roots were not in the South. I will always remember the encouragement he gave me when I sent him the first few pages I'd written for a book. He was not only encouraging but enthusiastic about its premise. Now that my book "Lighthouse Faith" has been published, I can honestly say that without Ravi's positive feedback early on it might never have come to fruition. Although Ravi will soon leave us, his voice never will. We will always have his books, his lectures, podcasts, and countless YouTube posts. Thank you, Ravi! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Thank you for your Christian leadership. Thank you for being a light in a darkened world. And thank you....  for being a tireless servant of the Living God.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LAUREN GREEN

The HEROES Act is largest in congressional history; congressional correspondent Chad Pergram reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The House passed Democrats’ budget-busting $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill on a 208-199 vote Friday night – but thankfully, the radical legislation is expected to be dead on arrival in the Republican-controlled Senate. Only one Republican voted for the measure. -- Rep. Pete King of New York. On top of that, the White House has said President Trump would veto the bill in the highly unlikely event it wins Senate passage. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has acknowledged that the HEROES (Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions) Act will not become law, but said it can be the basis for negotiations with Senate Republicans and the Trump administration. HOUSE PASSES $3T CORONAVIRUS RELIEF -- THE MOST EXPENSIVE BILL IN HISTORY Democrats seem to take the position in the legislation that money is no object when it comes to spending trillions upon trillions of dollars under the cover of helping the American people deal with the coronavirus pandemic. In reality, Democrats are using the pandemic to justify their wish list of far-left Big Government schemes more extreme than anything ever enacted in American history. The $3 trillion relief bill would be the costliest in our history as well, and would come on top of the $2.2 trillion CARES (Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security) Act passed by Congress and signed into law by President Trump in March. Perhaps if members of Congress spent as much time thinking about the impact of these free-spending bills as they did coming up with clever acronyms some of the most absurd provisions of both pieces of legislation could have been avoided.  Unbelievably, some House Democrats on the far-left fringe of the party actually complained that the House bill was too modest. They’d like to spend even more than $3 trillion. "Do I think it should be bolder? Yes," socialist Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., told reporters. “Do I think there should be more, especially as a starting offer? Absolutely.” Among the craziest provisions of the 1,800-page HEROES Act are a temporary elimination of the cap on state and local tax deductions on federal income taxes. This is a move that would mostly benefit wealthy taxpayers in blue states – people like Nancy Pelosi, among other Democratic lawmakers. The bill would also give an eye-popping $1 trillion bailout to state and local governments to deal with their budget shortfalls caused by the shutdown of businesses and stay-at-home orders designed to halt the spread of the pandemic. Democrats clearly don’t believe in belt-tightening by state and local governments to eliminate wasteful programs during hard times. Instead, the Democrats just want to run up the national debt to stratospheric levels. Want to know who will ultimately have to pay higher taxes to pay off that debt? Look in the mirror. Other parts of the Democratic legislation passed by the House call for up to $10,000 of college debt forgiveness and a whopping $25 billion for the Postal Service. Perhaps worst of all, the legislation would provide yet another round of $1,200 economic stimulus checks for most Americans, as well as an extension of the $600 weekly unemployment insurance bonus to jobless adults until the end of January 2021 – with an option to extend the bonus payments through March 2021. The unemployment bonus – which is paid on top of other unemployment benefits – would provide jobless workers with as much as an additional $31,200 over the course of a year for doing absolutely nothing. After adding the first and second rounds of stimulus checks and state unemployment benefits to the unemployment bonuses proposed by Democrats, it’s clear that tens of millions of unemployed people in low-wage jobs could end up receiving significantly more money in government benefits than they earned while working. One analysis by Ernie Tedeschi, an economist who previously worked for the Treasury Department, estimates that unemployed workers in all but a dozen states now receive about as much or more in government benefits than they did in wages prior to the economic shutdown – and his analysis didn’t factor in two rounds of $1,200 stimulus checks. Already, employers reopening their businesses have reported that they are having a hard time hiring employees for low-paying jobs because working would give so many people less money than they could collect in unemployment payments. Discouraging people from working all the way through January 2021 or even longer is the last thing politicians should be doing in the midst of the most significant economic crash since the Great Depression, but that’s exactly what House Democrats are clamoring to do. The biggest reason for the proposal is likely driven by politics, not economic considerations. The proof is in Democrats’ timeline. With so many unknowns, why would Democrats choose to call for extending bonus unemployment benefits through January 2021? Why not extend the bonus for a month or two and then reassess how state economies are performing? After all, many states are just now starting to reopen parts of their economies, and it’s still unclear how successful those moves will be. The most obvious reason for extending unemployment bonus payments is that January 2021 marks the beginning of the start of the next presidential term. If former Vice President Joe Biden ends up defeating President Trump in November, what better way to begin Biden’s time in office than to have millions of workers forced back into the job market? It’s no wonder then that Pelosi said at a press conference discussing the HEROES Act that it is “really quite an exciting time for us because we have a monumental need for our country at this sad time.” This sums up Democrats’ view of the crisis: Sure, the coronavirus pandemic is a tragedy, but what an “exciting” tragedy for those of us looking to expand government at every turn! It’s perfectly reasonable to target government aid to those who have been hit hardest by government decisions to shut down the economy. As the old saying goes, “if you break it, you bought it,” and in this case, the government unquestionably “broke” the economy and forced millions of people out of their jobs. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But government relief programs should always be as limited and targeted as possible, and in this case, congressional Democrats and even many Republicans have chosen to do the opposite. They want to hook as many people on government aid programs as possible, instead of focusing on finding effective ways to get the country back to work as safely and quickly as they can. The absurdity of sending $1,200 payments to millions of people who haven’t lost their jobs and calling it “stimulus relief” proves just how outrageous this entire gargantuan cash giveaway has become. Why would you send “relief” to people who haven’t lost their jobs and thus aren’t in any need of relief? And why would government try to “stimulate” the economy by infusing it with cash while at the same time keeping most of it closed? You know what would actually stimulate the economy? Opening it! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP From the beginning of this crisis to the present time, Congress and many state governments have failed the American people – and they’ve done so spectacularly. Americans shouldn’t forget that fact the next time politicians ask for our votes. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JUSTIN HASKINS

Former Deputy National Security Adviser KT McFarland tells 'Fox &amp; Friends' that she wants to know who knew what and when in the Obama administration. Our democracy is under fire, thanks to corrupt officials at the highest echelons of our government – including members of the Obama administration – who we're now learning conspired with former FBI Director James Comey and other "deep state" operatives to try to stop Donald Trump from getting elected. And when that election meddling failed, members of Comey's cabal, with far-reaching tentacles across intelligence agencies and the Department of Justice, abused their power, spied on innocent American citizens and unmasked them. That's just the tip of the iceberg. TRUMP WANTS FBI’S ORIGINAL ‘302’ REPORT ON FLYNN CASE, SAYS FORMER ADVISER 'PERSECUTED' These nefarious actors illegally leaked information to the media to smear President Trump and delegitimize and derail his administration. These scurrilous actions triggered illegitimate investigations – including a 22-month special counsel probe into possible collusion with Russia – to effect a coup d'etat. Make no mistake. What's transpired went far beyond a political hit job. It's a toppling of a core pillar of a democracy, one that requires the peaceful transition of power from one administration to the next. A government system that respects the will of the voters in free elections. When those time-honored principles and traditions break down, so does our electoral system and foundation of our democracy, because what separates the United States from a banana republic or a Communist regime is the peaceful transition of power. Here's the alarming reality now coming to light: Newly declassified documents reveal that Obama administration officials, including then-Vice President Joe Biden, violated the peaceful transition of power by working alongside Comey's FBI and other operatives who engaged in illegitimate surveillance and unmasking of high-ranking members of the Trump administration, including former National Security Adviser Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn. "A stunning 39 separate officials snooped on Mr. Flynn's conversations with foreign actors, lodging nearly 50 unmasking demands between Nov. 30, 2016, and Jan. 12, 2017," writes The Wall St. Journal editorial board. But that's not all. For the past several years, Democrats – led by documented liar Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif. – and a complicit left-wing media have peddled the false narrative that Trump colluded with Russia to steal the 2016 presidential election from Hillary Clinton. This massive, damaging lie, and subsequent disinformation campaign, has since been debunked by the costly Robert Mueller investigation. Yet, nevertheless, it's still spun as factual in the mainstream media to take down Trump and his administration. The list of abuses coming to light are downright chilling: CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The brazen misuse of Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA) warrants to spy on Trump campaign associates using discredited opposition research paid for by the Hillary Clinton campaign and the Democratic National Committee as a pretext. An FBI lawyer who doctored evidence. The reported withholding of exculpatory evidence by John Brennan, the former head of the CIA, to perpetuate the Russian collusion hoax and other troubling malfeasance. All said, it's time for Attorney General William Barr to appoint a special counsel to get to the bottom of what appears to be a seditious conspiracy against a sitting president. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP A failure to uncover the truth and hold bad actors to account will continue to sow damaging distrust in our justice system. It'll also threaten to silence the will of voters now and in future elections – an unraveling of our democracy. Mr. Barr, we can't allow that to happen.
 CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ADRIANA COHEN

Former White House Press Secretary Sarah Sanders argues presidential candidate Joe Biden is ‘tucked away’ and ‘hiding’ in his basement amid the coronavirus outbreak. She also provides insight into the Michael Flynn case. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  President Trump’s visit Thursday to a medical equipment company in Allentown, Pa., was designed to do more than call attention to his administration’s work to increase coronavirus testing and the national stockpile of medical supplies. Pennsylvania has 20 electoral votes – more than all but four other states and tied with Illinois – and Trump knows those votes will be crucial in the November election when he is expected to face former Vice President Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee. In the 2016 election, Trump narrowly edged out Hillary Clinton in Pennsylvania by only 45,000 votes of the nearly 6 million cast. This was not supposed to be. Polls had Clinton’s likelihood of winning at 77 percent. TRUMP VOWS TO RESUPPLY NATIONAL STOCKPILE, SAYING 'CUPBOARDS WERE BARE' AMID CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC A key to a Trump victory this year in the Keystone State will be his energy policies, which have brought economic prosperity and created jobs in Pennsylvania. The coronavirus pandemic and the shutdown of businesses to guard against the spread of COVID-19 have derailed economies in every state, but Trump’s pro-energy policies can play a crucial role in reviving the economies of Pennsylvania and the rest of our nation. In sharp contrast, Biden and other Democrats have embraced radical energy policies demonizing fossil fuels that would bring economic pain and increased unemployment to Pennsylvania and states around the country. These far-left policies would be disastrous anytime, but would be especially so coming on top of the severe economic pain inflicted on the American people by the coronavirus. The former vice president has even appointed socialist Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York – author of the radical Green New Deal – as co-chair of his climate policy group that is developing an energy agenda for his campaign. This is no doubt an effort to show his liberal bona fides and win over the far-left Bernie Sanders wing of the Democratic Party. How does Ocasio-Cortez help Biden in Pennsylvania? Well, when the energy industry was imploding last month, prices bottoming and bankruptcies mounting, Ocasio-Cortez didn’t express sympathy for the millions of jobs lost – let alone the financial ruin of innumerable businesses. No, she tweeted “you absolutely love to see it.” Hmmm. Biden, who was born in Scranton, Pa. – but moved with his family to Delaware in 1953 at age 10 – knows Pennsylvania is a vital electoral prize. That’s why he set up his campaign headquarters in Philadelphia and held his first campaign event in Pittsburgh, despite being a senator from neighboring Delaware for nearly 40 years. But voters don’t really care where a candidate headquarters his campaign. They care about what a candidate can do to improve their lives. And when it comes to energy policy, the difference between the job-creating policies of Trump and the job-killing policies of Biden couldn’t be more dramatic. Demographically, Pennsylvania is quite diverse, with major metropolitan areas, depressed Rust Belt towns, and a large rural population. But Pennsylvania also has something else: energy. And lots of it. It’s America’s third-largest coal-producing state. It’s the second-largest shale gas producer. These industries employ thousands of people. And they vote. My organization, Power The Future, published a study in January looking at the enormous economic benefits that hydraulic fracturing – better known as fracking – has brought to Pennsylvania and compared that to how New York has missed out on the economic benefits because Gov. Andrew Cuomo has unwisely banned fracking. Our study is titled “New York’s Buried Opportunity: How Governor Cuomo’s Policies Prevent Prosperity While Pennsylvanians Flourish.” The results of this study of neighboring states are important to voters around the nation. That’s because many prominent Democrats are hostile to fracking and would no doubt pressure a President Biden to outlaw the practice nationwide – even though this method of extracting oil and natural gas has a strong record of safety and has played a crucial role in reducing our dependence on foreign energy. Fracking has generated $1.7 billion in new tax revenue for Pennsylvania since 2012 and a remarkable 36 percent increase in wages for oil and gas employees in the state. During the Great Recession of 2008 to 2012 – when Pennsylvania was losing jobs overall – fracking jobs increased an astounding 259 percent, with the vast majority of these jobs in rural areas. Energy has been a boon for the state because despite the recession, despite the collapse of the housing market and the Wall Street market tumble, America will always need energy. Job losses in the energy industry caused by the coronavirus pandemic are temporary. But if Democrats succeed under a Biden administration in banning fracking and taking other anti-fossil fuels actions, the job losses would become permanent. This would have a far more devastating impact on the hardworking men and women who produce the energy that powers America. Pennsylvania is one of the leading energy-producing states, employing tens of thousands of energy workers. They will once again have a crucial role in this upcoming presidential election. Currently, 28 percent of Pennsylvania’s overall workforce is unemployed due to the coronavirus pandemic – a shocking and tragic number. Of the 1.8 million men and women who have filed for unemployment in the state, there’s no doubt some have come from the energy industry. We need to get these energy workers back on the job as soon as possible, consistent with public health guidelines needed to combat the spread of COVID-19. The last thing these workers need is permanent unemployment caused by unwise Democratic policies. Biden has made it clear what he thinks about Pennsylvania and its energy industry, despite putting his campaign headquarters in the state. One would expect the Biden campaign to make an aggressive pivot to the center in an appeal for Pennsylvania’s voters, but appointing someone as out-of-touch and downright offensive as Ocasio-Cortez to guide his energy policy shows his complete disconnect with reality.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As President Trump aims to reopen America and restart our economy, he knows we will need energy. The airline industry will come back, but not without energy. Cruise ships, travel, tourism, resorts and hotels all need energy. Millions of Americans – once permitted to resume commuting to work – will need energy for their vehicles. Every business and industry in the nation will only be able to return to full economic strength if Americans can be sure we will have inexpensive, reliable and abundant domestic energy. And Pennsylvania has a lot of it.  No one wanted the coronavirus to invade America and cripple our economy. The last thing we need is to adopt Democratic energy policies that will further cripple our economy by design. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Trump can tell Pennsylvania’s energy workers he wants them fully employed, providing for their families, contributing to their communities and building our nation back to its full economic strength. Biden’s message to these same energy workers is that he will put more of them on the unemployment rolls, and his message to all voters is that he will destroy our energy independence and ship billions of dollars out of our pockets to other countries to buy the energy we should be producing right here in America. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DANIEL TURNER

2020 presidential hopeful Joe Biden says 85,000 jobs have been lost and millions of lives. Joe Biden’s virtual campaign for president is a strange journey, with “virtual rallies” and “virtual rope lines” (whatever that is). It also includes a virtual press corps that routinely fails to offer any real scrutiny. The only problem is Biden, who keeps bumbling. The latest exhibit came on Thursday night’s “Last Word Special” with Lawrence O’Donnell on MSNBC. They brought in a pre-recorded question from “Naveed in San Mateo,” who asked how Biden could explain how losing a wife, a daughter, and a son would make him better at grieving coronavirus deaths than Trump. DAVID BOSSIE: BIDEN WRONG ON CHINA HIS ENTIRE CAREER – LET'S LOOK AT THE RECORD This isn’t the kind of “question” the broader media throw at President Trump. His briefings are brutal, as reporters like Olivia Nuzzi have compared Trump's response to the Vietnam War and suggested he’s personally responsible for 80,000 coronavirus deaths. Biden gets to babble into gaffes in three-minute answers, while White House reporters barely let the president finish a sentence before yelling some more. Newspaper columnists like Jennifer Rubin at The Washington Post are still suggesting the "walls are closing in" on Trump, even as Team Obama is on the defensive over their pernicious behavior in the Michael Flynn case. Biden gets to babble into gaffes in three-minute answers, while White House reporters barely let the president finish a sentence before yelling some more. CLICK HERE TO GET OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER This is the “journalism” pattern that all of America can see, from the Obama years to the Trump years. One side isn’t so much questioned as adored. The other side isn’t so much questioned as condemned. CNN is so transparently partisan that they’re now refusing to air the White House briefings with new press secretary Kayleigh McEnany….after CNN media reporter Brian Stelter spent a year lecturing that the old press secretary Stephanie Grisham never called a press briefing. This is only consistent if your strategy is to condemn Trump for everything he does, no matter what he does. Even now, CNN is still airing Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s press briefings live as it spurns the White House. On top of that, Gov. Cuomo routinely shows up on his brother Christopher’s primetime show, where he’s hailed as presidential timber and a babe magnet. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP How can the national media present itself to any audience as an honest broker without an axe to grind? Does anyone think their White House correspondents would have been yelling at President Hillary? Does anyone think President Biden has anything to fear from these people? If he actually becomes president, we should expect he will simply be asked what’s “enchanted” him in his first one hundred days. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TIM GRAHAM

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. It has been close to three weeks since the state of Georgia began to gradually loosen its coronavirus lockdown. 'REOPEN PENNSYLVANIA' FOUNDERS DELIVER MESSAGE TO DEM GOVERNOR AFTER TRUMP VISIT: 'GIVE UP THE POWER Starting late April, the state allowed hair salons, bowling alleys, barbershops and gyms to reopen. Three days later, restaurants and theaters followed. Hospitals once again were allowed to perform all needed surgeries. They could stop pretending that coronavirus was the only medical problem that patients faced. It is not. There nothing especially radical about what Georgia did, but you wouldn't know that if you were watching television that week. The decision was described there as the most reckless, public health decision since 9 out of 10 family doctors endorsed Camel cigarettes. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Untold millions would die because Georgia was reopening. The state of Georgia would be flattened by a tidal wave of corpses. It was that dangerous. Even Stacy Abrams took a break from campaigning for vice president to offer an assessment. We should be thrilled by this news because it suggests that America can begin to return to normal, restore the rights stolen from the population, maybe even treat citizens like adults once again, and not court medical disasters. You would think our leadership would be racing to the podium to share this great news. But of course, they are not -- just the opposite. Stacy Abrams, former Georgia gubernatorial candidate: We honestly don't understand the mayors of our largest cities who have all expressed deep concern, that of our scientists. This makes no sense and it doesn't improve our economy, it simply puts more Georgians at risk. Yes, she seems to know what she is talking about. You should know, though, that Stacey Abrams is delusional. At one point, she announced that she was the governor of Georgia, which, from a mental health standpoint, is one step from claiming you're Napoleon. Now, Abrams imagines she is a public health expert. It's best to humor her on that. Just nod and look interested. Chris Hayes is not a scientist, either. He is MSNBC's most ardent male feminist. But he still has strong views on epidemiology. Hayes was so upset by the idea that people in Georgia might go outside without permission that he suddenly found himself arguing that everybody must obey the Trump administration. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host: If that sounds insane to you, you are not alone. And for the record, Georgia does not meet the White House guidelines. It does not a 14-day trajectory of declining cases. It has tested less than 90,000 people out of a population of more than 10 million. Mayors in Georgia are describing the Governor's decision as reckless, dangerous, and illogical. Oh, the voice of overpriced Brooklyn. "We must do what the White House tells us!" he screams on MSNBC. That is how dangerous it was. Mark this day, wrote one longtime Washington reporter, because two and three weeks from now, the Georgia death toll is blood on Gov. Brian Kemp's hands. Well, as it happens, we did, in fact, mark that day. It was April 25, 2020, when the reopenings began. That day, Georgia had 650 new cases of coronavirus. On Wednesday, which was 18 days later, Georgia had a total of 555 cases of coronavirus. Infections and death in Georgia have been declining since early April -- that's why they began to reopen it. There are still sick people in the state. There will be for a while; some of them will die. But as of Thursday night, Georgia's numbers -- the actual numbers -- are no worse than the national average, and that tells us a lot. We should be thrilled by this news because it suggests that America can begin to return to normal, restore the rights stolen from the population, maybe even treat citizens like adults once again, and not court medical disasters. You would think our leadership would be racing to the podium to share this great news. But of course, they are not -- just the opposite. In fact, they are doubling down on authoritarianism. They enjoyed being in total control of your life. They do not plan to relinquish the power they received from this pandemic anytime soon, if ever. Ask yourself how many healthy middle-aged people do you know who have died from this virus? Maybe you know someone. How many people do you know who are now unemployed and terrified of the future? Probably a lot. The city of Los Angeles, for example, has extended its lockdown through the end of July. Citizens there will have to wear masks at all times, even when they are outside, where the risk of transmission is minimal. Mayor Eric Garcetti did not explain the science behind these commands. There isn't any science. Instead, Garcetti told his city, that until there is a "cure" for the virus, life will never go back to normal -- never. The mayor did not mention that it is possible -- in fact, it is likely -- that there will never be a cure for the coronavirus. Whatever. Nancy Pelosi didn't ask questions about it. She just quickly endorsed the whole thing. Willie Geist, MSNBC anchor: There are a lot of people in Los Angeles County who are saying, "Whoa, three more months. I can't survive this as a small business, I can't survive this as someone who is out of work." House Speaker Nancy Pelosi: Well, of course, I agree with the decisions of the people on the ground in their particular venue and location. So yes, it is inconvenient, but it is even more inconvenient if you are going to be infected or worse. Yes, it is inconvenient. But it is not as inconvenient as getting infected with a deadly disease, says Pelosi. That's a good talking point, by the way. Hat tip to the 26-year-old staffer who wrote it. But as a factual matter, it is wrong. For the overwhelming majority of Americans, the lockdowns are far worse than getting sick with the Wuhan coronavirus. If you are under 60, the odds of dying from this virus are fewer than 1 in 1,000, probably less than 1 in 10,000. The odds meanwhile, that government lockdowns are making you poorer and destroying your life -- those chances are far higher than that. Ask yourself how many healthy middle-aged people do you know who have died from this virus? Maybe you know someone. How many people do you know who are now unemployed and terrified of the future? Probably a lot. This is insanity. Obviously and at some point, we are going to look back in shame as we consider it.  ... The question is for the rest of us: Why are the rest of us allowing this to happen? Washington Gov. Jay Inslee is not a math guy. He is not calculating probabilities like this. Inslee apparently believes that everyone in Washington state faces the real likelihood of dying from the virus, and that's why he has ordered officials in the state to track who goes to restaurants and who they eat with -- because that is not a Chinese police state tactic or anything. Washington state Gov. Jay Inslee: This contact tracing, obviously, if you have somebody who has become sick and they were sitting right next to a person at a restaurant -- to be able to identify that person could be very valuable for their health to try to save their life, and so we put that in place. Yes, it's kind of weird that the authorities are taking notes on who you are having dinner with. But, you know, it's for the public health, so submit. It's not like politicians will ever misuse that information or anything. So sleep well, but don't forget to send in a blood sample so the government can sequence your DNA for public health reasons. Nobody in America is enjoying all of this more than Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. It is always the most mediocre people who love fascism the most. It gives them power they never dreamed that they would have and indeed, don't deserve. Whitmer wants this moment to last forever. She is enraged that anyone would dare to complain about it. She went on ABC on Wednesday and dismissed any citizen who disagrees with her, needless to say, as a racist. And then she promised that disobedient citizens in Michigan -- serfs -- will be punished with more severe lockdowns. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer: These have been really political rallies where people come with Confederate flags and Nazi symbolism and calling for violence. This is racist and misogynistic, and I ask that everybody who has a platform uses it to call on people to observe the best practices promulgated by the CDC and to stop encouraging this behavior because it only makes it that much more precarious for us to try to reengage our economy, which is what everyone says they want us to be able to do. Yes, not only is it racist, it is dangerous to the public health -- and racism. Whitmer was later asked if she had evidence, proof, that protesters were actually spreading the virus, and you will be surprised to learn she didn't. And by the way, that question is misogynistic, so shut up, bigot. Some people in Michigan are finally growing tired of this performance. Karl Manke owns a barbershop. He would like to continue cutting hair. Authorities won't let him do that. They prefer to send him welfare checks instead. That is not the country he wants to live in, though. Karl Manke, Michigan barbershop owner: I am 77. I've always worked. I have never looked for handouts. I don't even know what they are. I haven't -- somebody called me and said, well, why didn't you get on food stamps? Well, I don't want food stamps. I want to work. When our governor said we are going to have another 28 days, it knocked me to my knees. I couldn't take another 28 days. All of us as Americans need to begin to take responsibility for ourselves, you know? I feel that the government is not my mother. It never has been, you know. And matter of fact, this administration, for the most part, I've been in business longer than they've been alive. Gretchen Whitmer was not amused by that. "The government is not my mom" -- misogyny. And by the way, cutting hair is racist. So Whitmer's administration tried to shut Manke down with a court order because there's nothing else going on in Michigan right now. A judge resisted that it was too far. So, Whitmer's lackey simply revoked Manke's barber's license. Now, he is shut down for good and will be even when the lockdowns finally end. That will show him. Stop whining and take your welfare check, bigot. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This is insanity. Obviously and at some point, we are going to look back in shame as we consider it. Politicians will always seize the maximum amount of power they can. That is why they went into politics in the first place, to fill that empty space inside. The question is for the rest of us: Why are the rest of us allowing this to happen? Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 14, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. It’s no surprise that when crises hit, populations most in need are hit the hardest. Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Administration for Children and Families (ACF), housed in the Department of Health and Human Services, has been working non-stop to care for those most impacted. Now, more than ever, it is important to protect, support and uplift children and families by providing services pivotal to their stability. As a part of President Trump’s whole-of-government and whole-of-America approach to the coronavirus, ACF has thought strategically, innovatively and out-of-the-box about ways to support our programs and our communities during this time of crisis. Through actions like granting regulatory flexibilities and waivers, sending guidance, hosting webinars and much more, we have been able to continue serving America’s children and families during this time. ROBERT O'BRIEN: VENTILATORS FOR CORONAVIRUS — US IS ARSENAL OF HEALTH IN WAR ON COVID-19 In recognizing the critical importance of protecting the health of our child welfare workers and service providers, ACF worked with Eric Hargan, deputy secretary for HHS, to send a letter to governors. We encouraged them to work with their emergency management programs to classify child welfare workers and service providers as level 1 emergency responders in order for them to have greater access to personal protective equipment. We also looked for opportunities within our programs like Head Start, which promotes school readiness of children under 5, where we can use their resources and talent to serve our communities in supporting emergency child care. Recently our Office of Head Start clarified how programs can support, when possible, the use of closed Head Start centers as temporary child care centers for medical personnel and essential workers. These efforts will help support our front-line workers with a safe and child-friendly environment so they can continue their important work. ACF also took action by urging child welfare legal and judicial leaders to work together to ensure that necessary court hearings continue during this pandemic. We encouraged access to visits and other activities virtually where physical contact is not possible and in addition to physical contact, as well as clarified questions around the evolving crisis where courts have had to restrict parent/child face-to-face contact. We also advised child welfare leaders of the flexibility of certain requirements regarding fingerprint-based criminal records checks and caseworker visits to a child’s home. Through our actions during this pandemic, we have developed countless new ideas that are adaptable to how we serve vulnerable populations nationwide in the months and years to come. Finding ways to be innovative virtually has made a difference in helping to meet the needs of children in foster care during this time, because life doesn’t stop for them during pandemics. The historic coronavirus relief package, the CARES Act, which President Trump signed into law on April 23, delivered a strong financial foundation of over $6 billion for our programs affected by COVID-19, including child care and child welfare. In an effort to support the learning of children disrupted by the crisis, the bill includes up to $500 million for summer Head Start programs. We also secured $3.5 billion in supplemental funding for the Child Care and Development Block Grant to help states, territories and tribes address COVID-19 impacts on child care. Among other purposes, these supplemental funds can be used to provide child care assistance to health care workers, first responders and other essential workers playing critical roles during this crisis. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We also understand how important it is to inform our grantees and the vulnerable populations we serve about the actions taken and assistance we are providing, which is why we dedicated a web page to providing a comprehensive list of resources, information and services. Through our actions during this pandemic, we have developed countless new ideas that are adaptable to how we serve vulnerable populations nationwide in the months and years to come. Going forward, we want to continue implementing better, stronger and more innovative ways to deliver human services. And if this crisis has taught us anything, it is that we can better serve individuals, children, youth, families and communities in the years ahead. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The choice before us seems to be no choice at all: stay inside and have no human contact with another soul, keep businesses closed, denying a livelihood to millions, or step outside and risk death. Though I believe the risk is small when comparing the number of people who have been diagnosed with COVID-19 and have recovered with the number who have died, fear may be the greater threat. Some of a certain age may recall the fears promoted during the Cold War. There were newspaper stories and TV documentaries about how long survivors of a nuclear war would have to stay inside reinforced shelters until the fallout dissipated to a point it was safe to go out. Then, it was Geiger counters that would determine the level of radioactivity. CAL THOMAS: AMID CORONAVIRUS, GREATEST GENERATION STILL HAS LESSONS TO TEACH US Today’s Geiger counters are temperature gauges held to our foreheads. Symptoms, such as coughing, sneezing and fever, as well as high-risk factors, such as age and underlying health conditions, are also part of the diagnostic equation. We are told to frequently wash our hands, not touch our faces, don’t shake hands with anyone, practice social distancing — we can recite these from memory — but then we are also told to stay inside and only go out for “necessities,” such as food and prescriptions. Grocery stores where I shop require masks when entering and one-way traffic aisles. A hard plastic “wall” separates me from the cashier, who is also wearing a mask. Hand sanitizers and wipes are available at the entrance and exit where cart handles are wiped down after each use. If these practices are almost as good as staying home, why can’t businesses employing these practices, including restaurants and bars, be opened so people can make a living and not rely on government, whose debt now exceeds levels that will never be reduced without spending cuts (and likely tax increases if Democrats win the November election)? Restaurants can place tables six feet apart. Those operating in warmer climates could add outside tables, benches and chairs. For the fearful, takeout orders could be ramped up. As experts have noted, it could be months and possibly longer before a vaccine is created. And there probably is more than one strain, as with influenza, so a single vaccine is unlikely to protect everyone from every strain.   Last Sunday, my wife and I went to a local restaurant. Tables had been removed. We wore masks as did staff behind the counter. We purchased our food, left the place and ate outside without masks where tables and benches were available. There were others there, not all of whom were six feet apart. People engaged in social interaction, which is what humans do and need to do. No one seemed fearful. As experts have noted, it could be months and possibly longer before a vaccine is created. Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told a Senate committee Tuesday there is no guarantee a vaccine will work. And there probably is more than one strain, as with influenza, so a single vaccine is unlikely to protect everyone from every strain. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Does that mean staying at home until perfect safety can be guaranteed? The public won’t stand for it. Demonstrators are already petitioning state governments to open up to redress their grievances. Writing on his Facebook page, rock musician Ted Nugent expresses the growing frustration of many: “Why do I have to stay home just because 𝘆𝗼𝘂 are scared? How about 𝘆𝗼𝘂 stay home....𝘆𝗼𝘂 stay in 𝘆𝗼𝘂𝗿 house indefinitely, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 wear a mask, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 socially distance yourself from me, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 avoid restaurants, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 avoid baseball games, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 stay off the roads, 𝘆𝗼𝘂 avoid malls and beaches and parks…  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “I’m done playing 𝘆𝗼𝘂𝗿 dumb game…I’m no longer going to be a prisoner of your fear. I’m no longer staying in my house or catering to 𝘆𝗼𝘂 because 𝘆𝗼𝘂 are scared… “𝗬𝗢𝗨𝗥 fear is not an excuse to destroy America. 𝗬𝗢𝗨𝗥 fear is not my fear and your fear does not have the right to interfere with my life, my job, my income or my future as a free American citizen.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

Fox News travels to the home and library of our 32nd president to examine Franklin D. Roosevelt's incredible power of persuasion. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Seventy-five years ago this month, Germany surrendered, ending the European theater of World War II. At the war’s beginning, no one believed Germany would utterly collapse in May 1945. On the morning of Dec. 7, 1941, the day of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, German invaders were on the verge of capturing Moscow. Britain was isolated. London had barely survived a terrible German bombing during the blitz. A sleeping America was neutral, but it was beginning to realize it was weak and mostly unarmed in a scary world. REBECCA GRANT: WORLD WAR II IN EUROPE ENDED EXACTLY 75 YEARS AGO – IT HAS LESSONS FOR WAR AGAINST CORONAVIRUS But by 1943, a booming U.S. economy was fielding vast military forces from Alaska to the Sahara. Britain and America were bombing the German heartland. The Soviet Red Army had trapped and destroyed a million-man German army at Stalingrad. How did the Allies — Britain, the Soviet Union and the U.S. — turn around the European war so quickly? The huge Red Army would suffer close to 11 million deaths in halting German offensives. Britain would never give up despite terrible losses at home and at sea from German bombers, rockets and submarines. Yet the key to victory was the U.S. economy. It would eventually outproduce all the major economies on both sides of the war combined. But how did the U.S. arm so quickly, build such effective weapons so soon, and from almost nothing field a military some 12 million strong? Neo-socialist President Franklin D. Roosevelt unleashed American business under the aegis of successful entrepreneurs such as Henry Ford of the Ford Motor Co., William Knudsen of General Motors, Henry Kaiser of Kaiser Shipyards and Charles Wilson of General Electric. They were all given relatively free rein from New Deal strictures to work and profit without burdensome government regulations. The result was a military juggernaut that overwhelmed America’s enemies. Politics went on but in a less partisan fashion. Republicans picked up seats in the House and Senate in 1942, while Roosevelt won a fourth presidential term in 1944. Roosevelt was able to dodge charges of rank partisanship during the war by appointing Republicans to key positions in his administration. Republican Henry Stimson became secretary of war. Former Republican vice presidential candidate Frank Knox was the all-important secretary of the Navy. Roosevelt stocked the War Production Board with Republican capitalists. Government cannot restore prosperity. Only entrepreneurs and risk-takers can. Americans must master their fears of the virus and dare to go back to work.   The media turned from either propagandizing the success of the New Deal or hyping its failures to warning Americans of the looming existential threat that would soon make their differences irrelevant. Most importantly, Americans lost their fears. From 1929 to 1938, the U.S. economy was in ruins. FDR’s New Deal could not restore economic growth or consumer confidence. As late as 1938, economic growth had sunk to negative 3.3 percent. Unemployment soared to an unsustainable 19 percent. Only the threat of war terrified Americans into taking a gamble — to work feverishly and to ramp up industry. By the end of 1941, the early rearmament effort had spiked GDP growth to 17.7 percent. Unemployment had fallen to about 10 percent and would soon fall to about 2 percent. Americans began losing their dread that they could do nothing against a decade-long depression. The less they feared the Axis powers, the more they restarted the economy and began to produce a plethora of goods and services. After Pearl Harbor, Americans did not stay neutral, wait for government assistance or expect other nations to protect them. Does World War II offer any lessons regarding our wrecked economy and staggering unemployment from the lockdown reaction to the coronavirus? Perhaps. Government cannot restore prosperity. Only entrepreneurs and risk-takers can. Americans must master their fears of the virus and dare to go back to work. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Otherwise, locked-down states will continue to borrow to pay out public assistance without creating wealth from labor, production and investment. Bankrupt states will beg the federal government to print money that it doesn’t have for bailouts to pay those who are not working and not creating collective wealth. The media must stick to reporting on the virus and the ailing economy. Their often petty obsessions with destroying President Trump are long past monotonous. Trump himself must keep working with any Democratic governors who realize they must put their states back to work in order to have the money to pay for the fight against the virus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Interest rates are low. Gas is as cheap as it’s been in years. Inflation remains moribund. People are tired of being housebound. They want to get back to work to make and spend money. All that is missing is confidence — or rather, the conviction that the coronavirus is no more dangerous than were the Axis powers and can be beaten far more quickly if we show the sort of will our grandparents had. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In April, records from 9/11 mastermind Usama bin Laden’s compound were disclosed detailing his plans to assassinate then-President Barack Obama. Bin Laden’s rationale for his horrific plot was telling: “Biden is totally unprepared for that post, which will lead the U.S. into a crisis.”  Now, a decade since U.S. Special Forces killed bin Laden in Pakistan, it’s my guess that President Xi Jinping of China – our greatest geopolitical foe today – also wants former Vice President Joe Biden to be the next president of the United States. This makes perfect sense when you consider that Xi wants what’s best for China. Joe Biden has been wrong on U.S. policy toward China virtually his entire career. In fact, Biden and other establishment politicians in Washington have been instrumental in China’s meteoric rise from a developing nation into a Communist power with global ambitions. SEN. THOM TILLIS: CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA — US RECOVERY INCLUDES HOLDING BEIJING ACCOUNTABLE For decades, China has executed a foreign policy focused on replacing the United States as the world’s leading economy. During his time as lead Democrat on the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Biden gave a floor speech in September 2000 in support of Permanent Normal Trade Relations (PNTR) with China. He said, “Finally, I would like to point out that my support for permanent normal trade relations with China is based not just on an assessment of the economic benefits to the U.S., not just on the prospects for political reform in China, but also on the impact on our national security.” Twenty years later, on each of the three prongs he laid out to justify his support for the legislation, it’s clear that Biden was dead wrong. Statistics show that 3.7 million American jobs have been lost to China since 2001 due to our horrendous anti-U.S. worker policies. Furthermore, China has imprisoned upwards of one million Muslim Uighurs and other minorities in “re-education camps.” It also, according to reports, jailed more than 48 journalists in 2019 alone just for seeking the truth.  And today we face a global pandemic with more than 80,000 Americans dying from COVID-19 because China chose to lie instead of help save lives.  So much for Biden’s promises of economic prosperity, political reform and national security. About a decade after his pro-PNTR vote, in 2011, Vice President Biden doubled down on his cozy rhetoric toward China in an op-ed he wrote for The New York Times.  Biden shamelessly reiterated his unwise support for the Chinese government, stating, “I remain convinced that a successful China can make our country more prosperous, not less.” He added, “I am convinced, from nearly a dozen hours spent with Vice President Xi Jinping, that China’s leadership agrees.” Biden is choosing to ignore the fact that President Trump singlehandedly changed the debate and rallied America around his get-tough-on Beijing policy.    Biden, who first visited China in 1979, couldn’t see that the Communist leadership there was playing him for a fool. He closed the editorial by saying, “Some may warn of America’s demise, but I’m not among them. And let me reassure you: based on my time in China, neither are the Chinese.”  Let Biden’s naivety sink in and juxtapose it with President Trump’s actions on China – which show he’s been right from the beginning. You would think that Biden would observe this president’s leadership and success in negotiating with China and change his ways – but you’d be wrong. Biden is choosing to ignore the fact that President Trump singlehandedly changed the debate and rallied America around his get-tough-on Beijing policy.  Exactly one year ago at a May campaign rally, Biden boasted, “China is going to eat our lunch? Come on, man ... they can’t figure out how they’re going to deal with the corruption that exists within the system. I mean, you know, they’re not bad folks, folks. But guess what, they’re not, they’re not competition for us.” In our current reality, this statement personifies how wrongheaded Biden remains on China.  A typical liberal like Sleepy Joe in the White House would return to failed globalist policies and China would pass the United States as the world’s leading economic superpower and never look back.  A Biden administration would accept the failed status quo at the United Nations that President Trump has called out; a Biden administration would fund the World Health Organization and accept business as usual, and a Biden administration would consent to new job-killing global compacts that would destroy Trump’s policies that prioritize the working men and women in America. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The bottom line is that Biden’s disastrous policies would take us back to the days of economic stagnation. Trump came into office with the goal of making America great again. It wasn’t some poll-tested slogan that sounded good in speeches – it was a promise to the American people. It was a promise that the failed economy of the Obama-Biden administration, characterized by slow growth and vanishing job opportunities, would not be tolerated.  Upon entering office, President Trump confronted Chinese Communist leaders with his ironclad promise to the American people that he would bring our economy roaring back to life. The idea that America’s time was up and that China was the future simply did not sit well with the president. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Before the coronavirus escaped Wuhan and infected the world, our unemployment rate had dropped to historic lows, stocks had risen to record highs, and millions of new jobs were being created right here in America, thanks to this tremendous president. China and who can best rebuild our economy will be the dominant issues on Election Day and that’s bad news for Joe Biden. For the last three years, President Trump has proven that he’s the best man to tackle these challenging issues and lead America to peace and prosperity for generations to come. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE  

FOX Business' Stuart Varney on Nancy Pelosi's $3 trillion coronavirus stimulus plan. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill backed by House Democrats was headed for a vote in that chamber Friday, although Republican opposition in the Senate was expected to prevent the bill from ever becoming law. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., said Thursday that the legislation could become the basis of negotiations with the Republican-controlled Senate and the White House for compromise legislation. The White House issued an official veto threat Thursday for the Democratic bill, which would be the biggest relief package in history. PELOSI CALLS $3T CORONAVIRUS RELIEF BILL DEMOCRATS' STARTING OFFER AS WHITE HOUSE ISSUES VETO THREAT Among its flaws, the Democratic bill – called the HEROES (Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions) Act – threatens to undermine the increased workplace flexibility and accommodations that workers and employers alike need to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. The Democratic bill includes a full-year extension of what was supposed to be a temporary mandate on small businesses to provide up to 12 weeks of paid sick and family leave to all workers. Proponents of the legislation present this as another gift to workers – but it’s not. The mandate would make it harder for employers to stay afloat amid changing circumstances and meet their employees’ unique needs. Workers could expect more job losses, and those out of work would have a harder time finding jobs. Under the proposal, the paid leave mandate that took effect April 1 would not sunset until the end of 2021. Throughout this year and next, employers would be required to provide both full- and part-time employees with up to 12 weeks of emergency paid sick and family leave. Although employers can fill out paperwork and send in documentation to receive a credit for some or all of the paid leave they provide, it’s neither a straightforward nor simple process. Rather, Congress dictates the terms and conditions, which often overlap and interfere with employers’ own policies and other provisions Congress has enacted. For example, Congress dictates that workers qualify to receive the benefits their first day on the job and says the benefits must be given on top of any preexisting sick leave benefits, which cannot be changed by employers. But COVID-19 has forced businesses and households alike to readjust their finances, and some businesses need to temporarily adjust their employees’ benefits packages. The mandate also dictates that employers allow the leave to be taken intermittently or as a reduced work schedule. Moreover, employers cannot ask for documentation of an employee’s need for leave until seven days after the employee has returned from work. Employers also cannot discipline, discharge or otherwise discriminate against any worker who takes paid sick or family leave, and they must restore workers who take leave to the same or equivalent position after their leave. These mandates derail the organic process of businesses finding ways to meet their unique situations and needs. Instead of using their existing paid leave policies and focusing on adjusting to remote work options and keeping their businesses alive, employers are having to figure out how to comply with the new mandate. Rather than help workers stay employed, this extended mandate could exacerbate unemployment. Nearly a quarter of all U.S. workers have already filed for unemployment in just the last nine weeks. For nearly 37 million newly unemployed Americans, government-mandated paid leave benefits are meaningless; their priority is finding a job and getting their careers back on track. That will become much less likely if Congress moves to make it even more expensive and more complicated for businesses to rehire. And regrettably, it could put women – who are more likely to be primary caregivers – at a disadvantage in the job market. This paid leave mandate simply isn’t necessary. Federal law already requires employers with more than 50 employees to provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid family and medical leave. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Most employers want to do right by their employees and that’s why the overwhelming majority of full-time workers already have paid leave benefits. But employers don’t need to be altruistic to realize that it’s in their best interests to allow and even encourage sick workers to stay home. That’s never been truer than during the COVID-19 pandemic. Rather than meddle in the employee-employer relationship with a sweeping mandate that burdens small businesses, encourages layoffs, and curtails workplace flexibility, policymakers ought to focus on the real vulnerabilities that people face. That is, the risk that unreasonably prolonged, forced shutdowns will cause thousands of businesses to shutter their doors for good and that potentially millions of jobs will be lost and could take years to recover. Congress should make it easier for workers to prepare for time off by expanding opportunities to save pre-tax income, allowing workers to opt for comp time rather than additional overtime pay (a policy change including in the Working Families Flexibility Act) and reducing costly mandates, taxes, and regulations that prevent employers from having the resources necessary to provide paid leave. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And Congress can help workers accommodate to evolving work situations – including remote work and more flexible schedules to adjust to children being home – by easing restrictions on home-based businesses and clarifying the definition of an employee so that workers have more options to earn a living and be their own bosses, if that’s what they want. Americans want the opportunity to work and provide for themselves and their families. They know that employers face real challenges staying afloat and keeping workers paid. Congress shouldn’t make it harder for them to do so. Rachel Greszler is a research fellow in economics at The Heritage Foundation.

 We now know that Vice President Joe Biden and dozens of other Obama administration officials requested the unmasking of former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn’s private phone conversation without a constitutional warrant. Biden’s abuse of government power to go after a political rival is more than a little disturbing. This scandal reaching, perhaps, all the way to President Obama himself, is why innocent Americans wonder just how much their own government has been spying on them and vacuuming up their most sensitive information. Despite Edward Snowden’s devastating revelations, Congress has largely abdicated its responsibility to protect the Bill of Rights, and small tweaks to the system have not stopped abuse or waste of vital resources that could have been spent actually protecting our country. Yet Congress has patted itself on the back even as it steamrolled meaningful debate on one of the biggest issues of our time. RAND PAUL: FLYNN UNMASKING WAS 'DEVASTATING ABUSE OF POWER' BY BIDEN, OBAMA OFFICIALS This week, the U.S. Senate will take up the U.S. House-passed government surveillance bill extending certain expired Patriot Act powers. Once again, the bill plays with reform but falls far short of bringing real change to a system that currently relies on secret courts and the hope that the government will police itself. So I will offer an amendment to protect all Americans and help rebuild the trust our institutions have shattered over the years. My amendment would empower the government to conduct necessary surveillance on non-Americans and our enemies, but it would force federal officials who want to surveil an American to get a warrant from a regular court as established by our Constitution instead of the secretive Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court (FISC). It would also protect Americans’ privacy and restore due process by preventing the government from introducing into evidence any information it gathered from surveilling an American without a warrant. Americans would, however, be allowed to use evidence collected this way to defend themselves. My amendment would also make it illegal to use this secret, foreign court to investigate any political speech or campaign. The alarm about abuses of our system has only grown as we have learned about the Obama administration’s spying on Donald Trump as he ran for office and then transitioned into the presidency. They used the FISA court, which meets in secret and was intended for use against foreigners. Late last year, Department of Justice Inspector General Michael Horowitz made headlines when his office released a report that, among other findings, “identified at least 17 significant errors or omissions” in four applications the FBI made to the FISC to spy on former Trump campaign adviser Carter Page. The system as constructed lends itself too easily to mistakes and abuse that we discover far too late, and this is too important an issue for only cosmetic changes. Not long after, we learned the Department of Justice stated that in two of the applications, “‘if not earlier, there was insufficient predication to establish probable cause to believe that Page was acting as an agent of a foreign power.’” And, for some reason, the fact that a sitting president spied on an incoming national security adviser’s conversation continues to be regarded as just a footnote in the controversy over the FBI’s egregious treatment of Lt. Gen. Flynn. As set up right now, and as would still be the case under the House bill, our secretive system leaves the door wide open for abuses that are only revealed long after the damage is done. The Carter Page story led DOJ IG Horowitz to dig further, and he uncovered more shocking information concerning 29 other applications “relating to U.S. persons,” with the IG finding “apparent errors or inadequately supported facts in all of the 25 applications we reviewed.” The FBI couldn’t find what is supposed to be required documents for the other four applications that back up the claims made, with it not even sure those documents “ever existed” for three of those four, according to the IG. Do not misunderstand me here. Our government is filled with lots of good, hardworking men and women, and the FBI is making efforts to help prevent future problems. But the system as constructed lends itself too easily to mistakes and abuse that we discover far too late, and this is too important an issue for only cosmetic changes. We need substantive reform and not window dressing. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER I don’t believe tinkering around the edges with process reforms can make FISA constitutional.  FISA employs a less-than-constitutional standard. Instead of the Fourth Amendment’s requirement of probable cause that a crime was committed or being committed, the FISA standard allows for investigations if there is probable cause that an individual is working for a foreign government. I believe the only way to fix FISA is to exempt Americans from this court that was intended to investigate foreigners. I, for one, am tired of hearing after-the-fact outrage, only to see it vanish when it comes time to vote. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Patriot Act debate cuts right to the heart of what we stand for as a nation. It forces us to ask whether we will stick by our core, founding principles when they are challenged or fold in the face of those threats and change who we are supposed to be. The most patriotic action we could take this week would be to reaffirm the Bill of Rights, rescue due process from bureaucratic overreach and secrecy, and make it clear we can keep our people safe without treating innocent Americans like criminals. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SEN. RAND PAUL

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Ventilators are life-saving tools in the fight against COVID-19. They are durable medical devices intended to control or assist a critically ill patient’s breathing by mechanically delivering them a predetermined percentage of oxygen. Ventilators can be reused but hospitals need a sufficient supply to treat critically ill patients while still allowing enough time for each ventilator to be refurbished between patients. At the early stages of the United States' response to the pandemic, many models predicted that the supply of ventilators in hospitals across the country would not meet the demand of critically ill patients. According to the models, a shortage of ventilators in America threatened to be a public health catastrophe. SEN. THOM TILLIS: CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA — US RECOVERY INCLUDES HOLDING BEIJING ACCOUNTABLE To address this threat, President Donald J. Trump took decisive action to meet the anticipated demand for ventilators and, in the process, organized an industrial ramp-up the likes of which we have not seen since World War II. Using the Defense Production Act, the president encouraged private sector companies such as General Motors Co. and Ford Motor Co. to get into the ventilator production business, and existing ventilator companies like General Electric Co., Vyaire Medical Inc., ZOLL Medical Corp., and others to expand their production. Leading this effort for the president were Jared Kushner, senior adviser, Adam Boehler, CEO of the U.S. International Development Finance Corp. and Peter Navarro, director of the White House Office of Trade and Manufacturing Policy. Despite irresponsible reporting to the contrary, the mechanisms put in the place by the administration to create and deliver ventilators were so successful that every single patient who needed a ventilator got one. In fact, under their guidance, the United States is now on track to produce over 100,000 high-quality ventilators by the end of July 2020. That is by far the highest production of ventilators in history. Thanks to President Trump, we are strongly positioned to continue leading the world through this coronavirus pandemic and can now provide assistance to allies through an historic coordination of international efforts. This swift ramp-up in production of life-saving ventilators was achieved through President Trump’s direct personal involvement and the willingness of American companies to shift their production lines dramatically and rapidly from industrial and automotive products to ventilators. The president’s bold and decisive actions saved lives and safeguarded the health and well-being of the American people. He ensured our citizens have what they need first, and created new avenues for American ingenuity to thrive so that our supply of ventilators now exceeds demand. CLICK HERE FOR FULL CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE Thanks to President Trump, we are strongly positioned to continue leading the world through this coronavirus pandemic and can now provide assistance to allies through an historic coordination of international efforts. The president has reached out to our partners and allies around the world to provide them with these life-saving machines. I have been with President Trump as he has spoken with leaders from countries on six continents, including Brazil, Bolivia, Ecuador, France, India, Indonesia, Italy, Kenya, Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, South Africa, South Korea, Spain, the United Kingdom and many more. The president has ensured that these nations can purchase high-quality America-made ventilators to meet their medical needs. And, for countries that cannot afford ventilators, the Department of State and the U.S. Agency for International Development are providing foreign assistance to fund their purchase. All told, President Trump has committed to providing over 14,000 high-quality ventilators for purchase and donation to nations around the globe. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Like the early China travel restrictions in January, President Trump’s quick action on ventilators is saving lives at home and around the world. Ramping up our production of ventilators represents one of the most powerful weapons in America’s public health arsenal. We just celebrated VE Day. In World War II, America was the Arsenal of Democracy, providing war materiel to our Allies that ultimately led to victory over tyranny. Now, under President Trump, we have become the Arsenal of Health in responding to this global pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Ari Fleischer weighs in on reports that Chinese hackers are trying to steal coronavirus data from the U.S. to bolster China Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The responsibility for the spread of COVID-19, including the hundreds of thousands of lives lost and the severe and sudden global economic recession, lies squarely on the shoulders of the Chinese Communist Party. One study found that had the Chinese government told the truth and acted only three weeks earlier, cases of the virus could have been cut by 95 percent. Instead, the Chinese government lied to its own people and the rest of the world. They knew in late 2019 that a new coronavirus was spreading across Wuhan. REP. WILL HURD: CORONAVIRUS RECOVERY — WESTERN NATIONS CAN LIMIT FURTHER DAMAGE FROM CHINA. HERE'S HOW Instead of warning the world, they arrested and silenced the doctor who first warned about the virus, ordered test samples destroyed, curtailed efforts to develop preventative measures, and repeatedly downplayed the potential for human to human transmission, despite having clear evidence to the contrary. By late January, as COVID-19 spread across China, the Chinese government tried to reassure the world they had everything under control while secretly hoarding the world’s supply of respirators and medical masks. As COVID-19 became a global pandemic, the Chinese government waged a propaganda campaign casting themselves as the saviors, while spreading wild conspiracy theories claiming the U.S. military was responsible for the virus. Chinese hackers are now attempting to steal America’s vaccine research, actions that threaten our efforts to develop a vaccine. These are the malicious actions of a totalitarian regime that directly threaten the safety and security of the United States and the rest of the free world. The time to play nice with China is over. America’s leaders need to stand up and hold the Chinese government fully accountable for their misdeeds. If we fail to hold China accountable there will be more lies, more malign activities against America, and another pandemic. Tough actions need to be taken immediately to send a clear message to the Chinese Communist Party that the United States will not tolerate its behavior any longer. We must take strong, punitive measures in response to the COVID-19 cover-up and also take strategic, long-term action to contain China’s aggression. We must take strong, punitive measures in response to the COVID-19 cover-up and also take strategic, long-term action to contain China’s aggression. This week, I unveiled a plan to hold China accountable and protect America’s economy, public health and national security. The first step is to immediately initiate investigations and sanction the Chinese government. We need to investigate the origins of the virus and the culpability of the Chinese government in covering their tracks and denying the world vital information that could have contained it. We need to put everything on the table when it comes to sanctions. Congress should start by exploring ways to change sovereign immunity laws to enable victims to directly sue the Chinese government for damages. Congress also needs to pass a new law that allows the United States to sanction Chinese officials who played a role in the cover-up. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER One problem we face is that America’s leaders approach strategic planning one quarter at a time; China’s leaders plan by the decade. That needs to change. It starts by being clear on China’s ultimate ambitions: weaken the United States and overtake our position as the world’s top economic and military superpower. My plan includes solutions to break our economic dependency on China. That starts with providing incentives to companies to move their manufacturing back home to America. We also need to end our supply chain reliance on China. We need investigations to unveil the extent to which our reliance on China for pharmaceutical and personal protective equipment production threatens our public health, and how our reliance on materials for our military threatens our national security. We also need a Cold War-style approach when it comes to our military and foreign policy. We must have a robust military presence in Asia and encourage our allies in the region, including Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and India to purchase offensive and defensive equipment from the United States. As China wages a concerted global propaganda campaign, America cannot sit idly by as China uses predatory lending tactics to bring developing countries into its orbit, raising a new iron curtain across the world.  COVID-19 is a tragic wake-up call for America. The Chinese government’s misconduct has resulted in death across the world and misery for tens of millions of Americans who have lost their jobs. The Chinese Communist Party doesn’t care. They think they can get away with their cover-ups and lies in the hopes of turning the world against America and becoming the world’s top superpower. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Americans will get through this pandemic, and we will continue to lead efforts to develop therapeutics and a vaccine to ultimately defeat COVID-19. We will also begin to safely reopen our country and get our economy back on track. However, any successful recovery plan must include tough but necessary actions that hold the Chinese government accountable. We cannot allow history to repeat itself. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SEN. THOM TILLIS

 Judge Emmet Sullivan issued a politically motivated order in the Michael Flynn case Tuesday, bizarrely inviting statements from third parties who want to comment on the government's motion to dismiss the case. This order is delaying the legally required and rationally obvious dismissal simply to stoke the political fires. All manner of commentary has already been written on why this decision is against the rule of law, but a more fundamental question should be asked: Is Judge Sullivan seriously suggesting that he might deny the government's motion to dismiss and order the government to prosecute? VON SPAKOVSKY & MALCOLM: FLYNN JUDGE DISAGREES WITH OWN RULINGS BY LETTING OUTSIDERS FIGHT DROPPING CHARGES Because he can't. He's the judge, not the prosecutor. Yet Sullivan went further and became a de facto prosecutor Wednesday, considering “whether the Court should issue an Order to Show Cause why Mr. Flynn should not be held in criminal contempt for perjury.” It’s a blatantly malicious move by Sullivan to consider what criminal charge might be brought by the court itself, after delaying granting an unopposed motion from the actual prosecutors to dismiss the case. Separation of powers requires that the executive branch is exclusively vested with power of law enforcement, while the judicial branch is constitutionally independent and impartial as to the dispute between the government and the defendant. So, when the government decides they aren’t going to prosecute, the judicial branch has no power to force them to, or even to suggest that they should. Prosecutorial discretion allows the government to decline to prosecute and the law sometimes requires the government not to or to dismiss pending charges. It’s never the judge’s province to comment on or advise the prosecutor what charges to bring or think of new, creative ways to try to punish the defendant. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So, what could these Watergate prosecutors and "friends of the court" provide in their amicus filing that would help inform Judge Sullivan on the government's motion to dismiss? Literally nothing. It's a clear scam to get political statements into the record in Flynn's case so that after it's dismissed, Democrats can run with their fake narrative smearing the Department of Justice and Attorney General Bill Barr for doing their job within the executive branch’s province of enforcing justice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As more of the dark truth of the setup and intentional targeting by the Obama administration and FBI of their political opponent begins to come out, the Democrats and their media cohort will push harder to spin the narrative and say anything to deflect from facing what actually happened. Since Judge Sullivan appears to be so invested in trying to force the government to prosecute Flynn, he should step off the bench and apply for a job as an assistant U.S. attorney. He clearly wants to be a prosecutor, not a judge, so he's in the wrong branch of government. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JENNA ELLIS

This was a domestic spying operation hidden under the pretext of national security. On Jan. 12, 2017, The Washington Post ran a story about one of its opinion columnists revealing that the incoming national security adviser, Gen. Michael Flynn, had spoken repeatedly by phone to the Russian ambassador to the United States, Sergey Kislyak. TRUMP WEIGHS IN ON UNMASKING: 'GREATEST POLITICAL CRIME IN THE HISTORY OF OUR COUNTRY' Now, by itself, that wouldn't be much of a story. It is common for a president-elect and his staff to speak to their foreign counterparts before Inauguration Day. It's part of the transition to a new administration. But The Washington Post suggested that what Michael Flynn had done could be criminal. Those phone calls, the columnist posited, might be a violation of the Logan Act, a Revolutionary War-era statute that is so obscure, not a single person has ever been convicted under it during the entire span of American history. So, it's a safe bet that nobody reading the paper that morning had ever heard of the Logan Act, much less understood what it actually says. But it didn't matter. The Washington Post story spurred an instant scandal. Within hours, reporters were yelling about Flynn and Kislyak in the White House briefing room and that was the beginning of it all. Three full years of hysterics over Russia followed from there. Lost in the noise and the gesticulating were several vital questions. How exactly did The Washington Post know who Mike Flynn was talking to on the phone? Where did the details of his conversation come from? And the Logan Act of 1799 -- who came up with that? These are not small questions. Government agencies clearly had been spying on the incoming national security adviser. That is unethical and it's scary. It's a terrible precedent. Leaking details of those calls for political effect is a straightforward felony. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER During the Obama administration, several government employees went to prison for leaking. We've interviewed one of them on the show repeatedly. In the case of Mike Flynn, by contrast, no one has ever been punished. And we still don't know who did it, but we are getting warmer. Earlier Wednesday, Senators Ron Johnson and Chuck Grassley released a list they received from Ric Grenell, the acting Director of National Intelligence. On Grenell's list is the name of every Obama administration official who requested that Mike Flynn's name be "unmasked" in secret documents. There are an awful lot of names here -- 39 names. Former Vice President Joe Biden is on the list. His name is last on the roster. This is clearly a big story, but what exactly does it add up to? It's complex. So, here is some context for it. Every day, American intelligence agencies -- primarily the NSA, but also others -- collect massive amounts of data from around the world, emails and phone calls from foreign nationals they are interested in monitoring. This goes on and always has. But often, the names of American citizens appear in these transcripts. By federal law, these names must be redacted from intel reports. They are Americans, they haven't done anything wrong. Unless they receive special warrants from a FISA court, the intel agencies are not allowed to spy on American citizens. It is illegal for the NSA or CIA. to spy on you if they don't have a FISA warrant. This was a domestic spying operation. That's what it was. It was hidden under the pretext of national security. So, if the administration officials really want to know the names of Americans caught up in these reports, they have to fill out a form and officially request what's called an "unmasking." As former National Security Adviser Susan Rice once explained, unmasking someone's name is something you only do when it's critical to our national security. Susan Rice, former U.S. National Security Adviser: We can't be passive consumers of this information and not -- and do our jobs effectively to protect the American people. Imagine if we saw something of great significance that involved Russia or China or anybody else interfering in our political process and we needed to understand the significance of that. For us not to try to understand it would be dereliction of duty. So as Rice just told you, it's their duty to unmask the names of American citizens caught up in the surveillance when it protects the American people. Now, news reports on Wednesday, needless to say, are suggesting that the unmasking names of American citizens and intel reports is no big deal -- it happens all the time. And in fact, now, it does happen quite frequently. It certainly did under Obama. But it didn't always, and by the way, if it was no big deal, the names wouldn't be redacted in the first place by law. We spoke today to a former Intel officer who said that in his years working at CIA headquarters, he never one time requested an unmasking. So the question is, why did 39 separate Obama officials ask to unmask Mike Flynn's name? Now, we can't know for certain until we see the forms they filled out. Every unmasking request requires a reason for the unmasking. You can't just get it; you have to explain why you want it. When we see the forms they filled out, we will know the official pretext they gave. But for now, we know this: Every unmasking request is prompted by a separate intel report. That means there were an awful lot of intelligence reports being generated with Mike Flynn's name in them in the closing weeks of the Obama administration. Why? Well, it's obvious what was going on. The Obama administration wanted to monitor Mike Flynn's private communications. Legally, they could not do that. They didn't have a FISA warrant, so instead, they used the NSA to do it for them. The NSA forwarded all surveillance reports that included Mike Flynn's name to the White House, where Mike Flynn's name was promptly unmasked. It is clear that Michael Flynn did not commit a crime. Whatever you think of him, in this country you are punished for crimes, and he clearly didn't commit one. Obama administration officials, by contrast, did commit crimes -- felonies This was a domestic spying operation. That's what it was. It was hidden under the pretext of national security. Once you see the details, that's very clear. Plenty of the 39 people who saw Flynn's name, who unmasked it, had no reason to know his name. They were not national security officials. They were political hacks, and that's not an exaggeration. On December 6, for example, the American ambassador to Italy, a guy called John Phillips, asked to unmask Mike Flynn's name. Phillips is not an intelligence officer. He is an Obama campaign donor who is married to a former Obama aide. Why was Phillips party to spying on an American citizen? What could possibly be the justification for that? We don't know. We can only guess. The ambassadors to Russia and Turkey, by the way, also saw Mike Flynn's name. Some in the press tonight are defending this, but they shouldn't be defending it. It is totally wrong. Samantha Power was the U.N. ambassador, but in real life, she was a political activist -- for decades. She requested to see Flynn's name, too. So did Denis McDonough, the White House chief of staff, and a seasoned political operative. McDonough confirmed Mike Flynn's identity on the very same that his boss, Barack Obama, discussed Mike Flynn in the Oval Office with FBI Director Jim Comey and Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates. Maybe that's why Barack  Obama's name is not on the unmasking list. He had his assistant do it for him. Imagine if Donald Trump did this to his political enemies. That would be a legitimate reason to impeach him. We would not defend that on this show, that's for sure. It would be indefensible, and so is this. And then there's Joe Biden. Biden asked to uncover Mike Flynn's name on January 12. That was just a week -- eight days -- before Donald Trump took office. What official justification could Biden possibly have had for doing that? He must have given some reason. He had to. Again, the official form requires it. Let's see that form. Until we do, we can only speculate about Biden's motives. It's hard to see a legitimate reason for doing this, especially so close to the end of the administration. Eight days. Biden, for his part, is now claiming that he knew nothing at all about the Mike Flynn investigation. Watch this interview from ABC on Tuesday. Keep in mind, it took place before we received the unmasking list. Joe Biden, 2020 presidential candidate and former vice president: I know nothing about those moves to investigate Michael Flynn, number one. Number two, this is all about diversion. George Stephanopoulos, ABC News host: You say you didn't know anything about it, but you reported to being at a Jan. 5, 2017 meeting where you and the president were briefed on the FBI's plan to question Michael Flynn over those conversations he had with the Russian Ambassador Kislyak. Biden: No, I thought you asked me whether or not I had anything to do with him being prosecuted. Stephanopoulos: Okay. Biden: I'm sorry. I was aware that there was -- that they had asked for an investigation. But that's all that I know about it, and I don't think anything else. "That's all I know." But you asked to unmask his name from classified surveillance documents. Now, if it was anyone but Joe Biden saying that, you'd have to conclude that's an obvious lie. On the face of it, we can prove it is. But because it is Joe Biden, it is possible he honestly doesn't remember that or what he had for breakfast. But the rest of us should remember it. As the facts come in, it is clear that Michael Flynn did not commit a crime. Whatever you think of him, in this country you are punished for crimes, and he clearly didn't commit one. Obama administration officials, by contrast, did commit crimes -- felonies. They spied on Mike Flynn. They passed his name around the White House like a joint at a party. They leaked his private conversations to Jeff Bezos's newspaper in order to destroy his life, and they succeeded. These amoral creeps destroyed Michael Flynn's life and reputation and family. They should be punished for that and by the way, they may be punished. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP According to a knowledgeable source, a portion of the relevant information is missing from this latest document release. Now, that could be a sign that some evidence is now in the hands of a grand jury impaneled to consider charges against whoever did this. We don't know that's true. We certainly hope it is. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 13, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Former Whitewater independent counsel Ken Starr shares his breakdown of the DOJ handling of the Michael Flynn investigation. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  This Sunday we will learn if the venerable, oldest-of-its-kind Sunday interview show “Meet the Press” needs to change its name. Last Sunday, host Chuck Todd’s hatred of President Trump went over the top and evolved from mere snarky comments, biased questions and stacked information into an outright lie about the attorney general of the United States. No one who has watched conservatives like Sen. Ron Johnson slug it out with Todd could be surprised at the level of hostility the NBC moderator feels toward conservatives and Republicans in general – and President Trump in particular. But hostility turned to clear dishonesty when Todd distorted a recording of Attorney General William Barr from earlier that week. TIM GRAHAM: COULD NBC'S CHUCK TODD BE ANY LAZIER? 'MEET THE PRESS' HOST RUSSERT MUST BE ROLLING IN HIS GRAVE Todd played an edited excerpt of Barr during a CBS interview. Barr was being questioned over his decision to drop the case against former National Security Adviser Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn – who the Obama administration’s FBI had illegally targeted for a politically motivated prosecution. According to the AP: “When Barr was asked by reporter Catherine Herridge what history would say about the decision, Barr replied that ‘history is written by the winner. So it largely depends on who’s writing the history.’ “Todd said that he was struck by the cynicism of that answer. “'It’s a correct answer,’ Todd said. ‘But he’s the attorney general. He didn’t make the case that he was upholding the rule of law. He was almost admitting that, yeah, this is a political job.’ “However, 'Meet the Press' didn’t include Barr’s full answer to Herridge’s question. He went on to say: 'But I think a fair history would say that it was a good decision because it upheld the rule of law. It upheld the standards of the Department of Justice, and it undid what was an injustice.’ “In other words, Barr actually said what Todd accused him of not saying.” Justice Department spokesperson Kerri Kupec promptly tweeted a complaint, saying: “Very disappointed by the deceptive editing/commentary by @ChuckTodd on @MeetThePress on AG Barr’s CBS interview. “Compare the two transcripts … Not only did the AG make the case in the VERY answer Chuck says he didn’t, he also did so multiple times throughout the interview.” As one of my colleagues recently said to me, Todd is simply a Democratic operative on NBC’s payroll in the same way George Stephanopoulos is a Democratic operative on ABC’s payroll.  President Trump also responded to Todd’s distortion of what Attorney General Barr said by tweeting: “Sleepy Eyes Chuck Todd should be FIRED by “Comcast” (NBC) for this fraud. He knew exactly what he was doing. Public Airwaves = Fake News!” "Meet the Press" responded to the DOJ on Twitter saying, “You’re correct. Earlier today, we inadvertently and inaccurately cut short a video clip of an interview with AG Barr before offering commentary and analysis. The remaining clip included important remarks from the attorney general that we missed, and we regret the error.” Todd also apologized on air Tuesday, claiming he didn’t edit the recording. It’s nice that the show admitted fault – but this wasn’t a simple error. Todd saw an opportunity to smear the attorney general, and he eagerly did so – without exercising the most basic journalistic practice of reading the full transcript. Further, as Steve Krakauer of Fourth Watch noted, there is a huge audience difference between smearing the attorney general on network television and then apologizing on Twitter: “It has 3,300+ RTs, but likely has not been seen by even a small portion of the accounts 630,000+ followers, because a reply is only seen by mutual followers of both accounts. 'Meet The Press' has millions of viewers on NBC every Sunday, and another several hundred thousand through multiple re-airs on MSNBC. This mistake will not appear corrected for those viewers.” This is a clear crossroads for Chuck Todd, NBC and “Meet the Press.” “Meet the Press” is a remarkable institution of great prestige going back to its creation by Martha Rountree on Nov. 6, 1947. During the Tim Russert era, it was always fun to do the show. Russert off camera was a great host. When my in-laws visited, he went out of his way to make them feel at home even if they weren’t Buffalo Bills fans. It was often tough being grilled by Russert, but I never thought he cheated. What Chuck Todd did last Sunday was cheating. It’s apparent that, unlike his predecessor, Todd never quit being a Democratic operative when he decided to also become a pseudo-journalist. Russert had also previously worked in politics, but he made real effort to leave his past work behind him and take fairness, objectivity and the truth seriously. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Todd never did. As one of my colleagues recently said to me, Todd is simply a Democratic operative on NBC’s payroll in the same way George Stephanopoulos is a Democratic operative on ABC’s payroll. Todd has an opportunity next Sunday to apologize again to the American people for lying to them – and to Attorney General Barr for defaming him. "Meet the Press" has a considerably larger audience than Twitter or a weekday program. It will be a real test of NBC, “Meet the Press” and Todd to see if they value honesty and want to regain some of the country’s trust. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If they don't, they will reinforce the belief that the news media have degenerated into creators of fake news that cannot be trusted. It will be an important Sunday. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Earlier this week we celebrated Mother’s Day. As someone who has fought for the rights of women, especially women of color, throughout my life, we have rejoiced with family and friends over how far women, including mothers, have come in our professional and personal lives, and also agonized over how far we still have to go. This year, the April jobs report, released just two days before Mother’s Day by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bureau of Labor Statistics, paints a devastating picture for women in the workforce. And it highlights how the coronavirus has disproportionally impacted us in the labor market. So, my celebration of the joys of Mother’s Day has been tempered by the pandemic reminding me of the tremendous challenges that women are facing at work and at home. But never one to keep my head down, I am going to use this jobs report to urge our country’s leaders to fight these challenges head-on, including with federal and state legislation, that centers on the most vulnerable in the U.S. economy, especially my fellow women. REP. WILL HURD: CORONAVIRUS RECOVERY — WESTERN NATIONS CAN LIMIT FURTHER DAMAGE FROM CHINA. HERE'S HOW April’s report is the first to fully capture the economic impact of the widespread closures that began in earnest across our country in March. What did we learn from this report about the pandemic’s impact on the U.S. labor market, and on women in particular? According to the report, 20.5 million people lost their jobs in April. More than half of those job losses were suffered by women, despite the fact that women make up less than half of U.S. workers.  The unemployment rate rocketed from 4.4 percent in March to 14.7 percent in April, the highest rate since the Great Depression. Notably, the unemployment rates for white, black and Latina women is even higher, at 15 percent, 16.4 percent and 20.2 percent, respectively. This report is crushing for women in so many ways. Industries traditionally dominated by women lead the way in job losses and lost hours. Most striking are losses in the leisure and hospitality sectors, which combined lost 7.6 million jobs. Other sectors that employ disproportionate numbers of women also saw huge job losses. For example, education and health services lost 2.5 million jobs, and retail lost 2.1 million jobs. What do these numbers tell us? Well, first and foremost, they’re not just numbers. These are women, some of whom are mothers and caregivers, who have lost their jobs, their health care, and their ability to support themselves and, oftentimes, their families. And let’s not forget that this pandemic and unemployment crisis is happening in tandem with longstanding inequities in American society. Inequities fueled by sexism, racism and other institutional barriers. Inequities that have harmed women, and particularly women of color, for  centuries. These inequities include gender and racial wealth gaps too. We “celebrated” – I use these quotes to emphasize the extraordinary irony – Equal Pay Day in the U.S. on March 31 this year. What this day means is that the average woman in the U.S. has had to work three additional months into 2020 in order to earn as much as the average man in the U.S. earned in 2019. Our leaders have a responsibility to ensure a more equitable and safe future for women in the workplace. But that’s not even the full story of the vast chasm between men and women in the workforce in our country.  Equal Pay Day for black women will be on Aug, 13.  For Latina women on Oct. 29. Oct. 29! It’s hard to even fathom the meaning of that date. But let’s try: The average Latina woman in the U.S. has to work for almost two years to earn what the average man in the U.S. earns in one year. Are you kidding me? This is 2020, for heaven’s sake! These are all horrifying facts, and our leaders should be embarrassed at what they tell us. What they tell us, in real life terms, is that at the same time that women in the U.S. are losing their jobs at higher numbers than men, women have lower earnings and fewer savings to fall back on during the economic downturn caused by the coronavirus pandemic. And what about women who are thankfully still employed? Sadly, they face higher risks than men simply by going to work. How can that be, you may ask? Because women, heroically, make up more than half of essential workers on the front lines fighting the pandemic. As a result, these women who are leading our country’s unprecedented fight against an unseen threat have an increased risk of contracting COVID-19 and spreading it to others, including their families. Many of these working women, heroically again, shoulder additional caregiving and child care responsibilities at home. And yet they lack adequate access to child care, health care, paid leave and other structural supports. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Some of these women, tragically, are also facing an increased risk of domestic violence because of stay-at-home and other pandemic-related orders. This is a critical topic that I promise to address on another day. But I commend Sens. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, and Bob Casey, D-Pa., for leading a bipartisan group of 38 U.S. senators in requesting that any future legislation to address COVID-19 includes support for victims and survivors of domestic violence and sexual assault. So many of the grave challenges facing women in the workforce and in their homes during the coronavirus are interrelated. And all of these challenges, highlighted in April’s jobs report, are crying out for leadership, both Republican and Democratic, in our federal, state and local governments. A crisis of this magnitude demands comprehensive solutions from our leaders in Washington and beyond. Solutions that focus on the most vulnerable in our economy, especially women. Solutions including pay transparency, flexible work hours and other policies to support women workers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Our leaders have a responsibility to ensure a more equitable and safe future for women in the workplace. We must chart this path now, during the coronavirus. And it must be a path that leads to an American economy and society that are more resilient and just for everyone. I pray that, when we celebrate Mother’s Day in 2021, our rejoicing over America’s response to this pandemic, including in support of women in our workforce, overcomes our agonizing about the many obstacles we still face. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DONNA BRAZILE

Senator Mike Braun says Nancy Pelosi's attempt to push a $3T stimulus coronavirus package is completely out of line Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  It’s a good seven months until Christmas, but House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is already playing Santa Claus with taxpayer money. The California Democrat is proposing a $3 trillion bill, titled the Health and Economic Recovery Omnibus Emergency Solutions Act, or HEROES Act, that is packed full of gifts to Democrats. And incredibly, this is the pared-down version. The New York Times reports that the original Democratic bill asked for $4 trillion. CHRIS EDWARDS: DEM PLAN FOR $3 TRILLION IN NEW CORONAVIRUS AID IS TOO COSTLY – STATES MUST CUT SPENDING If you had any doubts that Democrats are politicizing the coronavirus crisis, Pelosi’s grab-bag of left-wing goodies should clear your mind. First, the 1,800-page bill gives people all kinds of reasons to stay home, dampening any momentum that might stem from governors reopening their states. For example, the proposal extends through end of the year the inflated unemployment benefits of an extra $600 a week created by the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act. Those benefits under the $2.2 trillion CARES Act had been set to end in July. Many business owners have reported difficulty rehiring staff laid off in the early weeks of the shutdown. The $600 weekly supplement to normal unemployment pay approved by Congress in April has raised income for low-paid labor above their normal wages and caused many to resist going back to work.  In response, employers may have to hike pay. Nothing could kill off a recovery faster than making it more expensive to hire workers. That’s what the Affordable Care Act did in 2010, as it required businesses to pay expensive new health care benefits. ObamaCare slowed job creation and stifled the recovery from the Great Recession for years. Pelosi also includes another round of checks to be sent to individuals and families, and extends those payments to people “without Social Security numbers.” That’s code for people who are in the country illegally. This is Democrats’ appeal to Hispanics, a core voting group that earlier this year had begun trending towards President Trump. Doubling down, the bill insists there be no deportations of illegal immigrants in “essential businesses.” Those businesses are defined as including nearly every industry that might employ undocumented workers – restaurants, food processing, hotels, etc. Some might interpret that portion of the bill as a “stealth amnesty,” since if Democrats win in November they would almost surely extend the protections. Pelosi is thereby using the coronavirus pandemic to push through a long-time Democratic ambition, possibly creating a path to citizenship for the millions of people who have come to the country illegally. Such a blanket amnesty would significantly enhance Democrats’ future election prospects. Of course, Pelosi’s bill includes myriad other items that have nothing to do with the coronavirus pandemic and everything to do with politics. It includes, for instance, a $25 billion lifesaver for the Postal Service. Democrats are worried the Postal Service will go under, crushed by outsized pension obligations, throwing 600,000 union members (aka Democrat voters) out of work and possibly leading to the service being privatized. The problems facing the Postal Service are nothing new, but the pandemic has taken only a moderate toll on its revenues. As Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., recently noted in a letter to the Postmaster General: “Postal Service revenues were down just 5.9% from March 16 through April 19 and that revenue for April was close to the levels from last year.” Why then the increased aid? The Los Angeles Times answers the question, reporting recently that “The Democratic Party and large progressive groups are finding the Postal Service cause to be among their most effective fundraising messages, and 100 major progressive groups just began a campaign framing its potential collapse as a civil rights issue because of its long-standing role as an entry point into the middle class for African Americans.” Now you know. The HEROES Act also pushes states to allow voting by mail, but Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., tweets that Democrats “would *prohibit* states from requiring photo ID, notarization, or witness signatures to send or receive mail-in ballots.” Cotton notes: “This is the perfect storm for voter fraud.” Another red herring is the call in Democratic proposal for restoring the SALT (state and local tax) deduction that was eliminated by the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act. That measure was a blow mainly to blue states like New York and California with high state and local taxes. CLICK HERE FOR FULL CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE Not only did wealthy Democratic donors in those states squawk over having to cough up increased taxes, it also inspired an exodus of well-heeled residents to lower-tax states. New York, for example, has led the country in population decline, a loss that poses a real threat to the state’s long-term prospects. Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo has explained that New Yorkers are moving to Florida for better weather. Seriously. We know better. Pelosi’s bill also calls for the release of all federal prison inmates who suffer from diabetes, asthma or who are over the age of 50, unless law enforcement officials can determine such individuals are a threat to a specific person. Not a threat to society, mind you, but to a “specific person.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER This is another offering to minorities; 31.5 percent of the federal prison population is Hispanic and 37.8 percent are black. Grinches on the Republican side of the aisle have called Pelosi’s goodie-packed bill “dead on arrival” and no one expects it to pass. But come November, Pelosi and her colleagues will doubtless remind voters of all they tried to give them, and blame the GOP for stuffing coal in their stockings instead. Republicans will argue that, as we pile up trillions of dollars in more debt, getting the economy working again is the only sane way forward. They will be right. The damage being done by the ongoing lockdown is enormous and includes medical needs unmet, rising suicides and drug abuse, as well as a real hit to our kids’ education. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Nothing should stand in the way of rebuilding our economy, and certainly not Pelosi’s ambitions. Voters should take the HEROES bill seriously, as a reminder of what’s at stake should Democrats win the White House in November. The $3 trillion in the legislation could turn out to be just the down payment on “transforming” our economy, as the Pelosi crowd is so eager to do. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LIZ PEEK

Trump reacts to the release of names of Obama administration officials that purportedly requested to 'unmask' the identity of former national security adviser Michael Flynn. Former Vice President Joe Biden appeared on “Good Morning America” on ABC-TV this week and anchor George Stephanopoulos asked him a simple question: “What did you know about those moves to investigate Michael Flynn and was there anything improper done?” “I know nothing about those moves to investigate Michael Flynn,” Biden said before launching into a stumbling diatribe about how questions about the Obama administration’s targeting of Flynn – President Trump’s first national security adviser – are just a “diversion.” But Stephanopoulos – a former top aide to President Bill Clinton, with a background in Democratic politics – didn’t let Biden slip away. HANNITY WARNS BIDEN 'MIGHT WANT TO START THINKING ABOUT GETTING HIS STORY STRAIGHT' ON FLYNN UNMASKING “You say you don’t know anything about it, but you were reported to be in a January 5, 2017 meeting where you and [President Barack Obama] were briefed on the FBI’s plan to question Michael Flynn over those conversations he had with the Russian ambassador [Sergey] Kislyak,” Stephanopoulos said. Uh-oh. Biden did a sudden flip-flop worthy of an Olympic gymnast. “No, I thought you asked me whether I had anything to do with him being prosecuted. I’m sorry,” Biden said, retreating from his comment the moment before. “I was aware that there was … that they asked for an investigation, but that’s all I know about it, and I don’t think anything else.” That was pretty revealing. Biden was caught contradicting himself in a span of just 64 seconds. He probably assumed the biased anti-Trump media would just let this slip away and that this would be the last time he was asked about Flynn, a retired Army lieutenant general. What a difference 24 hours makes. Biden was caught contradicting himself in a span of just 64 seconds With the recent notification to Congress by acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell, we now know that 28 different people in the Obama administration – an astounding number – made so-called “unmasking requests” that would have revealed Flynn’s identity as a U.S. citizen under surveillance. And we still don’t know who all these officials are, because some names on the newly released list are blacked out. Flynn was recorded talking with Ambassador Kislyak during the period when Donald Trump was president-elect and Flynn was the incoming national security adviser, making contacts with foreign officials as part of his duties for the soon-to-be Trump administration. Such contacts are standard for incoming administrations.  At the end of the unmasking list, submitting a request for this identifying information on January 12, 2017 – just eight days before the end of his term – was Vice President Biden. Biden has been caught in the act. Let’s get something straight before we continue: unmasking requests are not common, everyday things that go on inside the federal government. These are serious asks of our intelligence agencies that directly plow through the Fourth Amendment rights of American citizens in the name of “national security.” But to cut through all the legalese and Washington-speak that swamp creatures use to confuse you, here’s the truth: Among those who asked to learn who Kislyak was recorded talking to were Director of National Intelligence James Clapper, FBI Director James Comey, CIA Director John Brennan and Ambassador to the U.N. Samantha Power, in addition to Biden. All these people asked to unmask Flynn and to listen to his phone conversation in the closing days of the Obama administration. This is remarkable and hardly common practice during presidential transitions. The entire Obama-Biden cabal was among those who made direct requests of the intelligence agencies to gather information about someone working on an opposing party’s campaign and transition team. But there’s something else about these requests that just seem eerie. We knew the Deep State existed and acted with impunity, but this was an egregious finding for anyone who believes in civil liberties. It’s altogether shocking that some of Obama’s top operatives all sought this information. Reading these names and learning the stunning facts surrounding this case reminds us that in our book – “Trump’s Enemies: How the Deep State is Undermining the Presidency” – President Trump told us in 2018 that this investigation would lead all the way up the chain of command into Obama’s Oval Office. It turns out he was right. President Trump knew then that the Deep State was actively trying to destroy him simply because he defeated Hillary Clinton. Why did the top tier of the Obama administration and many more political hacks need this information? Were they seeking to unmask Flynn and leak his identity to the media? If you’ve been paying attention, you’re probably thinking the same thing: maybe they weren’t. The picture might be a little bigger. Who else at the campaign was being spied on?  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER There were only two people in addition to Donald Trump who were part of the transition briefings from the FBI: Flynn, due to his role as former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency; and then-New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, in his role heading the presidential transition. Was the governor of New Jersey also under surveillance from the Obama administration? We aren’t lawyers, but one thing we do know is this: it is not OK to spy on Americans on domestic soil. It’s especially not OK to use your office as a means to listen to the phone conversations of operatives in an opposing political campaign. It’s even worse to ruin a man’s life over the past three years and make him bury himself in legal bills just to defend himself from being set up by political foes using illegal surveillance – yet this is what has happened to Flynn after devoting his career to defending our country in his 23 years of outstanding Army service. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Democrats and their friends in the media will try to shrug all this aside and say it’s all a misunderstanding. Well, there’s a simple way to prove your case, considering we know all the people who looked at this information. We’ll give you the first step. It’s a question for someone who, justifiably, is hiding in his basement in Delaware. We’ll give him another chance. “Mr. Biden, what did you know about the surveillance of Michael Flynn and when did you know it?” That is the question that U.S. Attorney John Durham will be asking in his investigation of the bogus Russia collusion investigation that turned out to be a hoax and a witch hunt. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY COREY LEWANDOWSKI Corey R. Lewandowski served as Donald Trump’s campaign manager for the 2016 presidential election. He is the author of two New York Times bestselling books.

Fox News senior judicial analyst Judge Andrew Napolitano reacts to the jailing of a Texas salon owner for reopening her business and a new memo on the extent of the Mueller probe. “When the people fear the government, there is tyranny. When the government fears the people, there is liberty.”
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826) To Thomas Jefferson, the fulcrum between the people and the government they have elected was fear. He argued succinctly that the government would only respect liberty if it feared losing power. Today, the relationship between people and government is power. Does the government have the power to tell us how to make personal choices, or do we have the power to tell the government to take a hike? Stated differently, does the government work for us or do we work for the government? REP. WILL HURD: CORONAVIRUS RECOVERY — WESTERN NATIONS CAN LIMIT FURTHER DAMAGE FROM CHINA. HERE'S HOW Jefferson’s answer to that question in 1801, the year he became president, was that the government worked for us. Today, unfortunately, this same question has two answers -- a functional one and a formal one. One would stumble answering this question if one looked only at how some state governors are treating the people for whom they claim to be working. One needs to look as well at the nature of government in a free society. Six months ago, no one could have imagined where we are in America today. Then, if anyone had suggested that the governors of all 50 states, in varying degrees of severity, would be using police to interfere with personal choices -- choices that we and our forbearers have all made without giving a second thought to the preferences of the government -- no one would have believed it. Think for a moment of how you would have reacted to any pre-COVID-19 idea that the police in America -- using not the force of opinion but the force of arms -- would prevent you from going out of your home, operating your business, jogging in a park, patronizing a restaurant or clothing store, buying a garden hose, going to Mass or church or temple or mosque or even joining a small public gathering of folks who want to protest these prohibitions. Where did these prohibitions come from? They have come from the ever-changing edicts of governors and mayors, who rely on the ever-changing evaluations of medical data from an ever-changing cast of scientific experts. They are the pronouncements of politicians who have forgotten that they are elected to enforce laws, not to write them, and to be the servants of the people, not their masters. Why do Americans accept this? We are a nation born in a bloody revolution against a king. The founders of America made the profound and indisputable choice of establishing a government dedicated to the cacophony of liberty over the illusion of safety. They embedded that choice in the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution. The former states, unequivocally, that no government is legitimate without the consent of the governed and that government’s principal duty is to secure our rights. The latter -- which expressly protects the right to make personal choices -- is the supreme law of the land, and thus all governmental acts are subordinate to it. We have fought wars against tyrants who wanted to tell us how to live. Today, we have elected our masters who are doing just that. Americans seem to accept the restrictions on our rights to speech, religion, travel and commercial activities simply because the origin of those restrictions is a popularly elected person. But even an elected government can be tyrannical. Should you bow to these restrictions merely because their authors were elected and they have persuaded your neighbors that the prohibitions are for their own good -- the Declaration and the Constitution be damned?  Stated differently, the governments that have interfered with our well-established rights to go about our daily lives as we see fit -- taking chances whenever we cross the street, drink a glass of water, bite into food, sit next to a stranger on a train or at a baseball game, or go through a green light in our vehicles -- have failed their first obligation, which is to safeguard our freedoms to take those chances. Instead of safeguarding our freedoms -- our natural rights to make personal choices -- the governors and their police enforcers have treated us as if we work for them. Does the government work for us or do we work for the government? Formally, it works for us. We elect officials because we trust their judgment. We authorize those officials to protect our rights, and we prohibit them from interfering with our personal choices. For a few weeks now, I thought the most extreme of these governors has been Gov. Phil Murphy of New Jersey, who publicly admitted that he didn’t think or care about the Bill of Rights, even though he took an oath to uphold it. Yet, Gov. Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania has surpassed him. When Wolf learned that some Pennsylvania county sheriffs would not use force to enforce his non-law edicts, and some public accommodations would open their doors -- consistent with public safety but in defiance of his non-law edicts -- he threatened to withhold state aid from all who live in those counties and to close the liquor stores that, by his non-law edicts, remain open. This is straight out of 1930s Germany -- punish the community because of the resistance of a few. In Wolf’s Pennsylvania, the people work for the government. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP My colleagues at The Wall Street Journal have unearthed the facts that more Americans die annually from heart disease, cancer, accidents and non-COVID-19 respiratory failure than die annually (annualized) from this coronavirus. Every death diminishes me. So does every suppression of liberty. So does every denial of the right to make choices and take risks. Does the government really work for us, or are we afraid of it? CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO

Former Deputy National Security Adviser KT McFarland tells ‘America’s Newsroom’ why she believed Michael Flynn was ‘framed.’ U.S. District Judge Emmet Sullivan’s order soliciting comments from outsiders opposed to the Justice Department’s motion to throw out charges of lying to FBI agents against former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn is highly unusual and contradicts earlier rulings by the judge. Sullivan’s order, issued Tuesday, solicits “friend of the court” (“amicus curiae” in legal parlance) briefs from third parties on the request by the Justice Department to halt the prosecution of Flynn. It is particularly odd because Sullivan previously resisted all third-party efforts to intervene in the case. The judge did this a total of 24 times, according to Flynn’s lawyer, Sidney Powell. Moreover, the new order directly conflicts with Sullivan’s Dec. 20, 2017 order, in which he said: “The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure do not provide for intervention by
third parties in criminal cases.” ANDREW MCCARTHY: JUDGE VS. FLYNN – BIZARRE ORDER INVITES AMICUS BRIEFS ON CASE'S DISMISSAL In a new development Wednesday, Sullivan appointed retired federal judge and former federal prosecutor John Gleeson as a “friend of the court” to present arguments against the Justice Department motion dismissing the charges against Flynn. The judge also asked Gleeson to address the issue of whether Sullivan should hold Flynn in criminal contempt for lying to the judge, presumably for admitting guilt to a crime Flynn now says he did not commit.  The Tuesday order came one day after a group of former Watergate special prosecutors notified the judge of their intent to seek permission to file an amicus brief. It is no secret that many former federal prosecutors are unhappy with the government’s motion to dismiss charges against Flynn. Some have called for Attorney General William Barr’s resignation and accused him of wanting to drop the charges only because President Trump has said the retired Army lieutenant general should not be prosecuted. It is highly irregular for a judge to invite former prosecutors to second-guess how current prosecutors are handling a case. And that’s putting it mildly. Flynn attorney Powell argues that there “is no place for third parties to meddle in the dispute, and certainly not to usurp the role of the government’s counsel.” Allowing someone else to “stand in the place of the government would be a violation of the separation of powers” since the authority to enforce the law is given solely to the executive branch, Powell said in her written argument submitted to Sullivan. As we have noted elsewhere, Powell has also raised serious questions about whether Flynn’s original counsel, who recommended that Flynn plead guilty, had a conflict of interest in the case. For those confused about what is going on, the reason the Justice Department cannot simply dismiss the case itself is because Flynn has already pleaded guilty. If Flynn had not entered that plea – and if his trial had not yet commenced – the Justice Department could have just dropped its prosecution without getting judicial approval. Powell has filed a motion asking that Flynn be allowed to withdraw his guilty plea due to prosecutorial misconduct – a failure by prosecutors to turn over evidence favorable to Flynn. The Justice Department now says the FBI had no valid legal basis for interviewing Flynn in the first place and any misstatements (or deliberate falsehoods) he may have made during that interview in 2017 were not “material” to a legitimate investigation. The Justice Department has requested the case be dismissed because the government has no “interest in penalizing a defendant for a crime that it is not satisfied occurred.” Judge Sullivan, however, has made it crystal clear that he believes there was an adequate factual predicate for the investigation and that Flynn is, in fact, guilty of making a materially false statement to the FBI – the crime with which he was originally charged. The statement at issue involved communications between Flynn and the Russian ambassador to the U.S. during the time when Trump was president-elect. It is highly irregular for a judge to invite former prosecutors to second-guess how current prosecutors are handling a case In a fiery court session in December 2018, Sullivan told Flynn that the former national security adviser had sold out his country and “undermined” everything the American flag stands for, even suggesting that Flynn could be charged with treason. So what standard is Judge Sullivan supposed to apply in deciding whether to grant the government’s motion to dismiss the charges against Flynn?  Under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 48(a), the government may dismiss an indictment, information or complaint “with leave of the court.” In Rinaldi v. United States (1977), the Supreme Court reversed a trial judge’s decision to deny a Rule 48(a) motion based on his view that the prosecutor had acted in bad faith. The “salient issue,” the court ruled, is not whether the original charging decision was made in bad faith, but whether the government’s motion to dismiss the case is “similarly tainted with impropriety.” The high court stressed in the Rinaldi case that the “principal object” of the “leave of court” requirement is to protect defendants against harassment by prosecutors. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, which issues rulings that are binding on Judge Sullivan, has taken an expansive view of the Rinaldi case. In U.S. v. Fokker Services (2016), it held that, while Rule 48(a) appears to give a trial court discretion as to whether to grant the motion, that discretion is limited. Importantly, the appeals court said the rule is designed to protect defendants against harassment from the government routinely dismissing and then refiling charges. It does not confer on courts “any substantial role” in determining whether charges should be dismissed. And here’s a crucial point the appeals court made: It explicitly rejected the view that a trial judge should be permitted to deny a dismissal motion based on his or her personal belief that a defendant should stand trial or that any remaining charges would fail to address the gravity of the defendant’s conduct. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is clear, though, that Sullivan is upset. He may demand that the government provide a more detailed explanation as to why it wants to dismiss the charges against Flynn. But after raking the government over the coals, he will likely, based on these precedents, end up granting the government’s motion to dismiss charges against Flynn. But what if Sullivan refuses to allow Flynn to withdraw his guilty plea and proceeds to sentence him? Then Flynn’s only options will be to appeal that decision or seek a pardon from President Trump. What the Justice Department and the president might do in that event remains to be seen. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY HANS VON SPAKOVSKY Heritage Foundation Vice President John Malcolm heads the think tank’s Institute for Constitutional Government.

Trump reacts to the release of names of Obama administration officials that purportedly requested to 'unmask' the identity of former national security adviser Michael Flynn. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  The list released Wednesday by acting Director of National Intelligence Richard Grenell of top Obama officials who asked to “unmask” former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn’s name from NSA reporting is the latest bombshell in the story of how the Obama administration weaponized intelligence to undermine and destroy the incoming Trump administration. But it also suggests this conspiracy began earlier and was much broader than previously believed. By releasing this list, Grenell did a great service to his country to protect the principle of the peaceful transfer of power. But the intelligence community needs to release much more information to get to the bottom of this conspiracy. This should include information on the content of the NSA reports and which officials made unmasking requests of them. ANDREW MCCARTHY: JUDGE VS. FLYNN – BIZARRE ORDER INVITES AMICUS BRIEFS ON CASE'S DISMISSAL   Intelligence officials also need to provide a broader list of all unmasking requests made by senior Obama officials during this time period because it is likely that other Trump campaign and transition officials also were targeted. Names of U.S. citizens mentioned in U.S. intelligence reports, often NSA communications intercepts, are blacked out (minimized) because, under U.S. law, America’s foreign intelligence services are normally not permitted to spy on U.S. citizens. Although senior U.S. officials are permitted to ask for the identity of a blacked-out name in an intelligence report (an unmasking request), such requests are unusual and the requestor must have a “need to know” the identity of the U.S. person to understand the foreign intelligence information or assess its importance. When the request is approved, the unmasked identity is released only to the person who requested it, not to everyone who might have seen the original version of the report. For example, during my time at the State Department from 2001-2006, Deputy Secretary Richard Armitage made about 100 demasking requests. Then-Under Secretary of State John Bolton only made 10. The list released today is of 39 top Obama officials who made 53 requests to unmask Lt. Gen. Flynn’s name from intelligence reports between election day (Nov. 8, 2016) and Jan. 31, 2017.  While many of the requesters were Obama political appointees who resigned by Jan. 20, 2017, some were career officers at CIA, the Pentagon and other agencies. The most stunning thing about this list is that the vast majority of these requests were dated between Dec. 14 and 16, which was before Flynn’s Dec. 29 phone call to Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak. An NSA intercept of this phone call was the basis of the Jan. 24, 2017, FBI interview with Flynn when two FBI agents used this intercept to entrap Flynn into lying about the call. FBI Director James Comey broke protocol by not informing White House lawyers that he planned to send FBI agents to meet with Flynn. The FBI agents discouraged Flynn from having a lawyer present and didn’t read him anything like the Miranda warning. Flynn was targeted for unmasking at least two weeks before the Dec. 29 phone call. ...  This may indicate Flynn and other Trump transition officials were being targeted for unmasking as part of a fishing expedition to find dirt on them to undermine Trump’s presidency.  Flynn did not make any phone calls during this period to Kisylak until Dec. 22, 2016. He did meet with Kislyak on Dec. 1 at Trump Tower in New York. This may mean the unmasked mid-December intelligence that mentioned Flynn could have been a phone conversation by Kislyak with someone else. It also could have involved some matter involving Flynn, possibly with another country. This means Flynn was targeted for unmasking at least two weeks before the Dec. 29 phone call and the vast majority of these unmasking requests did not include intercepted conversations of Flynn having allegedly inappropriate conversations with Kislyak. This may indicate Flynn and other Trump transition officials were being targeted for unmasking as part of a fishing expedition to find dirt on them to undermine Trump’s presidency. In addition, there were only seven unmasking requests by seven officials after the Dec. 29 Flynn-Kislyak phone call – by Vice President Biden, then Director of National Intelligence James Clapper, Obama Chief of Staff Denis McDonough and other career officials. Since the information in this intercept leaked to the press, these seven officials are suspects for this criminal act. Other significant observations: U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power made the most unmasking requests for Flynn’s name – seven. Clapper made three. No one else made more than two.  Power, who reportedly made an astounding 260 demasking requests during her time as U.N. ambassador, testified in 2017 that most of these requests were made in her name but she did not request this information. I believe Power and assume someone at the NSC, who was not authorized access to demasking information, made these requests in her name. The intelligence community needs to disclose who this person was. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER  Also interesting is the cluster of requests to demask Flynn’s name by Biden and others between Jan. 7 and Jan. 12, 2017, and the timing of these requests. On Jan. 5, Biden, Comey, Clapper, CIA Director John Brennan, National Security Adviser Susan Rice and Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates met with Obama. In the meeting, Obama appeared to direct these officials to withhold Russia-related intelligence from the incoming Trump administration. The next day, President-elect Trump received a misleading and incomplete briefing on the fraudulent Steele Dossier and Russian meddling in the 2016 election by Clapper, Comey, Brennan, and NSA Director Mike Rogers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP  Over the next few days, there were seven high-level requests for Flynn’s name to be unmasked from NSA reporting. My guess is that this was not a coincidence and that a single intelligence official or NSC staff member suggested that these senior officials ask to see this information as part of a larger effort to target Flynn. The intelligence report in question probably concerned Flynn’s Dec. 29 phone call with Kislyak and would be used to entrap Flynn by the FBI on Jan. 24. The lists of requesters to unmask Flynn’s name from intelligence reports after the 2016 election is not a smoking gun, but it does strongly suggest some coordinated effort by senior Obama officials to get target Flynn and undermine the incoming Trump administration. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY FRED FLEITZ 

Startling new stats show high nursing home coronavirus deaths; insight from Phil Kerpen from the Committee to Unleash Prosperity. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Any 10-year-old who has watched just five minutes of COVID-19 news would have learned one thing: Maximize the distance between this virus and the elderly. This typically frail population is COVID-19’s easiest prey. Until Sunday, this most-basic lesson totally escaped Gov. Andrew Cuomo, D-N.Y., 62. But this warning propelled the COVID-19 response of Gov. Ron DeSantis, R-Fla., 41. Their divergent results are shocking: As of Friday, COVID-19 had killed 5,352 seniors in Empire State nursing homes. This pathogen had slayed 665 elders in Florida’s such facilities, despite its larger population. How could New York and Florida — America’s fourth- and third-most-populous states — have yielded such drastically, tragically, disparate results? MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS TRAGEDY — CUOMO'S NURSING HOME POLICY REVERSAL TOO LITTLE, TOO LATE 
      Excerpted here, Governor Andrew Cuomo’s deadly nursing-home regulation is missing from the state Health Department’s website, but remains available via WaybackMachine.org
       On March 25, Cuomo’s Health Department ordered nursing homes (NH): “No resident shall be denied re-admission or admission to the NH solely based on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19.” From President Donald J. Trump to governors to city councilmen, policymakers have confronted a brand-new, still-uncured disease. “There is no script for this,” Flags of Valor co-founder Joe Shamess said May 6 at the White House about the federal response. “They built the parachute on the way down.” Despite this enormous, unforeseen challenge, how could Cuomo have gleaned nothing from COVID-19’s first U.S. target: the Seattle-area’s Life Care Center had suffered 37 early-outbreak deaths. This alone should have dissuaded Cuomo from unleashing these microbes. The Democrats’ Trump-baiting taunt — “Testing, testing, testing!” — did not apply here. Precisely the reverse, Cuomo's Health Department order banned such screenings! His order continued: “NHs are prohibited from requiring a hospitalized resident who is determined medically stable to be tested for COVID-19 prior to admission or readmission.” Health care professionals yelled, “Stop!” The American Medical Directors Association stated March 26: “Unsafe transfers will increase the risk of transmission in post-acute and long-term care facilities which will ultimately only serve to increase the return flow back to hospitals, overwhelming capacity, endangering more healthcare personnel, and escalating the death rate.” Stabilized COVID-19 patients were sent from hospitals to nursing homes, including some cited for frightfully poor hygiene before the pandemic (e.g. one staffer failed to wash his hands after grappling with an occupant’s incontinence). As April 25’s New York Post reported, hospitals transferred 70 COVID patients to Harlem’s Terrence Cardinal Cooke home. By May 8, COVID-19 had killed 32 tenants. Hospitals sent 19 COVID survivors to Staten Island’s Carmel Richardson facility. By May 8, the virus had extinguished 56 there. “The state forced us to bring in these sick people,” a nurse at Long Island’s Luxor Nursing and Rehabilitation was quoted in the New York Post. “We had no choice, but we’re not happy about it here.” “The state forced us to bring in these sick people,” a nurse at Long Island’s Luxor Nursing and Rehabilitation was quoted in the Post. “We had no choice, but we’re not happy about it here.” Maria Porteus recalled visiting her ailing father there — Carlos Gallegos, 82. As Porteus told the Post’s Michael Goodwin: “Every time he tried to breathe, it was like firecrackers going off in his body.” Gallegos died April 9. Cause of death: “Possible COVID-19.” Nursing-home operators requested personal protective equipment for staffers and inhabitants. Cuomo replied: That’s “not our job.” Also, Team Cuomo did not ban COVID-19-positive personnel from nursing homes until April 30 — Day 48 of this national emergency. Cuomo’s lethal negligence might have been understandable were New York devoid of hospital beds. This was not so. The 1,000-bed hospital ship USNS Comfort reached Manhattan’s Pier 90 on March 30. It made 500 berths COVID-19 capable. And then it pleaded for patients. Only 182 visited before Comfort steamed home to Norfolk, Va., on April 30. Just 12 blocks south, the Javits Center’s 3,000-bed pop-up hospital stood largely empty, serving just 1,094 patients before standing down May 1. According to the New York Post, Donny Tuchman begged to send COVID-positives from Brooklyn’s overwhelmed Cobble Hill Health Center to Javits or Comfort. “We really want to protect our other patients,” the CEO implored the Health Department via e-mail on April 9. Officials replied: No dice. “I was told those facilities were only for hospitals” to refer patients, Tuchman said. Only 134 of Javits’ 1,000 COVID-19-compliant beds were full then, as were just 62 on Comfort. Cuomo should have sent COVID-19 patients to these and similar facilities and isolated them for a fortnight, or until they either recovered or expired. This would have been safe, sane and smart. Instead, Cuomo behaved like a clueless 10-year-old boy who tossed lit matches over his shoulder while skipping through parched brush on a sweltering, gusty day. Cuomo seemed to wonder: “What, me worry?” “Mother Nature brought a virus,” Cuomo said April 23. “The virus attacks old people. Nothing went wrong. Nobody’s to blame for the creation of the situation.” On Sunday, amid all this carnage, Cuomo finally reversed his deadly policy. Better late than never, as the ghosts of 5,352 deceased nursing-home dwellers would agree. In stunning contrast, Floridians have fared far better. “We had all staff required to be screened for temperature,” Gov. DeSantis told President Trump April 28 in the Oval Office. “And then we did require the wearing of PPE, such as masks.” DeSantis assigned 120 “ambulatory assessment teams” to 3,800 long-term care facilities, “to figure out where they were deficient so we could try to get ahead of this.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The Health Department’s “rapid emergency support teams” offered infection-control education and other training. Furnishing sanitary gear was pivotal, including “almost 7 million masks to the nursing facilities in Florida,” DeSantis said, “almost a million gloves, half a million face shields, 160,000 gowns.” By April 28, 50 “strike teams” had conducted 6,000 tests in nursing facilities. DeSantis and the University of Florida collaboratively assessed retirees at The Villages. This included drive-up screenings for elders in golf carts. “The result of that was pretty astounding,” DeSantis said. “Zero tested positive out of 1,200 asymptomatic seniors.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP With New York’s 5,352 COVID-19 nursing-home deaths, its fatality rate is 27.5 per 100,000 among 19,453,561 denizens. With Florida’s 665 such decedents, its death rate is 3.1 per 100,000 of its 21,477,737 people. In this tale of two governors, Andrew Cuomo turned New York’s nursing homes into a de facto death panel, while Ron DeSantis created a model of emergency elder care. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DEROY MURDOCK Bucknell University’s Michael Malarkey contributed research to this opinion piece.

Judge Emmet Sullivan is allowing ‘friends of the court’ submissions from outside groups in the case of security adviser Michael Flynn; reaction and analysis from former assistant U.S. attorney and Fox News contributor Andrew McCarthy. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Late Tuesday, federal District Judge Emmet Sullivan issued a bizarre order, inviting third-party groups with no legal interests in the case to file amicus briefs addressing the Justice Department’s motion to dismiss the false-statements charge against Michael Flynn, President Trump’s former national-security adviser. ANDREW McCARTHY: FLYNN UNMASKING STANDOFF – WHO 'OWNS' CLASSIFIED INFO? WHO GETS TO MAKE IT PUBLIC? The cantankerous jurist is stoking opposition to the dismissal. He knows the law calls for him to accede to attorney general Bill Barr’s decision. But Barr can’t stop Sullivan from turning the dismissal into anti-Trump group therapy — and who knows, maybe the grieving Legal Left will figure out some way for the judge to convict Flynn despite DOJ’s retreat. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Flynn’s counsel relates that on 24 prior occasions, Judge Sullivan has summarily refused to entertain input from non-parties to the case. No federal criminal rule authorizes such interventions. Yet Sullivan now encourages them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There is no complex legal issue to be resolved. DOJ’s dismissal motion may be politically controversial, but legally it is pro forma. The only branch of government constitutionally authorized to proceed with a criminal prosecution is the executive. The Justice Department has declined to prosecute. There is nothing for the judge to do besides the ministerial task of ending the case on the court’s records. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Journalist Lee Smith calls out the media for being complicit in Adam Schiff's collusion hoax Americans expect that politicians will lie, but sometimes the examples are so brazen that they deserve special notice. Newly released Congressional testimony shows that Adam Schiff spread falsehoods shamelessly about Russia and Donald Trump for three years even as his own committee gathered contrary evidence. The House Intelligence Committee last week released 57 transcripts of interviews it conducted in its investigation into Russia’s meddling in the 2016 election. The committee probe started in January 2017 under then-Chair Devin Nunes and concluded in March 2018 with a report finding no evidence that the Trump campaign conspired with the Kremlin. Most of the transcripts were ready for release long ago, but Mr. Schiff oddly refused to release them after he became chairman in 2019. He only released them last week when the White House threatened to do it first. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now we know why. From the earliest days of the collusion narrative, Mr. Schiff insisted that he had evidence proving the plot. In March 2017 on MSNBC, Mr. Schiff teased that he couldn’t “go into particulars, but there is more than circumstantial evidence now.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In December 2017 he told CNN that collusion was a fact: “The Russians offered help, the campaign accepted help. The Russians gave help and the President made full use of that help.” In April 2018, Mr. Schiff released his response to Mr. Nunes’s report, stating that its finding of no collusion “was unsupported by the facts and the investigative record.” CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING THIS EDITORIAL IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

2020 hopeful Joe Biden says he's trying to set an example for Americans during the pandemic; Peter Doocy reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  On Friday, the Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that during April, the American economy lost 20.5 million jobs due to the coronavirus pandemic. Unfortunately, health care policies proposed by former Vice President Joe Biden could mean some of those lost jobs never return. While health care represents one industry long thought of as “recession-proof,” the coronavirus pandemic has proven an exception. In April, the industry lost over 1.4 million jobs, with those losses spread throughout the sector. Dentist offices lost over 503,000 jobs, and physician offices an additional 243,000. Nursing homes lost a total of 113,000 jobs during the month. Most of the job losses came because doctors, dentists and other medical providers canceled non-emergency procedures, both to prevent the spread of the virus and conserve personal protective equipment. Despite an influx of coronavirus patients, hospitals lost 135,000 jobs in April — because the cancellation of elective surgeries took away their prime source of revenue. TOM HOMAN: BIDEN IMMIGRATION FLIP-FLOPS – LET'S SEPARATE FACTS FROM HIS CAMPAIGN FICTIONS While some states have allowed elective procedures to resume, hospitals could now face another financial problem: Many individuals may lose their employer-sponsored health plans, which generally pay hospitals much more than government programs like Medicare and Medicaid. As a researcher for the Rand Corporation noted, “Even if [patients] do go back to the hospital, they’ll be paying a lot lower rate than when they had insurance through their employer.” Hospitals could continue to face financial losses from these lower-paying patients, and suffer job losses as a result. Policies proposed by Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, would worsen these financial losses and job losses within the health care sector. His health care platform calls for creating a government-run health plan to “reduce costs for patients by negotiating lower prices from hospitals and other health care providers.” Translation: Biden will force hospitals and doctors to accept lower pay for their services. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Likewise, the “Medicare at 60” proposal Biden endorsed last month would expand access to that government program, which pays doctors and hospitals less than most private insurance. The government-run plan and “Medicare at 60” proposals would together reduce revenues throughout the health care sector, working to make the temporary furloughs of the past few months permanent. Those job losses could accelerate under Democrats’ march toward government-run health care. The 1.4 million health care jobs lost during April sounds like a large number — and it is. But an analysis last year in the prestigious Journal of the American Medical Association found that a single-payer health care plan similar to that proposed by Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., could lead to an estimated 1.5 million jobs lost in hospitals alone — more than 11 times the 135,000 jobs the hospital sector lost during April. During the Democratic presidential primaries, Biden claimed he did not support single-payer health care. But he endorsed the “Medicare at 60” proposal the day after Sanders dropped out of the nominating contest, in an attempt to win over the socialist’s followers. Further moves by Biden and his fellow Democrats to placate the radical Left will accelerate the march toward a fully-socialized health care system — and the job losses that will result. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The expansion of government-run health care will have numerous negative outcomes for patients. Paying doctors and hospitals less could force them to cut corners in ways that harm patient care. But government dictating lower payment levels will also result in additional job losses throughout the health care sector, and make some of the temporary job losses permanent. At a time when our nation already faces a major battle to recover from the coronavirus pandemic, that outcome represents a policy prescription our nation can ill afford. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM CHRIS JACOBS

A federal judge is now allowing input from outside groups on the DOJ decision and how the court should respond; John Roberts reports from the White House. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Fox News is reporting that there may be some tension between Justice Department officials and Richard Grenell, the acting Director of National Intelligence, regarding the declassification of information related to “unmasking” – i.e., the revelation of the identity of Americans incidentally intercepted during our spy agencies’ collection of foreign intelligence. I suspect that there may be less friction here than confusion, probably on ODNI’s part, and probably about Justice Department rules and procedures. In the government, classified information “belongs” to the executive branch, whose intelligence agencies collect and analyze it. That is why the president is the ultimate authority, having the power to declassify any such information. GREGG JARRETT: FLYNN JUDGE WRONG TO ALLOW ANTI-TRUMP FORMER WATERGATE PROSECUTORS TO INTERFERE IN CASE Beneath the president, intelligence officials may review specific classified information if they have a “need to know” and sufficiently high-level security clearances. But the information “belongs” to the intelligence agency that collected or created it. A concrete example. If an FBI agent had a security clearance high enough to authorize access to a file of top-secret intelligence collected by the CIA, that agent would be permitted to see that information. But neither that agent nor the FBI would be authorized to declassify it so it could be shared more widely. Only the CIA could do that. In terms of equity, it would be the CIA’s information. To grasp what’s going on with the unmasking issue, we also need to distinguish the declassification of information from the publication of that information. The vast majority of information held by the government is not classified. Yet, most of it is also non-public. The government has the power to compel people to produce various categories of information, and it may store and analyze that data. There is a trade-off, though: To protect people’s privacy (among other reasons), the government may not disseminate information publicly in the absence of a lawful reason. In particular, the Justice Department does not disclose information just to disclose it, or just because the public might find it fascinating. DOJ must have a legal reason for publicizing previously non-public information. We saw that last week, when DOJ moved to dismiss the case against Michael Flynn. Appended to the motion were exhibits that included non-public FBI reports, some portions of which may have been classified at some point. That information had been kept under wraps for years. But until the Justice Department filed a legal submission in a public court proceeding, to which these documents were relevant, no classified portions were declassified, and none of the information was made public. Obama officials unmasked an unusually large number of Americans, reportedly including many connected to Donald Trump. Several Obama officials were apparently involved. We should know which officials. Classified and other sensitive information relevant to the Trump-Russia investigation is of immense public importance. President Trump has said that he’d like to see the information made public. This has been frustrating for those of us closely watching the story because the president has the power to declassify and publicize. Yet, he obviously does not want to be accused of harming national security. (By definition, information is classified because it’s publication would harm national security.) Nor does he want to be accused of compromising investigations, which can be  undermined if information that is sensitive is prematurely publicized. On the other hand, history and common sense teach us that the intelligence agencies’ authority to stamp information “classified” creates great temptation to exploit that authority to hide information that could be embarrassing or even incriminating. They chide us that insisting on disclosure somehow imperils national security or endangers intelligence sources. Clearly, Grenell’s job at ODNI includes breaking this disclosure barrier. The president is frustrated by the resistance he has gotten from intelligence agencies, who never want to disclose anything. Grenell, an ardent Trump supporter who had been serving as U.S. ambassador to Germany, has been sent to ODNI, in part, to ensure that information related to the Trump-Russia investigation is disclosed unless there is a truly compelling reason to keep it concealed. The unmasking controversy is of great public interest. Obama officials unmasked an unusually large number of Americans, reportedly including many connected to Donald Trump. Several Obama officials were apparently involved. We should know which officials. We should know why they included some, such as U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power, who had little or no need to know the identities of Americans intercepted in foreign intelligence collection. On paper at least, Power was responsible for hundreds of unmaskings. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Grenell has reportedly declassified this information, which he was apparently empowered to do because ODNI has equity over it. Now, he wants it publicized. He realizes it is relevant to DOJ’s investigation into the genesis of the Obama administration’s Trump-Russia probe. Grenell thus seems to have figured that transmitting this now-declassified information to DOJ was the best way to get it released publicly. Again, however, the Justice Department must have a lawful purpose to publish information. DOJ is still investigating, and investigators virtually never want evidence to become public until their investigation is concluded. DOJ is no doubt very interested in the information Grenell has provided; but it has no immediate legal need or strategic desire for public disclosure. That said, the usual rules apply. Therefore, if the classified information belongs to ODNI, then ODNI has the power to declassify it. And if ODNI has declassified the unmasking information, and believes it has a legitimate reason to disclose that information publicly, it may do so … though Grenell will have to brace himself for the uproar from critics who will claim ODNI has acted politically, and potentially to the detriment of national security. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If the Justice Department’s investigation is to be regarded as good-faith law-enforcement rather than politics, then DOJ cannot be perceived as declassifying and publicizing information for political purposes. From DOJ’s perspective, the unmasking information need not be disclosed unless and until there is a legitimate law-enforcement reason for doing so. By contrast, if the unmasking information belongs to ODNI, then DNI Grenell has the authority to declassify it, and perhaps to disclose it. But he would have to be able to explain why doing so was an appropriate exercise of discretion in the public interest, rather than an abuse of power for political advantage. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Dr. Tony Fauci appeared on Capitol Hill Tuesday to testify before members of Congress. The topic, of course, was the ongoing debate over when and how to reopen the country at schools and workplaces amid the coronavirus pandemic, when to do it, and how quickly. CORONAVIRUS INFECTION IN CHILDREN MAY NOT START WITH A COUGH: RESEARCHERS Dr. Fauci left no doubts about how he feels on that question. Opening up now, he said, after just two months of lockdowns, is a very risky, indeed a dangerous, prospect. Letting Americans work and learn once again could be a catastrophe, he said. And he wasn't just referring to a handful of hotspots that have been hit especially hard. Entire states, Fauci said, likely need to remain closed. Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: What I've expressed then and again, is my concern that if some areas city, states or what have you jump over those various checkpoints and prematurely open up without having the capability of being able to respond effectively and efficiently. My concern is that we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks. So just to be clear, Fauci was not simply talking about certain workers or even all workers staying at home for the foreseeable future. He implied that schools and colleges will be able to reopen only if there is a cure for this virus or a vaccine. He said that prospect was a bridge too far. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In other words, no school until the coronavirus has been cured -- stopped. The problem is there is currently no approved vaccine for any of the several coronaviruses out there. We still don't have one for SARS. So, that may never happen. Once again, it has never happened. Fauci's recommendation was headline news at almost every media outlet instantly. "Fauci cautions about schools, colleges reopening in the fall," said the LA Times. "Fauci warns Senate the reopening U.S. too quickly could lead to avoidable suffering and death." And so predictably on with the hysteria. Fauci says that children must stay home or countless people will die -- that's the message. And so I'm just going to ask a very simple question: How does he know this exactly? Is Tony Fauci right about the science? Do we have any particular reason to think he is right? Well, right now there is an awful lot of evidence indicating that America should cautiously reopen. Sweden never shut down at all, and it doesn't appear much worse than the United States on average. Many countries in Europe have reopened schools, and they have not seen a spike in cases. The state of Georgia partially reopened weeks ago, to much hysteria and finger-wagging from the press, and yet hospitalizations in the state of Georgia are lower than ever. No one has explained why exactly schools specifically must stay closed. There's a huge cost to that -- massive. An entire generation of young people are not being educated because, let's not lie to ourselves, they are not. And yet as of right now, very few people under 18 have been seriously hurt by the coronavirus. So, when he was asked about that, Fauci simply said, we don't know that children are "completely immune to the virus." Complete immunity? Since when is that a requirement? Children are not completely immune. Indeed, they're vulnerable to countless diseases, many of which are far more dangerous than this one. The flu, for example, is much more dangerous for young people than the Wuhan coronavirus. This is not a talking point. It's factually true. Look it up. Sen. Paul is on to something. A lot of wrong predictions have come out of Washington on the question of the coronavirus, and quite a few of them came directly from Dr. Fauci himself. And yet only this virus is being used to deny young people an education. What is this, exactly? Some lawmakers are starting to ask that question because it's so obvious. There is no science on the other side. Sen. Rand Paul -- who is a physician, by the way -- asked Fauci about it during the hearings. Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky.: The history of this, when we look back, will be of wrong prediction after wrong prediction after wrong prediction, starting with Ferguson in England. So, I think we ought to have a little bit of humility in our belief that we know what's best for the economy. And as much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don't think you're the end-all. I don't think you're the one person that gets to make a decision. Every sentence to Dr. Fauci must be prefaced with "as much as I respect you." That's required by federal law. But Sen. Paul is on to something. A lot of wrong predictions have come out of Washington on the question of the coronavirus, and quite a few of them came directly from Dr. Fauci himself. We're not singling him out or attacking him. We've certainly made a lot of wrong predictions on this show. But we're not in charge of the entire country. So it's worth walking few through a few of them, just for the sake of the aforementioned humility that Sen. Paul was talking about. For example, Fauci spoke about how happy he was to see Americans going about their lives while wearing masks. Fauci: But some sort of mask-like facial covering, I think, for the time being, should be a very regular part of how we prevent the spread of infection. And in fact, the more and more as you go outside, right here and where I'm sitting in Washington, D.C., you can see many people out there with masks on, which gives me some degree of comfort that people are taking this very seriously. Yes, they're following Fauci's orders, and of course, he is pleased by that. He didn't expect to have this much power at the age of 79. In the last four months, Fauci has become one of the most powerful people in the world. And some, particularly in our media and in our Democratic establishment, are clamoring to give Dr. Fauci even more power. Why? The funny thing is, though, it was just two months ago that Fauci was in the chorus of high officials lecturing the rest of us that actually wearing a mask was pointless, maybe worse than pointless and people shouldn't do it. Fauci: Right now in the United States, people should not be walking around with masks. Reporter: You're sure of it because people are listening really closely to this. Fauci: No, right now, people should not be wearing -- there's no reason to be walking around with a mask. When you're in the middle of an outbreak, wearing a mask might make people feel a little bit better, and it might even block a droplet. But it's not providing the perfect protection that people think that it is. Now, I know this is going to be painful for some people. They don't want to doubt. This is a little bit like learning that your religion is fake. But this religion is fake. It shouldn't be a religion in the first place. It's supposed to be science. You're supposed to admit when you're wrong. You're supposed to be totally transparent about your reasoning. But they're not, and Fauci is in that category. By the way, back in early January, Tony Fauci was telling the rest of us don't worry about coronavirus. Greg Kelly, Newsmax: Bottom line, we don't have to worry about this one, right? Fauci: Well, you know, obviously we need to take it seriously and do the kinds of things that the CDC and the Department of Homeland Security are doing. But this is not a major threat for the people in the United States, and this is not something that the citizens of the United States right now should be worried about. Do wear a mask -- don't wear a mask. Don't worry about the coronavirus. Never reopen schools until we have a cure for coronavirus. That's a lot of different positions. It was just last month that Dr. Fauci told the rest of us it was totally fine to have sex with strangers you meet on the internet on dating apps. Totally cool. "Hey, man. He's old, but he's cool." But almost simultaneously, he said that nobody should ever shake hands again, just to be safe. Fauci: I don't think we'd ever should have to shake hands ever again, to be honest with you. Not only would it be good to prevent coronavirus disease, it probably would decrease the incidence of influenza dramatically in this country. Look, this is just buffoon level stuff at that point, and we're not doing this to mock the guy. You know, I mean, anybody who talks as much as Anthony Fauci does on television, we can tell you firsthand is apt to say some stupid things. The point is, is this the guy into whom you want to vest all of your trust? Is this the guy you want to chart the future of the country? Maybe not. This is a very serious matter, the decisions we're making right now. Tony Fauci has not been elected to anything. He has had the same job for nearly 40 years. That means the majority of American voters never even indirectly picked him for the role he has now. This is not the result of any kind of democratic process at work at all. Yet, in the last four months, Fauci has become one of the most powerful people in the world. And some, particularly in our media and in our Democratic establishment, are clamoring to give Dr. Fauci even more power. Why? Some people seem to think he should be dictator for the duration of this crisis. That's insanity. Fauci, like every other human being, is flawed. He says things that are wise, he says things that are profoundly silly. He is not  -- and no one is -- the one person who should be in charge when it comes to making long-term health recommendations. This guy, Fauci, may be even more off-base than your average epidemiologist. Plenty of doctors, by the way, think it's time for most, even all, of the country, to cautiously reopen. And they have a voice in this, too. They deserve one. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But in the end, no appointed doctor should make the call on what our federal policy is. We elect leaders for that because we are supposed to be in charge of the country because it's a democracy. Remember, NBC? CNN? Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 12, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. The late Tim Russert had a reputation of meticulous preparation for his Sunday turns on "Meet the Press." Guests from both parties feared what Russert would dig up and bring to the table. Russert hired Chuck Todd from The Hotline newsletter in 2007 to be an NBC political reporter. But Todd doesn't seem to be channeling the spirit of Russert in his own preparation. On Sunday, Todd mangled a short clip from a CBS interview with Attorney General William Barr. CBS reporter Catherine Herridge asked Barr what history would say about his department's decision to drop charges against former national security adviser Michael Flynn. Barr quipped that "history is written by the winner, so it largely depends on who's writing the history." Todd only ran that fraction and said to Wall Street Journal columnist Peggy Noonan: "I was struck, Peggy, by the cynicism of the answer. It's a correct answer, but he's the attorney general. He didn't make the case that he was upholding the rule of law. He was almost admitting that, yeah, this is a political job." NBC'S CHUCK TODD MAKES ON-AIR APOLOGY OVER BOTCHED BARR QUOTE, CLAIMS 'THAT WAS NOT OUR EDIT' Todd recklessly ignored the rest of Barr's non-cynical answer. In fact, Barr did make that case. "But I think a fair history would say that it was a good decision because it upheld the rule of law," he said. "It upheld the standards of the Department of Justice, and it undid what was an injustice." Conservatives on Twitter such as Greg Price of The Daily Caller quickly cried foul. Justice Department spokeswoman Kerri Kupec tweeted a protest. This was such an obvious error that even liberal site PolitiFact, which rarely types a discouraging word against the mainstream media, tagged it false on its Truth-O-Meter. On Sunday evening, the "Meet the Press" Twitter account confessed in a reply to Kupec: "Earlier today, we inadvertently and inaccurately cut short a video clip of an interview with AG Barr before offering commentary and analysis." It also placed the note at the bottom of the online transcript. As Steve Krakauer pointed out, this admission was surely missed by most of the "Meet the Press" account's 630,000-plus followers because the reply would have only been seen by mutual followers of the show and Kupec. Todd offered no apology on his Twitter account. None of that can be described as "inadvertent." CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Did Todd fail to watch the full CBS interview with Barr? Could he at least try to finish watching Barr's entire answer to the history question? The full transcript was posted on the CBS website. Todd has reached the pinnacle of NBC News, and he can't find the time to do any research? Since he doesn't work Mondays on MSNBC's "MTP Daily," Todd issued an on-air apology on Tuesday, more than 48 hours later. He proclaimed that NBC didn't slice the interview into pieces: "We did not edit that out. That was not our edit. We didn't include it, because we only saw the shorter of two clips that CBS did air. We should have looked at both and checked for a full transcript." Sounds like he's blaming CBS. Doing so would be wrong. The full clip on "history" did air on "CBS This Morning" on Friday. The half-clip on history aired "CBS Evening News with Norah O'Donnell" on Thursday. But seconds before, CBS ran another soundbite of Barr saying: "I want to make sure that we restore confidence in the system. There's only one standard of justice." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When Herridge asked if he was doing the president's bidding, Barr protested, "I'm doing the law's bidding." It's ridiculous for Todd to blame NBC's laziness and false impressions on CBS. Tim Russert should be rolling in his grave. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TIM GRAHAM


Dr. Marc Siegel reacts to the president announcing a plan for a federal reserve amid COVID-19. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  As the COVID-19 pandemic began sweeping the U.S. in March, health care institutions and medical personnel were concerned about making excruciatingly difficult decisions about who lives and who dies due to anticipated shortages of ventilators. U.S. hospitals feared facing the same grim reality that doctors in northern Italy confronted for several weeks – continuing ventilation for patients who are unlikely to survive meant denying ventilators to patients who still had a chance of beating the virus. I’m an emergency room doctor in Odessa, Texas, a medium-sized city in a metropolitan area of about 250,000 people. Like our counterparts in much larger cities, we prepared for an influx of coronavirus cases and the strong possibility that we would have to remove lifesaving care away from some patients in favor of others. MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS TRAGEDY — CUOMO'S NURSING HOME POLICY REVERSAL TOO LITTLE, TOO LATE Faced with the possibility of triaging health care, many hospitals reexamined their ethical guidelines regarding care in the case of pandemic or mass casualty event like a mass shooting or a bombing. Ethical Choices As a physician in the Iraq war, I often confronted battlefield situations with multiple casualties. Medical training prescribed my response. First, focus on those who were wounded most severely and required immediate care to survive and, second, treat those who were badly hurt and in great pain, but were not in danger of dying. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The most heartbreaking decisions I had to make was when I encountered unconscious patients who were close to death. With dozens of others who could be saved desperate for medical attention, I had to let go of the dying patients. It was an awful feeling. On the battlefield, I made these critical triage decisions on my own. As a civilian doctor in a U.S. hospital, I was shocked to be called upon to confront the possibility of rationing care in the face of COVID-19. Faced with the realities of the pandemic and no better alternative, my colleagues and I determined that these types of triage decisions would be made by teams of doctors who would compare notes on all our patients and create a list of those most likely to live and those most likely to die. It is a heartbreaking exercise and one I will never grow accustomed to. Deciding who lives or dies is a complex moral calculation. Medical ethicists look to three philosophical approaches to inform this decision-making process. Utilitarianism guides us in questioning which actions will produce the greatest good for the greatest number. To a large degree, this principle governed our practice of medicine on the battlefield.  Although this approach instructs us to let the dying go and treat the rest, we did everything we could to save every life possible with the resources we had. There’s much we can learn from the COVID-19 pandemic to help us prepare better for future outbreaks or other situations that could potentially overburden our medical resources. Egalitarianism – When there are many people who stand to receive the same benefit from a particular treatment, how do you prioritize one human life over another? In other words, if you have one ventilator and five people with equal survivability chances, who gets the ventilator?  Egalitarianism would suggest you choose randomly – not on the basis of social standing, wealth or even who is the best person. Social worth – If considering social worth, you would choose who gets the ventilator based on some calculation of the patients’ contribution to society, age, family status or other criteria. Obviously, these are subjective decisions and extremely tough to call for all concerned, hence a consultative team approach to this analysis is worth considering here. What We’ve Learned So Far There’s much we can learn from the COVID-19 pandemic to help us prepare better for future outbreaks or other situations that could potentially overburden our medical resources. The last few weeks have resembled war-like conditions in our emergency room. It doesn’t have to be that way in the future. We need to learn our lessons well and make sure we’re better prepared the next time for a global pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Kayleigh McEnany, White House Press Secretary, confirms President Trump has shut down trade talks with China amid the coronavirus pandemic Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. How far will the Chinese government go to make its economy the most influential in the world? That’s a question national security experts have been discussing for years, and we now know. Based on the Chinese Communist Party’s (CCP) attempt to rewrite the history of the COVID-19 pandemic, they are willing to use aggressive disinformation to achieve their aim. Over the past few months, the CCP has falsely claimed the source of COVID-19 was the U.S. Army and Italy. They then amplified disinformation about the U.S. response to the pandemic. These efforts are designed to achieve three goals: Save face with a Chinese populace devastated by this deadly epidemic, distract the world from the Chinese government’s lack of transparency on the spread of COVID-19, and drive a wedge between the United States and our international allies. JAMES CARAFANO: CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA — 3 RULES TO BUILD US UP AND MAKE THEM PAY General Secretary Xi Jinping, though clearly concerned about his standing in the CCP given their bungled response and draconian efforts to deal with COVID-19, has recognized the opportunity to use this global crisis to supercharge the Chinese government’s stated goal to become the world’s sole superpower by 2049. In addition to claiming COVID-19 is a bioweapon created by the U.S., the CCP is utilizing government-backed media outlets and officials to spread the narrative that China defeated the virus and is the leader in helping the rest of the world — by sharing medical expertise and providing personal protective equipment — through this global crisis. Russia and Iran are echoing this disinformation to distract their own populations from their ineffective responses to the virus and to sow doubt in the international community about who is the more responsible global superpower: the United States or China. Unfortunately, years of effective Chinese diplomacy and influence-peddling in Western capitals have made fighting this messaging campaign more difficult. Some of our allies have been lulled into complacency and failed to grasp the severity of the threat posed by the CCP to our economies, security and values. America and its allies must remain the world’s centers of innovation and technological advancement, and the only way to achieve this goal is to strengthen our alliances not weaken them. For example, European support for China’s Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), formally endorsed by more than half of the European Union’s members, has helped normalize an initiative that has left many countries trapped in debt, expanded China’s global influence and exported China’s surveillance state. The Chinese impact on European domestic economic projects allows them to gain influence on issues of foreign policy like getting countries to block the EU from condemning the CCP’s human rights record despite indisputable evidence of the CCP’s mass imprisonment of over one million Uyghurs. However, more than 125,000 confirmed European deaths from COVID-19 may revoke the free pass Xi has been enjoying in Europe. Many of our most important allies, such as Australia, the United Kingdom and France, have joined our calls for accountability and transparency. Our allies’ demands for more information about the origin and spread of the virus have been met by the typical CCP response of diplomatic coercion. Chinese officials even went so far as to threaten Australia with a boycott of its goods and services. The way the United States and our allies can insulate ourselves from further damage from China is by improving economic cooperation. Given our globalized economy, fully decoupling from China would be impossible and unwise. Instead, America and its allies must remain the world’s centers of innovation and technological advancement, and the only way to achieve this goal is to strengthen our alliances not weaken them. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In our own hemisphere, the U.S. should focus on strengthening North American competitiveness through the U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement (USMCA) to provide an alternative to supply chains in China. Additionally, western companies, not CCP-backed ones, need to lead in the development of advanced technologies like artificial intelligence, quantum computing and 5G. To achieve this goal Washington and our allied capitals must work together on strategies that coordinate efforts across government, academia and the private sector to advance research, development and adoption of new technologies. The chaos and destruction brought upon our society by COVID-19 and the CCP’s lack of transparency have crystallized the thinking of many Americans on the nature of the China challenge. Nine in 10 Americans view China as a threat and 62 percent see it as a major threat. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As we try to move from the prevention, containment and mitigation stages of this global pandemic to the control and recovery phases, we can’t forget the geopolitical reality of these final two phases. If we want to not only recover but be in a better position than we were when the world started dealing with COVID-19, then the U.S. must reassert our role as the global leader and lead the world through this pandemic by strengthening our alliances. Standing together, we can meet this challenge with renewed vigor and help create a better world after a pandemic that has taken far too many lives. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY WILL HURD

Fox News chief legal correspondent and 'Fox News @ Night' anchor Shannon Bream breaks down the details. This week, former President Barack Obama reemerged from hibernation to lecture Americans about the threat to rule of law posed by the Trump administration. After Attorney General William Barr announced that the Department of Justice would be dropping its case against President Trump's former national security adviser Michael Flynn, who had pleaded guilty to one count of lying to the FBI, Obama told his former aides, "our basic understanding of rule of law is at risk." Obama explained: "There is no precedent that anybody can find for someone who has been charged with perjury just getting off scot-free. ... And when you start moving in those directions, it can accelerate pretty quickly as we've seen in other places." GRAHAM CALLS ON ACTING DNI GRENELL TO 'RELEASE THE NAMES' OF THOSE WHO REQUESTING 'UNMASKING' OF FLYNN In reality, of course, Flynn was never charged with perjury. He was charged with lying to the FBI in the course of an investigation – a separate and far lesser offense, particularly given the fact that his alleged lie was immaterial to any underlying crime. In fact, as America found out over the past two weeks, Flynn wasn't supposed to be the subject of any investigation at all. The FBI had decided to close an investigation into Flynn in January 2017, even after supposedly nefarious calls between Flynn and Russian Ambassador to the U.S. Sergey Kislyak. Disgraced former FBI agent Peter Strzok – the same man who pledged to lover and former FBI attorney Lisa Page that Donald Trump would never be president and suggested an "insurance policy" against that possibility – then intervened to keep the investigation open. The next day, during an Oval Office meeting, President Obama himself asked then-FBI Director James Comey about the Flynn-Kislyak communications. Next, Comey upped the ante: He avoided following normal FBI-White House protocols in order to interview Flynn, and Comey's deputy director, Andrew McCabe, avoided informing Flynn of his rights. Nonetheless, the FBI agents who conducted the interview suggested that they did not think Flynn was lying during that interview. As it turns out, notes between top FBI officials at the time said, "What's our goal? Truth/Admission or to get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired?" Flynn would later plead guilty to one count of lying to the FBI – at least in part because the FBI was threatening his son with prosecution. This should be a massive scandal because, at the very least, it demonstrates the nation's chief law enforcement agencies, prompted by political actors at the very top of the government, racing to bend the rules in order to pursue a case they were convinced they would make: the case that the Trump campaign had conspired with the Russian government. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER From the purposefully botched Carter Page Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act warrant to the absurdly conjured prosecution of Flynn, the most powerful institutions in American life violated the protocols meant to restrict abuse, firmly secure in their own feelings of moral rectitude. That's the best-case scenario. The worst-case scenario is far darker: that by early January, with no evidence of Russian collusion, leaders of the nation's political and law enforcement agencies decided that guilt was irrelevant, and that the Trump administration had to be strangled in the crib. This seems like a major stretch, but in a highly partisan era, such a narrative will have legs. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Meanwhile, blithe in the knowledge that they were on the side of the angels, members of the Obama-era government continue to chide Attorney General Barr for ending a charade of a case. Their incredible inability to see how their conduct looks beyond the echo chamber of sycophantic media sources only undermines their credibility further. As it turns out, President Obama isn't wrong – at least not entirely. Our basic understanding of the rule of law is at risk, not because Barr stepped in to prevent an unjust prosecution but because our institutions under the Obama administration were politicized in ways that should shock the American conscience.       CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BEN SHAPIRO

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell discusses a potential fourth coronavirus stimulus relief bill on ‘The Daily Briefing.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As House Democrats were preparing their $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell drew a “red line”: no more spending without a liability shield for businesses. Republicans shouldn’t budge on this — businesses need protection from frivolous lawsuits in order to reopen their doors, rehire employees and lead America into economic recovery. A liability shield would ensure that if businesses are operating according to the best public health information knowledge available — the same information used by political leaders and health officials — then they won’t have to worry about facing lawsuits down the road if our understanding of proper care changes. CHUCK DEVORE: ELON MUSK'S TESLA TO TEXAS? CALIF. BUSINESS EXODUS MAY SHIFT INTO HIGH GEAR BECAUSE OF THIS Critics argue that a liability shield undermines workers’ interests, but they have it backward. A liability shield doesn’t absolve employers from taking care to create a safe environment for workers and customers. And, backers of the liability shield aren’t asking for total immunity for businesses, just reasonable standards of care. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) have issued recommendations for safe workplace operations, and any liability protection for businesses would be contingent on showing a good faith effort to comply with these recommendations. Employers who willfully disregard these standards of care and recklessly endanger the health and safety of workers or customers would face legal liability. As we learn more about how the coronavirus spreads, how it affects different populations and how it can be best managed, our procedures for caring for workers and customers will, and ought to, change. And businesses will have the responsibility to adapt their safety practices accordingly. But they can’t retroactively be held to a higher standard of care than what public health officials communicated at that moment. A liability shield doesn’t remove the guardrails that employees and consumers should enjoy. But it does provide employers with clearer signage about where the pavement ends and the ditch begins. Many businesses simply won’t have the confidence to re-open and re-hire if, even despite their best efforts based on the best publicly available guidance at the time, they could still be held liable for damages if a worker or customer falls ill from coronavirus. This fear would paralyze our economy and impede our nation’s ability to return to the pre-coronavirus prosperity. A liability shield doesn’t remove the guardrails that employees and consumers should enjoy. But it does provide employers with clearer signage about where the pavement ends and the ditch begins, giving them the ability to get back on the road and up to speed more quickly. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER And, the reality is, the vast majority of businesses understand that it’s not only in their economic interests to keep workers and customers safe, but it’s also the right thing to do for the friends and neighbors who make up their workforce and customer base. Businesses operate in communities — they employ and serve people in those communities and foster relationships that go beyond employer-employee and producer-consumer. They’re not asking for permission to endanger their friends and neighbors; they’re asking for permission to responsibly discover what safe operations and economic sustainability look like in a fast-moving and uncertain situation. Trillions of dollars of relief have already shown us that government spending simply cannot save a shuttered economy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP All of us are counting on businesses to quickly find a path to a robust recovery. It’s already a difficult enough job in the face of a novel and evolving health threat. We don’t need to make it harder by subjecting businesses to costly, time-consuming and potentially debilitating lawsuits that demand unreasonable standards of care. Workers need a paycheck, and they need to earn it in an environment that protects their health and safety. Giving businesses a liability shield is the best way to make sure both can happen. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BRIAN BRENBERG

DOJ spokesperson Kerri Kupec joins Martha MacCallum on 'The Story' with reaction to Judge Emmet Sullivan's decision to postpone an immediate resolution of Michael Flynn's criminal case. It’s a sure sign of desperation whenever lawyers try to raise President Richard Milhous Nixon from the dead. And so it is that a group of former Watergate special prosecutors this week resurrected the Ghost of Watergate Past in a last-ditch effort to keep alive the federal court case against former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn. The gang, adopting the sobriquet “Watergate Prosecutors,” asked permission from U.S. District Judge Emmet Sullivan to allow them to intervene in the Flynn case so they can – to put it bluntly – tell his honor how to think and what to do. FLYNN JUDGE TO ALLOW 'AMICUS' SUBMISSIONS, DELAYING IMMEDIATE RESOLUTION AND DRAWING PLANNED ETHICS COMPLAINT The judge issued an order Tuesday indicating he will soon accept “amicus curiae” (“friend of the court”) submissions in the case. But in trial court proceedings involving crimes, only prosecutors and defense attorneys are permitted to be heard. Judges are supposed to render decisions based on evidence and arguments presented by the parties involved, not outside interests.      The prosecution of Flynn, a retired Army lieutenant general, has been on life-support since the Justice Department belatedly moved last week to dismiss charges against him. He was accused of making false statements to the FBI during an interview that was nothing more than a devious perjury trap designed to “get Flynn to lie.” The FBI was creating a crime, not investigating one.  A review ordered by Attorney General William Barr discovered that former FBI Director James Comey’s agents and Robert Mueller’s special counsel hit squad concealed vital exculpatory evidence from Flynn and his attorneys. The hidden documents showed that the retired lieutenant general did not lie to FBI agents, despite his coerced guilty plea under threat.      The former Watergate prosecutors now want to meddle in the Flynn proceedings like uninvited house guests. In a court filing, they compare Barr’s decision to drop the Flynn charge to “the Watergate scandal” and Nixon’s infamous “Saturday Night Massacre.” The analogy is as tortured as the late President Nixon’s soul.  Reading their “Statement of Interest” is a nauseating exercise in the hubris of war stories retold by old warriors prone to embellish. The former Watergate prosecutors imagine themselves as heroes who single-handedly salvaged democracy from the clutches of the demented Nixon. On that basis, they argue to the court, they are back to save the day.  I’m reminded of what Butch kept asking Sundance: “Who are those guys?” Good question. These individuals are hyper-partisans who despise Trump, but have convinced themselves that since they helped drive the demon Nixon from office 45 years ago they should now be given exalted status as super Trump-slayers. The first name that pops out is Nick Akerman. He can be found on page 269 of my book “Witch Hunt: The Story of the Greatest Mass Delusion in American Political History.” He is one of the many media flamethrowers who constantly accused (without evidence) President Trump and his presidential campaign of colluding with Russia. At one point on MSNBC (July 11, 2017), Akerman said the following about Donald Trump Jr. and his conversation with a Russian lawyer at Trump Tower: “There’s outright treason. I mean, there is no question that what he’s doing is giving aid and comfort to the enemy.” No question? Really? Forget that Akerman’s hyperbolic claim of treason had no remote application or support in the law. The president’s son was never charged with any offense because Special Counsel Mueller found no agreement or conspiracy to do anything illegal. But don’t let facts get in the way of a good story, Nick. Another former Watergate prosecutor is Jill Wine-Banks, an MSNBC legal analyst who has a propensity to channel Nixon’s ghost at every turn. Earlier this year, she told Salon that “Trump is more dangerous than Nixon” and should be criminally indicted. On MSNBC, she declared that Trump is more of an “existential threat to democracy than Nixon.”               Richard Ben-Veniste is also a Watergate alum who has carved out a late career as an inveterate Trump thumper. In a column for The Atlantic in 2017, he drew innumerable parallels between Nixon and Trump. In the same publication the next year, Ben-Veniste accused Trump of going the “full Nixon on Mueller.” One gets the distinct impression that Ben-Veniste’s Trump-Nixon obsession belongs on a psychiatrist’s couch.     The 16 former Watergate prosecutors who are now determined to insert themselves into the Flynn case just happen to be the same lawyers (minus one) who penned a joint op-ed in the Washington Post on October 10, 2019 headlined “We investigated the Watergate scandal. We believe Trump should be impeached.” Of course, we know how that turned out. But the point is this: these individuals are hyper-partisans who despise Trump, but have convinced themselves that since they helped drive the demon Nixon from office 45 years ago they should now be given exalted status as super Trump-slayers. This kind of prejudicial interference from outside forces has no place in a court of law. It makes a mockery of both fairness and impartiality. Sadly, Judge Sullivan appears to have taken leave of his senses and decided to entertain the notion of allowing the former Watergate prosecutors to usurp the role of federal prosecutors. This resulted in his order Tuesday indicating he would permit “individuals and organizations” to file “amicus curiae” submissions. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Hours later, Flynn’s lawyer, Sidney Powell, filed a well-reasoned opposition argument that courts are not a forum for special interests. “The ‘Watergate Prosecutors’ have no special role and no authority whatsoever to insert themselves in this litigation on behalf of anyone,” she wrote. Powell also pointed out that Sullivan rejected 24 previous attempts by parties to intervene in the Flynn case. In one of his prior refusals, the judge made this declarative statement: “The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure do not provide for intervention by third parties in criminal cases. Options exist for a private citizen to express his views about matters of public interest, but the Court’s docket is not an available option.”  What has changed? Nothing. But Sullivan’s ruling may be a reflection of his own abiding prejudice. In a hearing last year, he all but accused Flynn of treason, only to retract his words after a recess. He seems to have a feeble grasp of the facts in this important case.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The former Watergate prosecutors should be denied the opportunity to pursue their biased agenda in a court of law. Flynn has been victimized enough by corrupt and dishonest government officials.  Let these former prosecutors resurrect the ghost of Richard Nixon in a more-friendly forum: the Trump-hating media. These media organizations are sure to roll out the welcome mat. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREG JARRETT 

Media accuses President Trump of racism after fiery exchange with White House reporter at Rose Garden news conference. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  At the end of President Trump’s press conference Monday, a reporter offered a churlish opinion disguised as a question. Trump responded in his usual way. CBS News White House Correspondent Weijia Jiang asked: “Why is this a global competition to you if every day Americans are still losing their lives and we’re still seeing more cases every day?” JOY BEHAR: TRUMP SUPPORTERS SHOULD ASK THEMSELVES 'IF THEY'RE RACIST' AFTER PRESIDENT'S EXCHANGE WITH ASIAN REPORTER The president replied: “Well, they’re losing their lives everywhere in the world. And maybe that’s a question you should ask China. Don’t ask me. Ask China that question, OK? When you ask them that question, you may get a very unusual answer.” Jiang responded: “Sir, why are you saying that to me, specifically, that I should ask China?” Trump said: “I’m not saying it specifically to anybody. I’m saying it to anybody that would ask a nasty question like that.” Jiang responded: “That’s not a nasty question.” Of course, how did the media see it? Brian Stelter of CNN said: “It is racist to look at an Asian-American White House correspondent and say ‘ask China.’ This isn’t happening in a vacuum. This is part of a pattern of behavior from the president that goes back many years. He doesn’t have the benefit of the doubt that someone might have if for the first time ever in their life, they made a comment like that to a reporter…  He’s also had this pattern of reacting to minority journalists in a very specific and different way.” Oddly, Stelter's right – there is a pattern of behavior. But it makes his argument hideously laughable. Here's the pattern of behavior, you sputtering chucklehead. President Trump has made the following comments about China to reporters of multiple racial and ethnic backgrounds – not just Asian-Americans – in discussing the coronavirus that originated in China: “There’s nobody ever been tougher on China than me.” “Our relationship with China was good until they did this.” “All I can say is, wherever it came from – it came from China.” “They didn't report what was happening inside of China. No, I'm not happy with China.” “They didn't want us to close our borders to China.” “The only leader of a country that closed our borders tightly against China.” “We're talking to China and we've expressed how we felt. We're not happy about it.” It's amazing we'd have to do a montage of Trump mentioning China, over and over. To anyone. But the media are like a stupid child. You’ve got to walk them through stuff they try to forget, every single day. The fact is, Trump’s been calling out China more often than Brian calls out for Chinese. And Trump was doing it when every moron with a microphone was obsessed with Russia – especially Brian Stelter’s own network. It’s an outfit that watches and waits for its biases to be confirmed. You want to know how it works? Here's an analogy: Bob swears at everyone. Then he swears at someone who's not white. CNN says “see, Bob's racist.” Their grift: ignore the color-blind behavior and selectively pick an instance that builds a smear. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It’s what a broken media does. Their crumbling psyche prompts them to see things they wish were there. This is called fiction. A never-ending profit model of conflict and bitterness that requires smearing people. This relies solely on mindreading: that when Trump says “China,” they can tell its racist. Yet, there's no evidence.  They just know. Because they hope it is. But this isn't just about Trump. Calling him racist is the media's gateway drug to calling you the same thing. Right Joy? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Joy Behar said this of Trump on “The View”: “He is a racist. He throws red meat to his base on a regular basis and anybody who still supports this guy needs to look in the mirror and ask themselves if they are racist also. That’s all I have to say about him. I’ve had enough of him!” Feeling is mutual, you bag of lawn clippings. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 12, 2020.  CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

The Founders would be appalled by what we're seeing in Congress, House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy tells Shannon Bream on 'Fox News @ Night.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. A proposal by House Democrats announced Tuesday to spend over $3 trillion more to deal with the impact of the coronavirus pandemic would send the federal deficit skyrocketing and place an enormous burden on taxpayers to fund. This is why it drew immediate objections from Republicans. The Democratic proposal, which was announced by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California, comes on top of earlier massive spending as part of the nation’s coronavirus response, including the $2.2 trillion CARES Act approved by Congress and signed into law in March by President Trump. The new Democratic proposal includes about $1 trillion for state, local and tribal governments, Fox News reported, along with a new round of $1,200 in stimulus payments to most Americans. HOUSE DEMS UNVEIL CORONAVIRUS BILL ESTIMATED TO COST $3T, IN LARGEST STIMULUS PACKAGE YET The proposal would also continue $600 in extra weekly unemployment insurance benefits through January, set aside $175 billion to subsidize rent and mortgage payments, and suspend student loan payments through September. The federal aid already approved is generous and the additional $3 trillion in spending is more than we can afford. Uncle Sam does not have an unlimited amount of cash and should not borrow unlimited amounts. The federal government is already aiding state health, education, and unemployment systems while offering the states emergency loans. But the states are not subdivisions of the federal government. They should tackle their budget challenges by tapping rainy day funds, furloughing nonessential workers, and cutting low-priority programs. Supporters of additional federal spending seem to think that states are feeble and unable to fend for themselves. But the states have powerful tax bases, rainy day funds, and a large ability to borrow. Local governments are wards of state governments, not the federal government. We need to remember that federal spending is not a free lunch. It will require more borrowing and thus higher federal taxes down the road – taxes that will ultimately land on residents of the 50 states. Congress has already provided about $300 billion in aid to the states. In addition, the Federal Reserve has created a “municipal liquidity facility” to lend money to cash-strapped governments. On top of this, state unemployment insurance systems can tap the federal government for loans. That is enough federal aid. Democratic and Republican supporters of additional federal aid are using the Washington Monument strategy – that is, claiming that high-profile or critical local services are at risk. Congress bailed out the states during the recession a decade ago, yet in the end state and local tax revenues fell just 5 percent in 2009 before resuming growth, according to Bureau of Economic Analysis data. State-only tax revenues fell 10 percent in 2009 before resuming growth. If the revenue dip during the current crisis is similar, states can handle it with the aid they’ve already received and their own budget actions. States can delay less-critical spending, such as highway construction, and they can furlough nonessential workers, as many businesses have done. Half of all state-local spending is for employee compensation, according to Bureau of Economic Analysis data, which means that furloughs can save a lot of money. Democratic and Republican supporters of additional federal aid are using the Washington Monument strategy – that is, claiming that high-profile or critical local services are at risk. Sen. Bill Cassidy, R-La., recently argued: “The tax revenue necessary to pay for police, fire, sanitation and airport ground crews is not there. Once these workers are laid off, there is no one to provide essential services to support employers and homeowners.” But those three critical services – police, fire and sanitation – account for just 7 percent of state and local government budgets. Why not trim the less-critical 93 percent instead? Cassidy mentions “airport ground crews.” But why not furlough some of those workers since airport traffic is down? And why not cut urban transit, since demand is in decline? Certainly, states should not be increasing their budgets, as Pennsylvania’s Democratic Gov. Tom Wolf wants to do. More federal aid would also create bad incentives. It would encourage state leaders to extend shutdowns, which are inflicting huge pain on the private sector. As tax revenues dip from shutdowns, governments will have to tighten their belts along with the private sector, and that will create a good incentive for politicians to reopen the economy. Longer-term incentives are also important. Because states need to balance their budgets, they are supposed to build rainy day funds during the boom years to cover revenue losses during the bust years. Rainy day fund balances today are higher than before the recession a decade ago, which is good news. However, rainy day funds vary from more than 10 percent of annual spending in 18 responsible states to less than 5 percent in 12 irresponsible states. New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Illinois and Kansas have saved virtually nothing. The more that the federal government bails out states during crises, the less responsible states will be in the future. Some states are facing particularly steep revenue drops during this crisis, particularly energy-producing states. But many of those states – including Wyoming, Alaska and North Dakota –knew their vulnerability, planned ahead, and have amassed large rainy day funds. California lawmakers know that the state’s budget is highly dependent on volatile income tax revenues, and they also built a substantial rainy day fund. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Going forward, another solution is for states to rely less on volatile income taxes and more on stable sales taxes. During the last recession in 2009, state-local income tax revenues fell 15 percent while sales tax revenues fell just 7 percent. A final way that states can prepare for recessions is to pay down debt during booms, which improves credit ratings and creates room to borrow during crises. New Jersey Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy wants to issue debt to close his state’s budget hole, which would have been easier if the state did not have one of the highest debt loads and worst credit ratings. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The coronavirus pandemic and the business shutdowns and stay-at-home orders could not have been foreseen by federal, state and local government officials. But emergencies sometimes arise without warning and it is the job of government officials to deal with them. State governments have already received a record level of federal aid to cope with the pandemic and now need to shoulder the responsibility to meet their remaining needs with their own resources and necessary cuts in non-essential spending. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CHRIS EDWARDS  

Fox News chief legal correspondent and 'Fox News @ Night' anchor Shannon Bream breaks down the details. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  There is lots of Flynn chatter today. Three quick points: 1. As I explain in a piece at The Hill today, I understand why the Justice Department relied on a legal argument — viz., lack of materiality — for moving to dismiss the case against Michael Flynn. It spares DOJ the need to get into the facts of the case which, to put it mildly, are unflattering to the FBI and prosecutors. MICHAEL GOODWIN: FLYNN CHARGES DROPPED — WHAT THE LATEST PIECES OF THE PUZZLE REVEAL Nevertheless, the best reason to dismiss the Flynn case is that the government would not be able to prove it beyond a reasonable doubt in court. The evidence is equivocal, the witnesses have profound credibility problems — and those witnesses actually thought Flynn was not lying to them. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The issue for the Justice Department is not whether Flynn made misstatements to Vice President Pence and other administration officials; it is whether prosecutors are in a position to carry their burden of proof that Flynn willfully lied to the interviewing agents. On the evidence as we understand it, I do not believe a jury would be confident even that they knew exactly what statements Flynn made, much less whether his statements were intentionally false rather than honest failures of recollection. 2. It is repeatedly claimed in the reporting that James Comey, then the FBI director, withheld information about the Flynn-Kislyak conversations from Sally Yates, then the acting attorney general, even though President Obama had clearly been briefed on it by the time of the White House meeting on the morning of Jan. 5, 2017. That is not true. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Mary McCord, then-chief of DOJ’s National Intelligence Division, has explained that Comey’s deputy, Andrew McCabe, informed her of the Flynn-Kislyak conversations on Jan. 3. At that point, McCord should have briefed her superior, Yates, and she planned to do just that — on the afternoon of Jan. 5. When people are very busy, this is the kind of screw-up that frequently happens. I’m betting McCord did not realize her boss was meeting with the president that morning; or, if she was aware, she did not realize Flynn was on the agenda. But the fact remains: The FBI did inform DOJ at a very high level. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Fox News chief legal correspondent and 'Fox News @ Night' anchor Shannon Bream breaks down the details. For three years former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn was put through a legal and financial wringer by top officials within the FBI, including its then-director James Comey. The FBI investigation threatened to destroy Flynn’s career, finances and life, as, according to the New York Post, agents tried to get Flynn to lie “so they could ‘prosecute him or get him fired,’ when questioning him about Russian contacts.” Finally, in an effort to protect his son from indictment in the Russia collusion scandal, Flynn pled guilty twice to lying to the FBI over a phone conversation he had with Russian Ambassador Sergey I. Kislyak during the presidential transition in late 2016 concerning “possible ties between the Trump campaign and Russia’s 2016 election interference.” Flynn later sought to withdraw his guilty plea after new evidence emerged that revealed FBI wrongdoing. In documents filed with the court, the Department of Justice said the FBI’s interview of Flynn was “untethered to and unjustified by, the FBI’s counterintelligence investigations into Mr. Flynn.” Further, it said, the interview of Flynn was not “conducted with a legitimate investigative basis.” MICHAEL GOODWIN: FLYNN CHARGES DROPPED — WHAT THE LATEST PIECES OF THIS PUZZLE REVEAL That could be said not only about the phony Russia “collusion” narrative, but also the Steele dossier, which the FBI reportedly knew was bogus before a FISA warrant was sought. That warrant allowed agents to spy on the Trump campaign and transition team, culminating in the impeachment fiasco led by House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff (D-CA). CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The DOJ filing is, as a Wall Street Journal editorial headline put it, a “vindication of Michael Flynn.” But, as former Secretary of Labor Raymond Donovan said after his acquittal in 1987 of fraud and grand larceny charges: “The question is, should this indictment have ever been brought? Which office do I go to get my reputation back? Who will reimburse my company for the economic jail it has been in for two and a half years?” Michael Flynn might be asking the same questions. The alllaw.com site says: “There are several legal claims that come into play when someone is falsely accused or wrongfully prosecuted for a crime. The most common are civil claims based on either defamation of character, or malicious prosecution and/or false imprisonment.” Flynn should sue those who falsely accused and sought to destroy him. While this might be the end of Flynn’s persecution, there is more to come. John Durham, the federal prosecutor picked by Barr to lead an investigation into the actions by law enforcement and the intelligence community into Russian interference in American politics, has yet to release his findings, along with possible indictments. Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, said on Fox News last week he expects Durham’s report in “two to three months.” Grassley also said he thinks there will be more “shoes to drop.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP One can only hope that this outrageous conspiracy will be fully exposed and that the perpetrators will be brought to justice, but the cynic in me is not betting on it. The “deep state” has a history of protecting its own. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

Michael Pack, director and producer of 'Created Equal: Clarence Thomas in His Own Words,' joins 'The Ingraham Angle' to explain. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Many today seem to revel in their victimhood, whether it be based on race, gender, sexual orientation or class. Many have good reason, none better than African-Americans, whose ancestors suffered centuries of slavery, followed by Jim Crow, lynchings and discrimination. But, how useful is it to base your identity on being a member of a victimized group? The life of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas provides an answer. I learned this first hand, interviewing him (and his wife, Ginni) for over 30 hours as part of a new documentary called "Created Equal: Clarence Thomas in His Own Words," which will be nationally broadcast on PBS on May 18. TREY GOWDY: WHY FAIRNESS MATTERS — ALWAYS Clarence Thomas had good reasons, all his life, to see himself as a victim. He grew up in the segregated South and suffered real poverty and hunger when very young. In high school, when he entered an all-white seminary to study for the priesthood, he was the occasional butt of racist jokes and slurs. When, as a young lawyer, he went to work for the Reagan administration, the civil rights establishment considered him a race traitor; journalist Hodding Carter called him one of those “chicken-eating preachers who gladly parroted the segregationists’ line in exchange for a few crumbs from the white man’s table.” His bruising confirmation battle to become a Supreme Court justice, including sexual harassment charges by Anita Hill, ratcheted up the attacks by his enemies. These attacks continue up to the present day, often employing racist tropes, such as picturing Thomas in KKK robes or as a shoeshine boy. For a while, Thomas did see himself as a victim. In his college years at Holy Cross, during the tumultuous '60s, he and others in the Black Student Union supported Malcolm X, the Panthers, and, as he says, “anyone who was in your face.” Thomas says, “Racism and race explained everything.” Finally, during an anti-war rally at Harvard that became a near riot, he was shocked by the violence he felt welling up in him, until he found himself in front of the chapel at Holy Cross in the middle of night, asking God, “If you take anger out of my heart, I'll never hate again.” At that point, Thomas returned to the values of his grandfather, Myers Anderson, who had raised him since he was 8 — the values of self-help, of “do for yourself.” Anderson’s favorite saying was “Old Man can’t is dead. I helped bury him.” Clarence Thomas' grandfather had every reason to think himself a victim: illegitimate, illiterate, grandson of a slave, working from “sun to sun” on an oil truck to make ends meet. But he did not see it that way.  Anderson had every reason to think himself a victim: illegitimate, illiterate, grandson of a slave, working from “sun to sun” on an oil truck to make ends meet. But he did not see it that way. He saw himself as a self-supporting, proud black man who was raising two grandkids. Although Anderson was a supporter of the NAACP, he did not look to the government for help, just for his rights. Later, Thomas would trace this attitude, once common among poor blacks, to Frederick Douglass, whose portrait is behind his desk at the court. Thomas began his opinion on an affirmative action case with a famous Douglass quote: “If the apples will not remain on the tree of their own strength, if they are worm-eaten at the core, if they are early ripe and disposed to fall, let them fall! … And if the negro cannot stand on his own legs, let him fall also. All I ask is, give him a chance to stand on his own legs! Let him alone!” Thomas also traces these ideas to Lincoln and, before him, to the Founders and their ideas of natural rights, which are spelled out in the Declaration of Independence and protected by the structure of government in the Constitution. As he says in the film, “They start with the rights of the individual, and where do those rights come from? They come from God; they’re transcendent. And you give up some of those rights in order to be governed. They’re inalienable rights. And you give up only so many as necessary to be governed by your consent.” His jurisprudence, his originalism, is based on these ideas. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Clarence Thomas has called his grandfather “the greatest man” he has ever known. His grandfather could have lived his life full of resentment, wallowing in his victim status. Instead, he lived as a free, proud and independent man, striving to create a better life for his grandchildren. Clarence Thomas has chosen to live his life that same way. All of us, perhaps with fewer challenges, face the same choice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Reaction and analysis from Copenhagen Consensus Center president Bjorn Lomborg. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Sweden, unlike its Scandinavian neighbors, made different decisions to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. It issued no mandatory orders. It did not require its citizens to shelter at home. True, as of May 4, more Swedes had contracted and died from the coronavirus (2,679 total deaths, a rate of 263.08 per 1 million people) than people in Norway (211, rate of 39.7) and Denmark (484, rate of 83.49). But fewer when adjusted for its population size compared with the U.K. (28,446 deaths, a rate of 427.83), Spain (25,264, rate of 540.71), France (24,864, rate of 371.18) and Italy (28,884, rate of 477.96). It also remains to be seen whether, in the long run, the actions taken by other Scandinavian countries will result in fewer lives lost. This is because Sweden appears to be achieving "herd immunity" faster than other countries and because experts expect another spike in cases when lockdowns are lifted. JAMES CARAFANO: CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA — 3 RULES TO BUILD US UP AND MAKE THEM PAY Furthermore, the rationale for the lockdowns is to prevent a country's health care system from being overburdened. If that is goal, Sweden has achieved it. Its hospitals, intensive care units and emergency rooms have not been overburdened, and the country has had no shortage of medical equipment. Dr. Anders Tegnell, the state epidemiologist of the Public Health Agency of Sweden, in early April said, "I'm not sure that there is a scientific consensus on, really, about anything when it comes to this new coronavirus, basically because we don't have much evidence for any kind of measures we are taking." Tegnell later explained: "We can install limited quarantine measures, but it is not legally feasible to lock down cities or regions — let alone the entire country. ... All (European) countries already have the virus, so why close the borders now? We are more concerned about the mobility within Sweden." Instead, Tegnell urged "personal responsibility" while admitting there is still a lot that he and other experts just do not know about the virus. "I'm not convinced at all. We are constantly thinking about this. ... What can we do better and what else can we add on?" said Tengell. "I think the most important thing all the time is to try to do it as well as you can, with the knowledge we have and the tools you have in place. And to be humble all the time because you may have to change." Sweden advised its people of the seriousness of the pandemic, recommended staying at home unless travel was necessary and advocated mitigation measures like social distancing and wearing masks. When it comes to battling the coronavirus, Nirvana is not an option. This is about trade-offs. They listened. As Swedish writer Johan Norberg, with the libertarian Cato Institute, writes: "Swedes have reduced their mobility substantially, even without police enforcement. For example, cell phone data shows that the inhabitants of Stockholm reduced their trips to the most popular Swedish holiday destinations during Easter by around 90 percent. "This means that our economy still hurts. ... We are not going to shops and restaurants like we used to. But losing two-thirds of your revenue rather than 100 percent might mean the difference between life and death for many entrepreneurs." It helps that Swedes have far greater trust in their government than do citizens in many in other countries. The U.K.'s Independent noted, "The voluntary measures may have also been more effective due to high levels of trust in government among the Swedish population — with 72 percent trusting their government, compared to an EU average of 40 percent." Expect years of analyses of how different countries are addressing this pandemic. But about Sweden, Dr. Mike Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization's Emergencies Program, said: "I think if we are to reach a new normal, I think in many ways Sweden represents a future model — if we wish to get back to a society in which we don't have lockdowns." CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Is this because, unlike America, Sweden has a centralized government that spoke with one voice? No, said Tegnell, who explained that the federal government offered guidelines, but the final responsibility rested with local authorities and individuals themselves. When it comes to battling the coronavirus, Nirvana is not an option. This is about trade-offs. As economist Thomas Sowell said: "In the unconstrained vision, there are no intractable reasons for social evils and therefore no reason why they cannot be solved, with sufficient moral commitment. But in the constrained vision, whatever artifices or strategies restrain or ameliorate inherent human evils will themselves have costs, some in the form of other social ills created by these civilizing institutions, so that all that is possible is a prudent trade-off." Bottom line, Sweden accepts the concept of "trade-offs," something that many who attack President Donald Trump's response to the coronavirus do not seem to understand. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Every year, more than 30,000 Americans die in traffic accidents. It is quite possible to build a vehicle in which no one gets killed. It would look like an armadillo on wheels, and maybe go a gas-guzzling five miles per hour. But nobody would die. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LARRY ELDER

Judges across the country are ordering ICE to release hundreds of immigrant detainees because of COVID-19; reaction from Fox News contributor and retired ICE Director Tom Homan. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Presidential candidate Joe Biden is dangerous for our country when it comes to the rule of law and protecting our nation’s sovereignty. It is not only concerning that what he is saying now puts us at great peril, but equally troubling that he will disown what he has believed in for years to get the power of the presidency. Why do I say that? Consider just one statement on his campaign website: “It is a moral failing and a national shame when a father and his baby daughter drown seeking our shores. When children are locked away in overcrowded detention centers and the government seeks to keep them there indefinitely. When our government argues in court against giving those children toothbrushes and soap. BRIAN ARBOUR: CORONAVIRUS ECONOMY – TRUMP'S REELECTION DEPENDS ON THESE THINGS “When President Trump uses family separation as a weapon against desperate mothers, fathers and children seeking safety and a better life. When he threatens massive raids that would break up families who have been in this country for years and targets people at sensitive locations like hospitals and schools. When children die while in custody due to lack of adequate care.” Now, let’s compare those statements to the facts. Nobody wants to see immigrants die, not the president and not the Border Patrol that saved over 4,000 immigrant lives last year. If Biden wants to know why people who are trying to get to this country are dying all he needs to do is look in a mirror. Many come because of the endless enticements being offered up by him and his party, such as abolish Immigration and Customs Enforcement, end immigration detention, free health care for illegal aliens, drivers’ licenses and a pathway to citizenship for those that violated our laws and entered illegally, just to name a few. With those kinds of promises, folks will flee to the U.S. in droves. They will hire a cartel to smuggle them. That means 31 percent of women will be raped and more people will die making that journey while the criminal cartels continue to make millions. The detention centers were not overcrowded. It was the Border Patrol stations that became overwhelmed. Why was that? Because the Democrat-controlled House refused the pleas for more funding for adequate facilities for women and children during the surge. They ignored it until it got so bad they had to act. That same party denied the existence of the caravans, saying it was all a manufactured crisis. Yes, the inaction of these politicians caused the overcrowding. The Border Patrol, the Department of Homeland Security and the administration warned them and begged for funding, but they ignored the pleas for relief until it was too late. Nobody is asking to detain children or families indefinitely, and Biden should know that. ICE wants to do the exact same thing it did under the Obama-Biden administration:  hold families in a residential center long enough to see a judge and plead their case, which takes about 40-45 days. We did it in FY15 while Biden was vice president and guess what? Ninety percent lost their case and were sent home. The result was a steep decline in illegal crossings. Don’t vilify the men and women of the Border Patrol who are just enforcing the law as written. That is the oath they have taken. The Border Patrol enforces the law as it is enacted by Congress. Entering this country illegally is a crime. People don’t have to break the law to claim asylum. They can appear at a port of entry and make that claim without violating the law, Instead, many choose to disrespect our laws and our country by entering illegally. The data on this has been clear for the last two years. Almost 89 percent of Central Americans who claim asylum at our border never get relief from U.S. courts because they either don’t show up or they lose their case. They are using these loopholes to cheat the system. Parents are not separated out of hate.  People are prosecuted and separated just as U.S. citizens get separated by U.S. law enforcement if they are arrested with their children. Don’t vilify the men and women of the Border Patrol who are just enforcing the law as written. That is the oath they have taken. Biden was in the U.S. Senate for many years. If he didn’t like the laws, he had plenty of time to change them. But instead of taking responsibility for his own inaction, he attacks law enforcement officers who put their lives and safety on the line every day. ICE does not arrest people at hospitals, schools or churches. ICE has a sensitive location policy that includes these locations. That policy was written under the Obama administration and Biden knows that. He can’t cite one example of this happening so the statement on his website is blatantly false. No child has ever died in ICE custody and no child has ever died in Border Patrol custody from lack of adequate care. These kids were in bad shape when found and these agents did everything they could. They are American heroes that save many migrants lives. Remember, migrants died during the Obama-Biden administration also. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But the real issue is not about care on this side of the border. It’s about the horrible journey they made from Central America and became ill during that journey. As I said, if you want to save lives, stop enticing them to come because of promises you are making. Biden has said that one of his first acts as president would be to freeze all deportations. He also has said that only illegal aliens convicted of serious felonies should be deported. Those statements signal that it is OK for anyone to enter this country illegally. And he’s effectively promising the criminal cartels will make millions more on human smuggling. Will all that result in more illegal immigration? Of course. As a senator, Biden voted for border barriers in the 2006 Secure Fence Act, which authorized 700 miles of fencing at a cost of $50 billion dollars, Now, he says we don’t need a wall. He supported a 1996 law that increased penalties for illegal immigration and expanded the government’s deportation authority. In 2008 he proposed jailing employers who hire illegal aliens and cracking down on sanctuary cities. Now he supports sanctuary cities and doesn’t want to deport any illegal alien unless they get convicted of a serious felony. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The bottom line? Under a Biden administration, all the success President Trump has had on our border will be lost. The president has illegal crossings down over 80 percent from the high in May and he has done it without any help from Congress. President Trump deserves our thanks for keeping his promise to secure the border and protect America. Joe Biden has promised to undo all of it. That should scare every one of us. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TOM HOMAN

Congressional candidate and New York Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis joins Tucker Carlson on 'Tucker Carlson Tonight.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Gov. Cuomo will never be confused with Fiorello La Guardia. “When I make a mistake, it’s a beaut,” the legendary mayor of New York once confessed. Unfortunately, Cuomo’s pride and political calculations don’t allow him to admit error even as he finally reverses one of the most deadly policy mistakes in New York history. MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS AND NURSING HOMES — CUOMO, THIS NY TRAGEDY IS ON YOU Nursing homes and rehabilitation centers have tallied more than 5,000 coronavirus deaths, yet the governor accepts zero responsibility despite his March 25 order forcing them to take infected patients from hospitals. Now he says they no longer have to do that, announcing Sunday that “a hospital cannot discharge a person who is COVID positive to a nursing home.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Indeed, the initial order denied nursing homes the right even to ask if patients being sent by hospitals had tested positive for the coronavirus. Now hospitals must do discharge tests and only those who are negative can be referred to nursing homes. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Said one nursing home executive, “It feels at least a month too late.” The move comes amid growing calls for an independent investigation of the nursing home catastrophe, where the death count dwarfs the total deaths in every other state except New Jersey. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

On January 20, the last day of the Obama administration, outgoing National Security Adviser Susan Rice stat down to write her final memo. On Inauguration Day, 2017, it is likely that not 1 in 100,000 Americans was thinking about Russia. GRENELL DECLASSIFIES NAMES OF OBAMA OFFICIALS WHO 'UNMASKED' FLYNN It was the last thing most people were thinking about. The Cold War had ended peacefully more than 25 years before. Moscow was no longer America's main strategic rival as it had been for 50 years. Russia had been downgraded instead to the status of a regional power consumed with disputes with obscure places like Ukraine. In the American media, there were more stories about Russian alcoholism than there were about Russian ICBMs. But in the White House in Washington that morning, Russia was very much the main topic. It was January 20th, the last day of the Obama administration. Outgoing National Security Adviser Susan Rice sat down at her desk to write her final memo. Rice described the presidential transition which had been underway for months. Then she wrote this, during a meeting two weeks before: "President Obama said he wants to be sure that as we engage with the incoming team, we are mindful to ascertain if there is any reason we cannot share information fully as it relates to Russia." CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now, Rice does not explain why Obama's staff felt it might not be possible to give intelligence on Russia to Donald Trump's staff, or for that matter, why the Obama people thought they had the right to withhold national security information from an incoming American president who had just won a national election. Most media outlets have ignored the origins of the Russia conspiracy hoax completely. And as a result of that, Barack Obama's plan to derail his successor unfolded with very little opposition along the way, including from Republicans. The entire country, therefore, spent the first three years of the Trump administration hyperventilating about Russian collusion that did not exist But Rice didn't need to elaborate. There was only one possible explanation for this: Donald Trump could very well be a Russian agent. Barack Obama himself said he believed that was possible. In Rice's words: "The President asked [Jim] Comey to inform him if anything changes in the next few weeks that should affect how we share classified information with the incoming team. Comey said he would." Now, what exactly does that mean? Here is what it means. The president of the United States turned to the head of the FBI, the most powerful law enforcement official in America, and said continue to secretly investigate my chief political rival so that I can act against him. Comey's response? Yes, sir. That's what Obama was saying openly. In any normal period in American history, this exchange would define Barack Obama forever. Obama would be known as the disgraced former president who used federal law enforcement to hurt his political enemies. That's what he did. Unfortunately, this is not a normal period. Already Obama's order that Comey investigate Donald Trump has been relegated to a little known footnote. Joe Biden happened to be sitting in the room when this happened. Has Biden ever been asked about that? It's possible he never has been. Most media outlets have ignored the origins of the Russia conspiracy hoax completely. And as a result of that, Barack Obama's plan to derail his successor unfolded with very little opposition along the way, including from Republicans. The entire country, therefore, spent the first three years of the Trump administration hyperventilating about Russian collusion that did not exist. Susan Rice assiduously did her part to help it along. Here is Rice in July of 2017, a year and a half later, suggesting on network television the president of the United States was indeed working for Vladimir Putin. Susan Rice, former U.S. National Security Adviser: He has taken a series of steps that, had Vladimir Putin dictated them, he couldn't have mirrored it more effectively. What his motivations are, I think is a legitimate question, one that I trust that the special counsel is investigating. But the policies that this president has pursued globally have served Vladimir Putin's interest in dividing the West, undermining democracy. George Stephanopoulos, ABC News host: Does that mean you think it's an open question whether or not he is compromised by Russia? Rice: George, I don't know what his motivations are. I think that's a legitimate question. In fact, it was never a "legitimate question." It was a reckless slur, the most reckless possible slur -- the kind that damages a whole country along with a politician it is aimed at. Because Michael Flynn correctly described Russia as a declining power, and then went on to criticize Susan Rice's close friends in the Chinese government, Susan Rice concluded that General Flynn must be a Putin spy.<br>This is idiotic, and it's crazy. It's hard to believe that Susan Rice was once a national security adviser of the United States, but she was. Rice knew perfectly well, there was no evidence at all that Donald Trump had ever worked for Russia. We know that she believed that because she admitted as much under oath in a closed-door hearing in Congress. As Rice explained to the House Intelligence Committee, the reason she was willing to accuse Trump officials of treason against their own country was that some of them seemed to unduly worried about the rise of China. Here's what Susan Rice, for example, said about General Michael Flynn: "General Flynn's focus was on China as our principal overarching adversary. He had many questions and concerns about China. And when I sought to elicit his perspective on Russia, he downplayed his assessment of Russia as a threat to the United States. He called it overblown. He said they're a declining power. They're demographically challenged. They're not really much of a threat and then re-emphasize the importance of China." "I had seen enough at that point and heard enough to be a little bit sensitive to the question of the nature of General Flynn's engagements with the Russians." Did you follow that? Because Michael Flynn correctly described Russia as a declining power, and then went on to criticize Susan Rice's close friends in the Chinese government, Susan Rice concluded that General Flynn must be a Putin spy. This is idiotic, and it's crazy. It's hard to believe that Susan Rice was once a national security adviser of the United States, but she was. Evelyn Farkas was once Barack Obama's deputy assistant secretary of defense. Farkas repeatedly went on television to say there was ample evidence the Trump administration was colluding with Russia. And yet, like Susan Rice, Farkas said something completely different under oath before Congress. "I didn't know anything," she admitted. Now we quoted Evelyn Farkas saying that on this show on Friday. Farkas responded to us by claiming that we were "missing some key facts." Now originally, she agreed to come on and explain what those key facts might be. She is running for Congress now in New York. Unfortunately then, Evelyn Farkas backed out, but we fervently hope she comes back to tell us what those might be. We'd like to speak to Barack Obama, too. That's unlikely, so we'll have to settle for what he has told his friends. On Friday, Obama had a purportedly private call with supporters that, of course, was immediately leaked to the media. In it, the man who sicced law enforcement on his political rivals accused the current administration of undermining the rule of law. Barack Obama, former president of the United States: That's the kind of stuff where you begin to get worried that basic -- not just institutional norms -- but our basic understanding of rule of law is at risk. "Institutional norms." These people are nothing if not predictable. What you just heard, as always, was textbook projection. You see it again and again and again. What they accuse you of doing, they are eagerly doing themselves. "The rule of law," yelps Obama. It's almost amusing. The press doesn't find it funny in the slightest. They see no irony at all. They repeat it verbatim with solemn faces. Over the weekend, Chuck Todd of NBC accused the attorney general, Bill Barr, of gutting the rule of law, of ignoring it completely. And to prove that, Chuck Todd used what seemed to be quite a damning quote. Chuck Todd, NBC News host: I want you to listen to this Bill Barr answer to a question about what will history say about this. Wait until you hear this answer? Take a listen. Catherine Herridge, CBS News senior investigative correspondent: When history looks back on this decision, how do you think it will be written? William Barr, U.S. Attorney General: Well, history is written by the winners. So, it largely depends on who is writing the history. Todd: I was struck, Peggy, by the cynicism of the answer. It's a correct answer, but he is the attorney general. He didn't make the case that he was upholding the rule of law. "Struck by the cynicism." Chuck Todd, who is married to a political consultant, was just struck by the cynicism. He could barely believe it. He was stunned. Bill Barr didn't even mention upholding the rule of law -- kind of a major omission for an attorney general. But wait -- it turns out that Bill Barr did mention the rule of law. It was at the center of his answer. That was a CBS tape -- NBC got ahold of it and edited out the words to distort Bill Barr's meaning. We have the real tape. Here it is: Herridge: When history looks back on this decision, how do you think it will be written? Barr: Well, history is written by the winner. So, it largely depends on who is writing the history, but I think a fair history would say it was a good decision because it upheld the rule of law. Yes, to be clear, Catherine Herridge did not edit that tape. She did a straightforward interview. NBC News edited the tape. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Now if you're shocked that a news network could be that openly and aggressively dishonest -- so buffoonishly dishonest -- then you haven't been paying very close attention for the past four years. They've been doing it since day one with the Russia hoax, and they don't plan to stop now. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 11, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Trump predicts 'phenomenal' economic restart post COVID-19 despite record 20.5 million jobs lost in April; reaction and analysis on 'The Five.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. We are facing challenging and uncertain times. As Americans are homebound, many are growing restless — as a mom, I share these sentiments. Eric and I welcomed our first child, Luke, in September 2017. We were blessed last August with our precious daughter, Carolina. I think about how our children are being affected by the coronavirus pandemic, and my heart goes out to families who have been impacted and lost loved ones during this difficult time. LIZ PEEK: CORONAVIRUS REOPENING – DEMOCRATS RESIST, AMERICANS PERSIST. HERE'S WHY Now, more than ever, our country needs strong, decisive leadership and that is exactly what we are getting from President Donald Trump. The president and his administration are making sure supplies are getting to the states, increasing testing capabilities and working around the clock to find a vaccine. President Trump took early, swift action to shut down travel from where the virus originated and immediately worked to ensure families and small businesses impacted by coronavirus had access to immediate economic relief. Contrast that to the presumptive Democrat nominee for president, Joe Biden, who instead of calling for unity and offering a positive message, called the president’s prudent, life-saving travel ban xenophobic. It’s unfortunate that Biden chose to politicize the pandemic from the start. The president acted without delay, providing small-business owners and their employees immediate financial support through the Paycheck Protection Program. The program will protect the jobs of millions of Americans and ensure small businesses have the cash necessary to pay the bills. The president also spearheaded efforts with Congress to pass bipartisan legislation that supports American families and businesses hurting through no fault of their own. The CARES Act provides families and individuals with immediate cash relief, while also supporting America’s health care workers on the front lines of the battle. Make no mistake — Biden and the Democrat Party will weaken our economy at a time when we need a strong, decisive leader to rebound following the pandemic. Joe Biden and the Democrats’ solution is higher taxes for the middle class, more job-killing regulations and support of the Green New Deal that will run our economy into the ground. He will take advantage of the crisis to exert more government control over our lives, not for the benefit of working families, but for the benefit of special interests and the Washington establishment. Make no mistake — Biden and the Democrat Party will weaken our economy at a time when we need a strong, decisive leader to rebound following the pandemic. We know President Trump will boost the economy and protect jobs because he knows what it takes to build a strong economy. He built a strong economy once and will do it again. In 2017, he passed the historic Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which doubled the child tax credit and delivered a tax cut of $2,000 to the average family of four. The tax cuts also ensured families kept more of their hard-earned income. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER President Trump and his administration worked with Congress to secure paid family leave for more than 2 million Americans employed by the federal government. The change to the policy represented the first update to federal family leave policy in a generation and provides federal workers with 12 weeks of guaranteed paid time off for parents following the birth, adoption or fostering of a child. The president has also overseen the largest expansion of the Child Care and Development Block Grant in history — a $2.37 billion increase approved by Congress in 2018. This increase in funding will make a critical difference in ensuring more children have access to critical early learning experiences necessary to be ready for the first day of kindergarten. While Washington career politicians and Joe Biden have paid lip service to the American worker and their families for generations, President Trump is following through on his promises to support the backbone of America — the American working family. And as we combat the virus, it is imperative for America to have compassionate leaders willing and able to stand up for working people and their families. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When your son or daughter watching television is afraid, and maybe even asks you if they are safe — you can let them know that they are safe with President Trump in charge. A final message from the president that I hope each and every American takes to heart. President Trump loves the American people and he is with you. We are all in this together. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM LARA TRUMP

Trump predicts 'phenomenal' economic restart post COVID-19 despite record 20.5 million jobs lost in April; reaction and analysis on 'The Five.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  What’s the most important factor in an election? In most years, it is the state of the economy. This sentiment was best encapsulated by Ronald Reagan, who asked in his closing remarks at the lone 1980 presidential debate “Are you better off than you were four years ago?” The 1980 election was held in the middle of a recession and Reagan presumed that most voters would answer no, and vote against incumbent Jimmy Carter. Political scientists like myself refer to this phenomenon as “retrospective evaluation.” This means voters look back at how things have gone over recent times and judge incumbent officeholders accordingly. The economy is the most important element of retrospective evaluation. LIZ PEEK: CORONAVIRUS REOPENING – DEMOCRATS RESIST, AMERICANS PERSIST. HERE'S WHY When the economy is good (like in 1996 or in 1984), the incumbent president benefits and is likely to win reelection. When the economy is poor (like in 1980 or in 1992), the campaign of the incumbent president falls on deaf ears and the challenger wins. At the moment, retrospective evaluation is working against the reelection hopes of Donald Trump. Unemployment is rising, GDP declining, the stimulus provided by the federal government is proving inadequate, and the COVID-19 pandemic continues to rage in the United States. Should we just assume that Joe Biden is a shoo-in in November and that he should start working on his inauguration speech? Not so fast. There are significant reasons to think that the economic downturn, as sudden and as sharp as it has been, will not have the same negative effects on this president’s political fortunes as previous economic problems had for other presidents. The first reason is that the polarization of American politics in the most recent political generation has given both parties a larger base of voters that support their leaders. As the Republicans have grown homogeneously conservative and Democrats homogeneously liberal, voters can more easily understand the differences between the two parties. For voters, even those who are not intense partisans or defined ideologues, the choices between candidates are ideologically very stark. As a result, vote choices are easier to make. In previous recessions, the main story was the recession itself. Not this year. The economic hardship, as deep as it is, is a secondary story to the public health crisis caused by the pandemic. This polarization shows itself in the approval ratings of our last two presidents. Barack Obama recorded an average approval rating of 83 percent among Democrats in Gallup polls across his eight years in office, but only 13 percent among Republicans. Trump’s numbers are even more polarized. He has averaged approval ratings over 90 percent from Republicans and less than 10 percent among Democrats in Gallup polls across his presidency. Trump enjoys near monolithic support among Republicans. That those approval ratings have remained steady for the previous three years of the administration – despite constant stories of scandal and inattention to the mechanics of government – demonstrate that Trump has a higher floor of support than presidents such as Jimmy Carter and George H.W. Bush, who had to campaign for reelection during frightful economic times. The second reason why Trump may not be politically damaged by the economic downturn as much as previous presidents is the unique nature of this downturn. The cause of the downturn is the need to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. The economy is suffering not from the policy choices of the president nor from the inevitable ups and downs of the business cycle. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER In previous recessions, the main story was the recession itself. Not this year. The economic hardship, as deep as it is, is a secondary story to the public health crisis caused by the pandemic. The loss of jobs and failure of business, as big as they are, are a result of the virus. Voters may be more willing to accept explanations from this president about why the economic downturn is not his fault and what he is doing to mitigate the damage to the economy and the public health system. And if the downturn in the economy is temporary, and the economy seems to be coming back in the fall, it is possible that the economy will be a positive issue for the president’s campaign. With that being said, the president is playing a really lousy hand. The defeats of a wide variety of one-term presidents, ranging from George H.W. Bush and Jimmy Carter in my lifetime, to Herbert Hoover in the Great Depression and Martin Van Buren – whose presidency faced both the Panic of 1837 and the Crisis of 1839 –  have been caused primarily by a bad economy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In general, incumbent politicians are punished for bad things happening, even if the bad thing is not their fault.  From shark attacks to tornadoes, wildfires and lottery winners, and even the results of the local college football and basketball team, political scientists have found that bad news is bad for the incumbent and good news is good for his chances of reelection. It takes no big leap in logic to assume that voters unhappy with the pandemic will be less inclined to vote for the incumbent president. So the economy puts President Trump in a disadvantageous position going into the general election campaign. But that conclusion is tempered by the fact that polarization and the pandemic create much more uncertainty about the effects of the economy on this year’s election. It is more likely to hurt the resident than help him; that’s what the history of American elections tells us. But voters may look back and not be happy, but they may not think it is the president’s fault. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BRIAN ARBOUR

Reaction from former California Assemblyman Chuck DeVore, vice president of the Texas Public Policy Foundation. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Tesla founder and CEO Elon Musk threatened to move his company headquarters and manufacturing plant, California’s sole remaining auto factory, out of state — to Texas and Nevada. Neither Texas nor Nevada has an individual income tax and their corporate taxes are lower, as well. With California’s higher taxes, greater red tape compliance costs, higher labor and land costs, and more litigious environment, business analysts estimate that companies can save 32 percent of their operating costs by moving out of California to states such as Texas. LIZ PEEK: CORONAVIRUS REOPENING – DEMOCRATS RESIST, AMERICANS PERSIST. HERE'S WHY California Gov. Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, gave the clearance for manufacturers in California to reopen on Friday, but Alameda County has extended its local shutdown order indefinitely. The county lockdown order brought Musk’s frustration into the open, as it prevents his flagship Fremont assembly line from reopening. The Fremont location has manufactured cars since 1916 for Chevrolet, General Motors and then a GM-Toyota joint venture from 1984 to 2010. Tesla took over the location in 2010. It’s now California’s last remaining automobile manufacturing facility. Musk announced via Twitter that “Tesla is filing a lawsuit against Alameda County immediately. The unelected & ignorant ‘Interim Health Officer’ of Alameda is acting contrary to the Governor, the President, our Constitutional freedoms & just plain common sense!” Musk continued, “Frankly, this is the final straw. Tesla will now move its HQ and future programs to Texas/Nevada immediately. If we even retain Fremont manufacturing activity at all, it will be dependen (sic) on how Tesla is treated in the future. Tesla is the last carmaker left in CA.” Musk appears to be channeling his inner Davy Crockett, who after losing his campaign to get reelected to Congress in 1834 said “…you may all go to hell and I will go to Texas.” If California does enact a series of tax increases, it may well accelerate the economic damage done by the virus from Wuhan, China.    In response to Musk, Democrat San Diego lawmaker Lorena Gonzalez tweeted “F*ck Elon Musk” Saturday night. Texas immediately welcomed Musk to move, with Sen. Ted Cruz tweeting, “Come to Texas! We would welcome Tesla HQ in Texas. We love jobs & Texans very much want to open up & get back to work (while still staying safe & following sound science). We make lots of cars & trucks in Texas, and we’d love more!!” California can ill-afford to chase away more jobs in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. Even before the virus hit, a longtime California commercial real estate developer, John Ghiselli, saw California’s deepening financial crunch as likely to lead to further tax increases. He moved to Texas last year and has created a company — Waterloo Capital Private Equity — that will arrange financing to move companies out of California. Ghiselli is certain he’ll get a healthy return on his investment because the average business that relocates out of California will reduce its operating costs by 32 percent. Business relocation expert Joe Vranich, also a former Californian, published a study last year showing 13,000 businesses left California over the past eight years. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER With widespread government restrictions aimed at slowing the spread of the virus, California’s finances plunged from a multibillion-dollar surplus to a $54.3 billion shortfall, 46 percent higher than it was at the peak of the Great Recession. California, with its nation-high income tax, is heavily dependent on wealthier taxpayers, yet its dominant political class tends to excoriate job creators. California lawmakers returned last Monday to the Capitol, where they are likely going to vote to approve a series of heavy tax increases. In addition, voters will consider two ballot initiatives this November to hike property taxes up to $12.5 billion per year on commercial properties, a whopping 20 percent increase in overall state property taxes. If California does enact a series of tax increases, it may well accelerate the economic damage done by the virus from Wuhan, China. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In contrast, Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott and key lawmakers are said to be preparing to scrub Texas’ budget for billions in savings while holding the $10 billion in their rainy day account in reserve. If California further hikes taxes while Texas holds the line, look for an increased exodus of jobs and people from the Golden State to the Lone Star State. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CHUCK DEVORE

Insight from Gordon Chang, author of 'The Coming Collapse of China.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Around the world, a lot of folks are itching to retaliate against China for its complicity in launching the coronavirus pandemic. But a thirst for vengeance seldom leads one to the wisest course of action. Revenge, after all, is a dish best served cold — or at least without the heat of passion. The ongoing competition between the U.S. and China cannot be resolved quickly. This is a marathon, not a sprint, and there are special rules for this kind of contest. Washington needs to follow them if it wants to win. Long-term competitions are long for a reason: neither side has a decisive advantage over the other. Sparta had a great army, but it wasn’t much use against the Athenian navy — and that went for the other way round. The two city-states butted heads for 40 years. England and France fought for 100 years, because neither side had a good solution for bridging the channel. Neither Protestants nor Catholics could muster a majority in the Thirty Years War. LIZ PEEK: CORONAVIRUS REOPENING – DEMOCRATS RESIST, AMERICANS PERSIST. HERE'S WHY When neither side holds a decisive edge, conflicts can settle into wars of attrition, with the winner emerging at long last, barely standing. But there are exceptions to this debilitating outcome. Consider the Cold War. The U.S. and its allies emerged at the end stronger and richer — and just as free — as when it started. The free world won by adopting strategies that emphasized protecting our key competitive advantages as much as going after the other side. Investing in the Marshall Plan to rebuild the economy of the transatlantic community was every bit as important as fielding an army to defend against a Soviet invasion. In this manner, the West grew more powerful over time as the Soviets strained to keep up. Today, China challenges the West. Beijing has speedily amassed power in part because we let them cut into our competitive advantages. The Chinese Communist Party ran amok through global free markets, lying, cheating and stealing their way to the top. If the free world wants to stay on top and mitigate the threat of Beijing’s global destabilizing behavior, we are going to have to work both sides of the problem — pushing back on China and protecting our core competitive advantages. What has kept the West from becoming a suburb of Beijing so far is that we are free. We can defend ourselves. We are affluent. If we lose those decisive advantages, we become little more than a speed-bump to the Party’s ambitions. What has kept the West from becoming a suburb of Beijing so far is that we are free. We can defend ourselves. We are affluent. If we lose those decisive advantages, we become little more than a speed-bump to the Party’s ambitions. This leads to the three rules we must follow when it comes to getting back at Beijing for the COVID-19 outbreak and its many other misdeeds. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Rule #1. Put first things first. Job one for America, its allies and partners is to get our economies safely up and running. If we can’t do that — nothing else matters. We will be faced with the worst depression in modern history. If memory serves, the last one didn’t go so well and was capped with a cataclysmic world war. So, the first rule is that no major action against China should interfere with rebooting the U.S. economy and the U.S. leading the free world in economic recovery. Let’s get everybody back to work first. Rule #2. Getting the bad guy’s attention is more important than making yourself feel better. Toilet-papering your-ex’s car might lead to some self-satisfaction, but it won’t change his cheating heart. The only steps worth taking against Beijing are those that will actually make them sweat. Case in point: to deal with the growing debt, some want to gut defense spending. If Washington slashes our capacity to defend U.S. interests, that will send the wrong message to Beijing — a message far stronger than insisting aspirin be made in America. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Rule #3. Think long-term. China isn’t going anywhere. Neither are we.  Let’s give them challenges that they will face for the long haul. Perhaps this won’t be as satisfying as a slap in the face, but such measures are much more likely to get Beijing’s attention, mitigate threats and perhaps change the Party’s behavior. Rebuilding the U.S. manufacturing capacity and strengthening trade and investment ties with our friends will worry Beijing far more than restrictionist measures that curb free markets. One good example: let’s create a real market alternative to the Huawei’s 5G telecom trap. The best way to serve up revenge? With policies that both weaken the advantages of the Chinese Communist Party and safeguard the freedom, prosperity and security of the free world. That’s how we keep the strength needed to finish the marathon first and in good shape for the next race. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

A remote-controlled robot dog currently enforces social distancing at a Singapore park. Sorry, Dana, this is America’s dog. I know, it’s in Singapore. But, if I have my way, it will patrol every park and street in our country. Because, as I’ve said before, the only way to save the world is a robot takeover. GREG GUTFELD: ESCAPING THE KID'S TABLE – WHY EVERYONE GOT THE PANDEMIC WRONG, ESPECIALLY THE EXPERTS They’re just better at being humans -- and dogs. This remote-controlled robot dog currently enforces social distancing at a Singapore park. It senses where a pedestrian is and then plays a recorded message reminding them to keep a safe distance. If the person doesn’t cooperate, the dog will sink its metallic teeth into the flesh of the pedestrian and rip out a solid pound of thigh muscle, leaving the person to die -- its corpse later devoured by squirrels. CLICK HERE TO GET THE GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER I’m not sure if that’s true. But here’s what is: the bot's camera will record how many people are in the park. And because it’s a robot, it will never have to relieve itself, making it the perfect companion for Jesse, who would simply pick up the poop and throw it in his neighbor’s yard anyway. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP  So God bless our future robot overlords, and remember, my metal friends -- it was I, your friend Greg, who chose you over these stupid humans. So kill them all… but spare me. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld's monologue on "The Five" on May 11, 2020.

Barack Obama is apoplectic.
The always sanctimonious former president is now upset that Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn will not likely spend time behind bars, or the rest of his life as a convicted felon.
In audio obtained by Yahoo News, Obama privately complains to members of the Obama Alumni Association that, “the fact that there is no precedent that anybody can find for someone who has been charged with perjury just getting off scot-free. That’s the kind of stuff where you begin to get worried that basic — not just institutional norms — but our basic understanding of the rule of law is at risk.” MICHAEL GOODWIN: FLYNN CHARGES DROPPED — WHAT THE LATEST PIECES OF THIS PUZZLE REVEAL The former president’s self-righteous, pearl-clutching statement is both blatantly dishonest and hypocritical. In fact, Flynn was not even charged with perjury. He pled guilty to one count of making false statements to the FBI. One of Obama’s favorite military advisers, retired Gen. James Cartwright, was also convicted of lying to the FBI about media leaks of classified information. In 2017, then-President Obama issued a full pardon for his favorite general. In other words, Gen. Cartwright got off “scot-free” in a perjury case.
Clearly, Obama doesn’t care about perjury. In his administration, lying was a perfectly acceptable means to an end.
The former president lied about the “shovel ready” jobs in his stimulus bill. He lied about premiums going down under ObamaCare. His “keep your doctor, keep your plan” shtick was named PolitiFact’s 2013 “lie of the year.” His United Nations Ambassador, Susan Rice, appeared on five different Sunday talk shows and lied about the Benghazi attack. Rampant dishonesty was a way of life under the Obama administration. CLICK HERE FOR THE OPINION NEWSLETTER
So why is the former president so concerned with the case of Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn? According to Flynn’s attorney Sidney Powell, Obama was a key figure in the plot to frame her client. On Jan. 5, 2017, just one day, after Flynn’s dead-in-the-water “Russia collusion” case was inexplicably reopened, then-President Obama pulled both FBI Director James Comey and Deputy Attorney General Sally Yates aside to discuss Flynn. Yates testified that she was shocked to learn that Obama had intimate knowledge of Flynn’s wiretapped phone calls. In the days and weeks to come, Comey’s FBI took unusual, aggressive and unethical measures to persecute Flynn. Yet, for some curious reason, Obama’s national security adviser, Susan Rice, sent herself a very unusual email, on the very last day of the Obama administration, writing that the president wanted all investigations done “by the book.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP
Now that we know former President Obama is so deeply concerned with our “rule of law,” and doing things “by the book,” and that he knew about the contents of the call Gen. Flynn made, he owes the American people serious answers.
The real question must now be asked under oath: President Barack Obama, what did you know and when did you know it? CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM SEAN HANNITY 

Jim 'Red' Knutson, owner of Jim's Ash Trail Store in Orr, Minnesota, says keeping the state closed is costing small businesses. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Can you feel it? Can you feel the pace quickening? More cars on the road, more people in the stores, more ads crowding your inbox? Activity is picking up, even in my state of New York, where we’re still under lockdown. It’s palpable; Americans everywhere are going back to work. Democrats don’t like that one little bit. The worse things are, the better their chances in November. ARNON MISHKIN: PRESIDENT TRUMP, DON'T DIS THIS GROUP – YOU'LL NEED THE IN NOVEMBER After all, Joe Biden is blaming President Trump for having helped throw the country into a deep recession; he sure doesn’t want the hard times to end. A recent tweet from the former VP claims “Donald Trump spent the last three years undermining the core pillars of our economic strength.” That will be news to the millions of former felons, workers without a high school diploma, disabled people and others who finally, under this White House, were able to find work. Horrific job losses brought on by the coronavirus lockdown are giving Biden’s struggling campaign a lift, and maybe a focus; he claims that he and President Obama guided the country through a similar tough time, so voters should entrust him to do so again. Never mind that the eight years following the Great Recession marked the most tepid recovery of all time. Never mind that Obama and his wingman were singularly AWOL when it came to job creation. Unfortunately for the presumptive Democrat presidential candidate, Americans are resilient; they are tuning out the media and political scolds who for weeks have spewed a steady diet of frightening headlines and statistics. Not that the alarmism hasn’t borne fruit. Surveys show that people are scared that businesses may start up too quickly, leading to a new surge in infections. Those polls show, oddly, that Democrats are far more worried than Republicans. That’s understandable. If you only read the New York Times or watch MSNBC, you can be excused for being petrified. That’s their mission. Caution is appropriate, and especially for the sick and elderly. But most Americans are capable of returning to their not-quite-normal lives, equipped with face masks and keeping their distance. Eventually, those keeping their states under lockdown will be held accountable for the dire problems that quarantining has wrought Ultimately, Americans will vote with their feet. When Gov. Brian Kemp allowed some businesses to reopen in Georgia on April 27, he came under blistering attack for being reckless and shoppers remained cautious. Early on, activity in Georgia’s formerly-closed sectors was gauged to be about 10 percent of pre-crisis levels; now that has risen to roughly 70 percent, according to one private survey. Across the country, governors are lifting restrictions. Even Czarina Gretchen Whitmer of Michigan, who set off protests by enacting draconian stay-at-home orders, has reversed course, dictating that auto companies could restart production as early as May 11. She had no choice. Eventually, those keeping their states under lockdown will be held accountable for the dire problems that quarantining has wrought. People self-isolating are forgoing important medical treatments and screenings, including for cancer and other serious illnesses. Deaths by suicide and because of alcoholism or drug abuse sparked by the isolation measures are no longer matters of speculation; in March and April EMT calls for drug overdoses and suicides in Milwaukee, for instance, rose 54 percent and 80 percent, respectively, compared with the year before. Also, state budgets are in the toilet. Congress may eventually come through with some sort of bailout, but the only sure way that governors will begin to close yawning fiscal deficits is through higher tax revenues. And that will happen only when their local economies spring back to life. Thankfully, that is happening. Georgia is not an outlier. Economists at ISI Evercore, who closely track numerous industries, raised their grim GDP forecast last week, noting that various sectors of the economy, like retailers and auto dealers, have begun to turn slightly higher, albeit from extremely depressed levels. They cited massive stimulus measures and a quicker-than-expected reopening for their improved projections. Initially, the group had forecast second-quarter GDP to drop 50 percent, to be followed by an additional 5 percent fall-off in the third period. Only in the fourth quarter did ISI project an increase, of 5 percent. Now the top-ranked research group is predicting the second-quarter slide to be 40 percent – still terrible but improved – and are looking for a 5 percent upturn in both the third and fourth quarters. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That is, relatively speaking, good news. As is the determination that 88 percent of the job losses recorded in April were temporary, according to the Wall Street Journal. That means thousands of employers have furloughed workers, who will be rehired as activity picks up. Apple, one of the first companies to shut down, is reopening some stores. Walmart is hiring more workers, oil prices have ticked higher and mortgage and credit card data confirm the economy is starting to percolate. Another positive sign is that in the first week of May, more households than expected continued to pay their rent on time. Democrats and their liberal allies in the media are despondent to see progress, which could help President Trump win reelection. The New York Times will continue to run scary headlines about a “second wave” or about rising infection rates. They will neglect to mention that the number of cases is rising because there is more testing, and will downplay the improving outlook for therapeutics like remdesivir, which could temper another onslaught of the virus. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP None of this is to suggest we are out of the woods. Second-quarter results for companies will be hideous, and the stock market will likely sell off on those releases. Continued depressed demand will probably lead to more pay cuts and bankruptcies that could squash optimism and consumption. Undoubtedly there will be an instance of renewed activity causing deaths, and we will have to backpedal. But the United States entered this horror with a booming economy and strong institutions. We will survive, guided by common sense, perseverance and American know-how. Those standing in the way will get crushed. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LIZ PEEK

Comedian Jerry Stiller, who was best known for his role on 'Seinfeld' as the high strung father of George Constanza, has died of natural causes, his son, actor Ben Stiller confirmed. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Frank Costanza’s “Aunt Baby” may never have made it – but the real-life Gerald Isaac Stiller made it to 92, a long and storied life demonstrating that age is only a state of mind. “I’ve never thought of stopping,” the then-84-year-old actor said in an interview. “The only time you ever stop working is when they don’t call you.” The classically trained Brooklyn-born actor and comedian first burst onto the national scene in the 1960s with his wife and actress, Anne Meara. JERRY STILLER, 'SEINFELD' ACTOR AND VETERAN COMIC, DEAD AT 92 “Stiller and Meara” was a wildly popular husband and wife comedy duo that appeared on variety television programs throughout the 1960s and '70s, becoming a fixture on "The Ed Sullivan Show.” Clever writing coupled with the pair’s gift for improvisational performance made them hit. Acting can be a fickle business with many performers peaking quickly and then fading even faster. But Jerry Stiller’s career seemed to ride from peak to peak, perhaps a testimony and reflection of his versatility and humility. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER When Jerry Seinfeld came calling with the role of Frank Costanza, Stiller turned down the part because he was committed to a play with Tony Randall called “Three Men on a Horse.” But the play shut down five months later and the actor needed the work. Stiller’s agent suggested holding out for money, but the actor disagreed, wanting to see where it might lead. Where it led was comedy immortality. Arriving on set, Stiller wasn’t impressed. “I didn’t think the lines were so funny, so I started changing the lines,” he recalled. The role, originally played in earlier episodes by John Randolph opposite Estelle Harris, was written to be a quiet, subservient-type character. Stiller took the part in an entirely different direction, creating the eccentrically loud, agitated and combative Frank Costanza. Jerry Stiller’s improvisational instincts proved their weight in comedic gold. Following his five-year run on Seinfeld, Jerry Stiller would reprise a version of the character in the hit sitcom, “King of Queens.” Playing Arthur Spooner – an eccentric and conniving nudge who lived in the basement of his daughter (Leah Remini) and son-in-law (Kevin James) – the comedian made grilled cheese sandwiches with the couple’s iron while falling under the spell of neighbor Lou Ferrigno’s gossip. As both Frank and Arthur, the iconic and versatile performer would deliver memorable and timeless lines – articulating frustrations in phrases proving that, more often than not, life imitates sitcoms. I often find myself muttering, “Serenity now!” – the calming, relaxation meditation Frank Costanza hollered to soothe his nerves. Whenever someone really bothers me, whether in Washington, the office or even one of our own boys, I often find myself muttering, “Serenity now!” – the calming, relaxation meditation Frank Costanza hollered to soothe his nerves. We don’t celebrate Festivus in our house – the holiday Frank originated after coming to blows over a doll purchase for his son – but we do believe it’s healthy to “air our grievances” when tempers rise. Hold the “Feats of Strength,” please. Though I suspect we’ll continue to enjoy Stiller's comedy for years to come thanks to reruns, his legacy goes well beyond humor and the mindless musings of an eccentric or agitated man. In a recent interview, Stiller reflected that the reason "Seinfeld" worked so well wasn’t just because it was funny or creative. “We weren’t thinking of our next line,” he said. “We were listening to each other. We liked each other and we just made each other laugh.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Life would be a lot more enjoyable if we followed Stiller’s advice – if we listened more and maybe talked less, working to understand each other rather than always insisting on being understood. Rest in peace, Gerald Isaac Stiller. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM PAUL BATURA

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  If you want to see who missed the boat on the coronavirus, don't look at me. Look at everyone. Especially the experts. First, let's talk about those who told us to go about our daily lives, and not to panic. GUTFELD ON GOV. CUOMO AND THE NURSING HOME SCANDAL They were wrong, but, with good intentions. They thought it was for our own good, to lie to us. They knew this virus was bad news, but doctors are trained in giving bad news, so the bad doesn't create more bad. Being in panic mode makes you less likely to focus on important information. To use a clumsy analogy, America is the patient, and the experts had to give bad news to America, without freaking it out. The diagnosis: You're gonna get sick. And part of you isn't gonna make it. Hopefully, you will lose no more than a toe. But it could be more. Initially, this was a highly contagious, deadly disease with no therapeutics in sight. No vaccine. no drugs – and what's just as bad: no real information to soothe our itching curiosity. China wasn't forthcoming. To use another clumsy analogy ... China and its Wuhan virus are like the guy at a bar who keeps saying that pulsing thing on his lip isn't a sore. So experts had bad news for "Patient America." And they relied on their experience as deliverers of bad news. When you give it, you have to deliver it in a way that reduces the panic. Panic leads to fear, which leads to hopelessness, hoarding, then savagery. This is why the medical experts did not level with us on a few things. In the back of their minds, they saw us as dumb animals – incapable of facing a pandemic head on. To buy everyone time – so hopefully, we might become psychologically ready – they said a few things that were false. Those things were: These were not mean-spirited lies, or even cover-your-ass lies – they were simply well-meaning responses that the future proved misguided. Let's tackle each error. First, telling people to live life normally – a suggestion not just from Andrew Cuomo, Bill de Blasio, but top doctors too, early on – was a soothing line designed to keep a population stable, while the experts figure out the plan when the crap does hit the fan. It was meant to buy time. Maybe they felt that panic will only make our response worse, as the true reality sets in. For me – I'm not sure that's a good strategy. I was panicking early on. And I think my panicking helped. I went on “The Five” and said, "Shut down travel!! Now!!" I wouldn't have done that if I wasn't panicked. And remember, I'm a skeptic in general. So while their deflection is understandable – maybe we could have benefited from a little panic. Not a lot, but a little. A little panic might have prevented New York from placing the sick and contagious among the vulnerable in rest homes. Which led to an increase in deaths.  As for experts telling you that there was no proof masks help you reduce transmission? That claim, on its face (no pun), makes little sense. Why the hell do people wear them in hospitals? It’s such an absurd lie, I have to ask: why tell it? Well, the experts operated on a sufficiently plausible belief that if you or I were wearing a mask it would mean fewer masks for nurses or caregivers. I accepted that lie completely. They also said that we – the United Republic of Morons – wouldn’t know how to use a mask effectively. Which is hilarious: given that even a dolt like me can operate a car and an electric toothbrush. We know masks reduce transmission. After all, you cover your mouth with your arm (not the hand!) when you cough or sneeze. Any obstacle, even one with a high fallibility rate of prevention, creates some friction between your action (a cough) and a consequence (droplets ending up on your friend). Even a crappy fence is better than no fence (a burglar loses time and effort navigating that fence). It's the same thing with masks and viruses. Doctors and nurses don't wear masks because it's Halloween. Barriers work. Problem was, no one could get masks in mass quantities. We don't need millions, we really need billions. We didn't have that. The experts didn't want to tap that resource out. So they told us we didn't need them. Now we realize that masks were needed, and could have cut viral transmission. If the experts had leveled with us, and said, “You know what, we don’t have enough masks for you guys; We need them for health workers. Meanwhile, try making one of your own, something reusable. There are YouTube videos that show you how to make one yourself.” If an expert has said that in January, perhaps May would look a whole lot better. But hindsight is 2020, and most people who engage in it are hind-minds. Meaning, they have their heads up their asses until it’s safe for them to blame someone they hate. I’ve noticed this a lot, and it prompted me to come up with “Gutfeld’s Law,” which states: “If you’ve offered no advice on how to deal with an oncoming problem, you lose your spot at the table for discussion when the problem hits.” It’s easy to condemn people for wanting to go back to work, when you’re working, and don’t feel the need to say when we should return. The people who do this will look at people who offer advice on returning to work as callous monsters who want to see people die. These amateurs belong to what’s known as “the kiddie table.” If a person cannot comprehend that every decision carries a risk, not simply a benefit – then they must not be allowed at the adult’s table. They must be quarantined, because not only are they hindering the adults who must make such brave but routine decisions, they are cowardly too. They don’t want any skin in the game, but they want to punish you for having the guts to do what they can’t: which is, to share the risk. When S.E. Cupp castigated Chris Christie for his sober reflection that people will die when we return to work – she was merely mimicking the infantile response of so many sheep that comprise her pathetic industry. None of her shrill, mindless peers could say when a civilization must return to life, but they could certainly condemn you as evil, for taking the adult stand and offering a suggestion based on the facts of future suffering. I have taken a look at all these shameless hacks who’ve called people “callous” or “grandma killers” – and I can’t find a single one who had the guts to suggest what to do next. Instead, they sit in their home studios and wag their fingers at people – especially at those who desperately want to get back to work. Those people don’t have the luxury of a Chris Cuomo, or Cupp, or any of these like-minded clowns: meaning, a job that pays during misery. Hence my second rule: you can’t leave the kid’s table, until you tell us what you’re willing to risk. So back to lies: the last lie – that the flu kills more people so clearly coronavirus isn’t as big of a deal. It was also good-intentioned but misleading. First, we’re told that the flu killed 34,000 people last year. And 60,000 the prior year. We aren’t sure how real those numbers are, but that debate is for another time. Regardless, this rhetorical response was meant to contextualize our priorities. And there's a good reason for that. Here's why: if you don't contextualize death and risk, you are forever paralyzed. You can never leave the house (even though people die daily in their homes – falls, poisonings, fires, choking – hence the Life Alert commercials). But the contextualization is often taken incorrectly. People love to compare the coronavirus to car accidents. The comparison doesn't downplay the deaths from the virus, however – instead, it reveals how humans make decisions that accept risk every day. Cars are missiles made of metal, in which you readily place yourself and your family. These missiles are all around you – some driven by careful grandparents, texting teens or drunk a-holes.  We lose tens of thousands of loved ones a year in car accidents and have friends and loved ones permanently maimed. Yet not only do we accept it, we love our precious death machines! Our cities are built to indulge a technology that kills 38,000 people a year. Within that mentality is where we solve the coronavirus threat. The virus isn't a car. It's a car accident – a result of life's risks. Car accidents taught us to manage risk. It's hard to believe that cars never had seat belts (I even own one that doesn't; it’s from 1957), but it took decades to make buckling up part of daily life. Airbags are still only a few decades old. The coronavirus is the result of biology unleashing something novel into our world of enhanced transport. So now that it’s here, and there is no cure – we must manage risks. If you look at that threat like the risk of auto collision – then proper and permanent hygiene adjustments become the seat belts and airbags in this daily fight against a deadly hazard. Remember how the beeping noise in your car was there to remind you to strap yourself in? We could probably use the same idea when it comes to washing our hands, touching faces, tossing our dirty masks. I also see doorknobs disappearing, replaced with doors that require no hand involvement at all. Of course, one way to avoid car accidents, and also the virus, is to never leave home. That’s not in the cards (unless you have a home studio and a cush job in TV). So that's likely how we learn to live with a murderous virus – the same way we learned to live with murderous machines. This is not a callous thought – in fact, it's the opposite. It's the adult assessment of life's risks, which then helps everyone (you and me, plus our leaders and experts) to figure out novel ways to reduce the odds of a novel virus ending our lives. The people who keep screaming, "But people will die if you go back to work," love to ignore that people already die when they go to work, in their cars, thousands of times a year. Last, I want to bring up an interesting phenomenon, coined by Scott Adams, called Cheryl’s Law. It’s based on the wisdom of a restaurant server who noticed that any major change in the daily routine can essentially make business “stop.”  Meaning, if you own a café, and it starts raining in the morning, you might not get a customer all day. People change their plans. But, likewise, if the weather becomes miraculously sunny and warm – then no one shows up your café either. They went to the park. But once the “change” becomes routine, then the people return. They get used to the rain, or the heat, and start returning to their daily lives. And customers return to the café. I noticed this in my job. At the start of the pandemic, I (along with others) repeatedly stressed the importance of unity and cooperation. Let’s put aside our petty political squabbles, we’d tell ourselves – because we have a war to fight against an invisible enemy! And you know what? It worked! For maybe two days. The novelty shock of the pandemic – like a change in weather – might have been enough to quell our normal ideological, team sport beefs. But, after we got used to this new world, and the novelty wore off … others were back to our old tricks. Liberals screamed at Trump. Trump mocked them in return. Pundits started blaming everyone for not seeing this pandemic coming … the same pundits who were binging on the impeachment miniseries, while the virus exploded. CNN mocked people wanting to go back to work, while at least one employee violated quarantine. The media proved Cheryl’s Law: their finger-pointing divisiveness stopped until they got bored of the novelty. Then their pettiness returned, in full force. And, you can bet, as the election nears, it will only get worse. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Finally: if there is no vaccine in the near future, and other therapies remain iffy – what's left? Changing our behaviors, which will allow us to resume something akin to a normal functioning society. How long will that take? Who knows? It turns out even the experts don't.  The good news – we're learning a lot every day. Good stuff about you and me: How we handle this, how we can improve on our handling of similar crises for the future. We see the resilience of a country, and how polarization only exists with pundits and politicians. We're doing fine. And we'll keep doing fine. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As long as we level with each other. The truth hurts, but we can take it. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

The state of Georgia is calling for a federal investigation into how local prosecutors handled the shooting investigation; Jonathan Serrie reports. When I first saw the horrifying video of the shooting death of Ahmaud Arbery, I was sickened to my core. I’ve worked in the criminal justice system since 1989, as a law enforcement officer, prosecutor and defense attorney. I have worked more murders than I care to remember, and I’ve seen all sorts of graphic evidence, yet this video shook me. I’m not alone. The emotional response to this video caused such an uproar it got the attention of Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp, who immediately offered the assistance of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI). They, in turn, arrested Travis and Greg McMichael for murder within 48 hours of taking over the investigation. At face value, this feels like a clear case of murder with an eventual conviction a foregone conclusion. But I’m not sure a conviction is certain. Why? Because of the early involvement of a Georgia district attorney who later dropped an investigative land mine into the case that creates a blueprint for a potential acquittal and will certainly make the prosecution’s job much harder than it needs to be. JACK BREWER: DON'T POLITICIZE AHMAUD ARBERY'S HORRIBLE DEATH According to a May 10 press release from the state Attorney General's Office, in the immediate aftermath of the shooting, DA George Barnhill of the nearby Waycross Judicial Circuit injected himself into the case – where he had, at that time, no jurisdiction – and was instructing local police that he saw no reason to charge anyone. This, of course, before any meaningful investigation into all the facts had occurred. When the Brunswick district attorney had to recuse herself because Greg McMichael had worked for her as a criminal investigator, Barnhill was brought in to oversee the case. Barnhill nearly immediately concluded, largely on the basis of video evidence, that there was no probable cause to charge anyone with any crimes. He quickly concluded the shooter was acting in clear self-defense. But he didn’t stop there. Even though Barnhill himself was eventually recused from the case because he is the father of an assistant DA in Brunswick – upon his departure he dropped a poison pill into the case file that could derail the entire prosecution. In early April 2020, Barnhill sent a letter to Glynn County Police setting out a detailed analysis of the facts of the case and explained why, under Georgia law, there should be no arrests. Barnhill’s letter, which seems like a reasoned analysis, concludes these two men acting lawfully wound up defending themselves from a fleeing felon who attacked them. This is a defense lawyer’s dream. A letter – complete with the official DA’s letterhead – concluding the defendants should never have been arrested. It’s a blueprint for a trial defense that could easily lead to an acquittal. And there are other problems. Most importantly, the letter is based on erroneous factual assertions and flawed legal conclusions. First, Barnhill says the McMichaels were lawfully making a citizens’ arrest as authorized by Georgia law. He says they had “solid first hand probable cause” and were in “hot pursuit” of a “burglary suspect.” That simply is not true. The first shot is clearly heard being fired while Arbery is in front of the truck. There was, in fact, a life or death fight for control of that shotgun – Arbery was trying to disarm his attacker. Although video has now emerged that shows Arbery entering a nearby house under construction, there is no apparent evidence that he was committing a burglary. At most, this video shows a trespass. Burglary requires an intention to commit a theft or a felony. The video does not show that. Arbery is not seen leaving that construction site with any stolen property. There’s no way to know for sure why he was at that location, but the fact remains there is no way the McMichaels could have concluded he was a burglar from the mere fact that he had visited, for whatever reason, this house under construction. Second, Barnhill concludes Arbery “attacks Travis McMichael" and tried to take McMichael’s shotgun away from him and that McMichael was, therefore “allowed to use deadly force to protect himself.” I disagree. Under Georgia law, a person can’t claim self-defense if they start the fight. Barnhill says he sees on the video that Arbery attacked McMichael after making an abrupt left turn toward where the shotgun-wielding McMichael was standing. This initial altercation occurred in front of the parked pickup truck and out of the view of the camera. There is no way Barnhill could see that from the video. The first shot is clearly heard being fired while Arbery is in front of the truck. There was, in fact, a life or death fight for control of that shotgun – Arbery was trying to disarm his attacker. I would have done the same thing. Sadly, Arbery lost the fight and lost his life after more close-range blasts from the shotgun. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Barnhill’s letter simply glosses over the fact that the fight for the shotgun took place AFTER McMichael had already shot Arbery. To be fair, we don’t know exactly what happened in that one second in front of that truck. But absent any other evidence, there is just no time for anything much other to have occurred than for McMichael to have pulled the trigger. Nevertheless, this letter is a HUGE problem for the GBI and the new prosecutor. It is out in public and fueling the public discussion. And if experienced prosecutors and the head of the GBI – an experienced criminal lawyer (defense and prosecutor) and former judge – can't agree on probable cause for an arrest, I doubt a jury will be able to agree that anyone is guilty beyond a reasonable doubt. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Did Barnhill knowingly inject a poison pill into the investigation? If so, why? Was he trying to sabotage any future prosecution? These are legitimate questions that Barnhill will be called on to answer. Georgia's attorney general has now asked the U.S. Department of Justice to investigate this investigation – including Barnhill's early involvement and his letter. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PHILIP HOLLOWAY

Steve Hilton weighs in on the costs of media misinformation. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Coronavirus is bad enough, so here's the question: Why would anyone want to make out that it's worse than it is? Rachel Maddow, MSNBC host: America is the largest coronavirus disaster in the world by a million miles. COLORADO RESTAURANT DRAWS LARGE MOTHER'S DAY CROWDS IN DEFIANCE OF STATE ORDER "By a million miles!" To try and prove that claim, she showed a graphic of cases with a helpful little red arrow to show you just how bad America. It looks really bad, right? Just the worst. But America's population is bigger than all of those countries put together. Even The New York Times isn't that deceptive. They said a better comparison is with Western continental Europe. And on that basis, it turns out, there are many thousands more cases in countries not run by Trump. But even that's not the whole picture because the number of cases statistic actually measures the number of tests. So, why don't we compare what really matters - how many lives are being lost. There's the actual data, Johns Hopkins deaths per 100,000. America has the least bad outbreak of any major country apart from Germany. And as some have noted, if you take the New York metro area out of it, the rest of America is close to Germany. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The media's other constant apocalyptic chorus is about testing. Chris Cuomo, CNN anchor: It just shows how far we are behind in terms of testing and tracing. Behind who? We test more than anywhere else by far, over eight million tests to date. It's not even close. On test per population, we are ahead of South Korea, who the media constantly go on about as the gold standard. And by the way, that's after the initial bungling by the media's precious public sector CDC was replaced by the private sector innovation brought in by President Trump and his team. It is not just testing, though. The fear mongers in the East Coast media elite, after weeks of solipsistically assuming their experience in New York was the same as everyone else's, are now trying to frighten the rest of America with misinformation about the coming coronavirus disaster in places like South Dakota. I don't think they've ever paid so much attention to Red State America in their lives. But now, they can terrify people about the looming disease apocalypse for the meatpacking rubes. They're all in. But I checked the data on the deadliest coronavirus day in South Dakota. Five people died; five family tragedies. But the number was five. Deaths per 100,000 in South Dakota, four. In New York, it's 138. We put them on a chart, and you can barely even see South Dakota. We're still waiting for the media's South Dakota apocalypse. It's nonstop fear-mongering misinformation. They said the new head of the HHS coronavirus response team was a Labradoodle breeder. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host: A Labradoodle breeder is currently running the day-to-day federal government response to a once in a century pandemic at HHS. Frightening, right? I mean, what an utterly incompetent federal government, putting a dog breeder in charge of coronavirus. It's not just coronavirus that kills, the shutdown costs lives, too. Except he is not just a dog breeder. He turns out, once you check the facts, to be an experienced government official in multiple administrations, including in the White House in the Health Department. But whatever. Let's just scare the American people. Let's just scare them about nursing homes, too. Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn.: We have to be able to go into hotspots or potential hotspots like nursing homes or prisons or densely populated neighborhoods and be able to test people who aren't showing symptoms. Yes, senator. And almost two weeks before you said that Dr. Deborah Birx said this. Dr. Deborah Birx, White House Coronavirus Response Coordinator: We'll be doing sentinel surveillance throughout nursing homes, throughout inner city federal clinics, throughout indigenous populations to really be able to find early alerts of asymptomatic individuals in the community. The worst disaster in the world. The coming disaster in South Dakota. The government is doing nothing. On and on it goes. But it's all a misinformation. And it matters because Democratic leaders take their cue from what they see on their favorite news outlets -- CNN, MSNBC, and all the rest of them. It's a mutual appreciation society. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo: Thank you for your reporting on this story. You've done a tremendous service to us all. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi: Any chance I get, I want to thank you for the beautiful presentation you make about the challenge that our country is undergoing. Oh, yes. Thank you. Thank you so much. You're so marvelous. This misinformation, this fear they stoke, it's not just empty words. It has a real world impact -- the human costs of the shutdown pushed by the shutdown fanatics on TV. Fear stops people from going to the hospital, even when there are empty beds. Fear stops people from going out, even when they're not at risk. Fear costs jobs and livelihoods, yes. But it also costs lives. So, please stop this dangerous divisive misinformation. If you want to open up, they say, you want people to die. Chris Cuomo: He is a fan of money first, mortality second. Pelosi: As the President fiddles, people are dying. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host The president is now listening to voices on the right that say, "Really? What's a million seniors when you're thinking about the whole economy?" Ignore the grotesque and gratuitous insult, and just focus on the facts. It's not just coronavirus that kills, the shutdown costs lives, too. Two senior cadets at the Air Force Academy committed suicide within days of each other after they were isolated. Zach Branson's liver transplant was canceled when he might just have a month to live. Alison Krupnik was set for cancer surgery before her hospital called it off. In April, 1.4 million health care jobs disappeared. The fear stoked by the establishment media, according to this doctor, has literally killed people. Dr. Harlan Krumholz, Yale School of Medicine: My hunch is that it may be a good third of the toll of people dying out of the hospital, maybe because of preventable illnesses that are not the direct result of the virus, but actually indirect result of people being fearful about getting care. Dr. Jeff Tomlin, chief executive officer of EvergreenHealth: People are choosing to stay away, we even found that for stroke and even some of our heart attacks. And just listen to this doctor. Unidentified doctor: I'm calling as a clinical psychologist and our percentage of death is way less than 0.01 percent. Our percentage of getting it is a little bit higher, but not much. And we're watching as many counties are, the emotional toll that this virus is taking on people with rising incidences of domestic violence, child abuse, and just the emotional devastation. Heart attack, stroke, child abuse ... but you know, we've got to keep going with the shutdown. Have your heart attack at home; I'm sure you'll be fine. How bad is a stroke, really? Do you need a doctor for that? Child abuse -- it's a price worth paying. Here's the real intellectual dishonesty of the fear mongers. They don't even ask whether the human cost of the shutdown is worth paying because they pretend there isn't one. Stopping coronavirus infections is the only an absolute imperative. Nothing else matters. This is what Santa Clara County Health Officer Dr. Sara Cody said recently. She imposed the nation's first shutdown here in the Bay Area. "If we lift too soon, there's no reason to think we wouldn't have exponential spread. Our whole population is susceptible and at risk." That is not true. We know from the data that over 80 percent of those infected have mild or zero symptoms. Our whole population is not at risk. Because of this reckless, manufactured climate of fear, people are terrified of even catching this virus. That's ridiculous. As we've said here from the start, the focus should be on protecting the vulnerable. But no, they pushed fear, and we now have a human catastrophe from the shutdown. Millions upon millions have lost their jobs, their health insurance, and their hope. Most of them, by the way, the exact same people the moralizing media grand standarders saying they speak for. Guess who has been hurt most by the shutdown? Hispanic-Americans. It turns out their biggest threat wasn't from the racist Trump, but you, the fear mongering media. Your misinformation has a human cost. It breeds fear. Fear stops people from going to the hospital, even when there are empty beds. Fear stops people from going out, even when they're not at risk. Fear costs jobs and livelihoods, yes. But it also costs lives. So, please stop this dangerous divisive misinformation. I'll give the last word to someone I don't know, but who seems incredibly smart and brilliant at what she does. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Rachel Maddow: If somebody is repeatedly misinforming the American public about important things having to do with this disease, don't broadcast that. Adapted from Steve Hilton's monologue from "The Next Revolution" on May 10, 2020 CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM STEVE HILTON

Michael Flynn’s attorney Sidney Powell joins ‘Sunday Morning Futures.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  The best way to understand the dismissal of the phony prosecution case against Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn and the release of secret congressional testimonies is to imagine a giant jigsaw puzzle. We know the final picture will show a broad conspiracy by law enforcement and intelligence agencies under Barack Obama to undermine Donald Trump’s campaign and help Hillary Clinton win the 2016 election. When that failed, many of those same people turned their efforts to sabotaging Trump’s presidency. Some are still at it. ANDREW McCARTHY: FLYNN CASE — OBAMA OFFICIALS, FBI COLLABORATED TO INVENT 'RUSSIAN COLLUSION' NARRATIVE That’s the big picture, and last week two more significant pieces of the puzzle fell into place. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The congressional testimonies were more shocking because they go to the heart of the Russia collusion narrative spun by Democrats and their media handmaidens. The witness took the oath in 2017, but what they said was hidden ever since. Now we know why. Rep. Adam Schiff, the California Dem, didn’t want the public to realize that top members of the Obama administration had blown the collusion narrative to smithereens. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP One after another, James Clapper, Susan Rice, Samantha Power, Loretta Lynch, Sally Yates and others said some version of “I know of no evidence linking the Trump campaign to Russia.” This was terrible news for Schiff, who released the documents only because the White House threatened to if he didn’t. Schiff, recall, relentlessly insisted he had seen lots of collusion evidence. Maybe he needs an eye test. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

The coronavirus caused doctors’ offices across the country to go virtual in an effort to keep their patients safe, but is it really practical? Here is what some practitioners say about the virtual health platform. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The coronavirus pandemic has been exposing unnecessary routines in many industries. In health care, the battlefield shift to telehealth is teaching us a lot. After all, does it really make sense to drive to see a doctor for a urinary tract infection, for example, where a hands-on exam may not be required? Consider our current system of calling to set an appointment, driving and navigating a parking garage, signing in and waiting in a lobby to see a doctor for the 15 minutes it would take just to get a basic prescription? Add to that the expensive medical non-transparent pricing-billing-collections game that drives people crazy. Of course, an in-person appointment makes sense if you need a hands-on exam, but for many conditions and quick follow-ups, telehealth is far less expensive and reduces the lost productive time for many Americans. DR. MARC SIEGEL: CORONAVIRUS AND NURSING HOMES — FLORIDA SETS EXAMPLE WITH THESE STEPS TO PROTECT ELDERLY Due to the COVID-19 crisis, many doctor visits and elective procedures have been postponed as the health care system scrambles to combat the virus. As a temporizing measure, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services used a waiver to authorize telemedicine expansion for approximately 60 million Medicare beneficiaries. This governmental action allowed a wide range of clinical providers (physicians, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, nurse anesthetists, clinical psychologists, social workers and dietitians) to see patients via videoconferencing by enabling them to receive the same reimbursements as they do for in-person visits. As we empower clinical providers during this national emergency, there is a tremendous opportunity to re-invent the way we routinely deliver health care in the U.S. Embracing telehealth expands access to medical care and improves our nation’s health security. Never again should we be caught off-guard by a pandemic that exposes our inadequate health technology system for delivering services remotely. Telehealth increases our country’s surge capacity, improves our health security and addresses geographic disparities to high-quality care. Instituting telehealth widely is badly needed right now. Doctors and hospitals have a massive backlog of patients in a holding pattern for routine and even semi-urgent care. This backlog has received little attention from the media, but it is a tsunami that threatens to overwhelm our hospitals and clinics once the infection subsides. Currently, existing telehealth platforms are experiencing delays and longer wait times to accommodate the rush of demand. This rush is viewable by the FAIR Health telehealth state tracker. Making robust telehealth systems available to all health care professionals would help us quickly serve the people that have been patiently waiting for their care. Making telehealth mainstream has the promise of improving quality and lowering costs by ushering in price and quality transparency.  States can contribute to advancing telehealth by instituting payment parity for telehealth for their state Medicaid programs. Currently, most states reimburse providers for telehealth at a reduced rate, making it challenging for providers to adopt telehealth for their entire practice. This change would impact the health of the 74 million people insured through Medicaid. The benefit is magnified because Medicaid patients have more comorbidities — a major factor accounting for the higher case fatality rate among minority groups in the U.S.  Medicare and Medicaid patients may represent the most vulnerable populations in the U.S. Creating new lines of health dialogue for these Americans could enable better health promotion and address chronic diseases, which account for 75 percent of health care costs in the U.S. While there are many debates about how to reduce health care costs, one idea has universal support: healthier people cost less. Private insurers and self-insured businesses can also advance telehealth for approximately 240 million people who do not have government insurance for health care. Twenty-nine states, including those heavily affected by coronavirus such as New York, California and Washington, already require insurance companies to reimburse telemedicine at the same rate as in-person care. Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina, the state’s largest private insurer, is providing reimbursement parity for telemedicine visits. Health plans have also announced a wider array of telehealth services, and CVS Health has offered its members zero-dollar copay telemedicine health visits for any reason in a 90-day window during the pandemic period. Similarly, some telehealth services, such as Sesame, are allowing physicians to use their telehealth, direct-pay and scheduling platforms for free during COVID-19. While these measures offer help at a time of need, we should consider their benefits long-term.  The fundamental problem in the health care cost crisis is that markets are not competitive, enabling price inflation fueled by a price markup-discount game between hospitals and insurers. Making telehealth mainstream has the promise of improving quality and lowering costs by ushering in price and quality transparency. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Times of crisis can provide a long-overdue re-examination of why we do things the way we do. Historically, moments like these have challenged dogma and spawned innovation. For instance, wage controls that came from World War II unintentionally launched health insurance as a worker benefit in the U.S. Given our current strain on our health care system, we need to view telemedicine as a strategic investment to survive not only the current crisis but also the post-COVID-19 recovery.  Telemedicine payment parity is a means to address some of the most systemic inefficiencies of the U.S. health care system. It’s a straightforward economics argument: if physicians are compensated equally for both in-person and virtual care, they will have a higher incentive to participate, which will increase the supply of physicians on telemedicine platforms. It will also address socioeconomic barriers to better health. Parents will not need to worry about child care and transportation issues to see a doctor. On the provider end, payment parity will promote competition in the virtual care market and distance is removed as a barrier to treatment, enabling doctors in less populated areas to see patients in the most afflicted areas. Also, in a time of rampant consolidation in the health care industry, telemedicine consults enable physicians to practice in a wider variety of locations (maybe even from home), possibly reducing overhead costs and increasing competition in the market. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Finally, one of the elusive targets of health care has been quality control. Telehealth allows health care professionals to record their sessions for peer-review, benchmarking and quality improvement. Such an approach can help standardize best practices and elevate the bar for all clinicians. Ultimately, transparent quality information could be used in an open market that competes on value. It is time we revamp archaic and cumbersome patient services. Doing so has the promise of improving quality and lowering costs by making health care more streamlined and more patient-centered. In order to achieve this goal, all of health care’s stakeholders need to step up to make the current telemedicine experiment a permanent reality. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. MARTIN MAKARY Victor C. Agbafe is recent graduate of Harvard University and an incoming medical student. Nancy L. Woo also contributed to this article.  

Fox News Flash top entertainment and celebrity headlines are here. Check out what's clicking today in entertainment. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  More than 200 celebrities, scientists and Nobel Prize winners have signed an open letter rejecting the idea that things should “go back to normal” after the coronavirus pandemic ends – arguing that we must, instead, stop “the pursuit of consumerism.” Now, to be clear, I’m not attacking them for their success – or even for them enjoying it with lavish lifestyles. What I am saying, however, is that I can’t help but be irked by the unconscionable lack of awareness you’d have to have in order to sign something like this while you’re sitting in an extravagant home surrounded by servants. After all, if any of the super-wealthy people who signed this letter had any real interest in stopping the “pursuit of consumerism,” they would certainly have started with taking a look at their own habits in that area. JUSTIN HASKINS: MILLIONAIRE HOLLYWOOD LEFTISTS USE CORONAVIRUS AS EXCUSE TO JUSTIFY SOCIALIST POLICIES The letter, which was published in the French publication Le Monde on Wednesday, states, in part: “The pursuit of consumerism and an obsession with productivity have led us to deny the value of life itself: that of plants, that of animals, and that of a great number of human beings. Pollution, climate change, and the destruction of our remaining natural zones has brought the world to a breaking point.” Many of these people – such as Madonna, Robert De Niro, Iggy Pop, Christian Louboutin, Penelope Cruz and Jane Fonda, to name a few – are incredibly rich and famous. Madonna, for example, is actually totally free to sell her multimillion-dollar mansion in Lisbon and give all of the cash to Greenpeace if she wanted to. No one is stopping her – and actually, with a net worth that Forbes estimated at $570 million in 2019, she could probably part with a lot of her assets and still live far more comfortably than the vast, vast majority of us could ever even imagine. Their money doesn’t bother me and neither does their fame. What <em>does</em> bother me, though, is the hypocritical virtue-signaling they all displayed in signing something like this. I’m not singling out Madonna, either – because there were a lot of people on that list who probably haven’t exactly had to resort to eating boxed macaroni and cheese in a while. Celebrity Net Worth, for example, estimates Jane Fonda’s at about $200 million. Oh, and Robert de Niro? A cool $500 million.   Perhaps what’s most insane of all is the fact that Christian Louboutin signed this letter, when it’s public knowledge that the most basic pair of Louboutin heels sell for nearly $700. Louboutin doesn't hate consumerism – he lives and breathes it. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Obsession with material status symbols isn’t just acceptable to him, it’s actually his entire business model. It’s the entire reason why he, the child of a cabinetmaker and stay-at-home mother, was able to launch a business that made him worth an estimated $85 million today. The thing is, I actually think stories like his are amazing; I’m not attacking any of these people for having success or money. Far from it. Madonna is worth hundreds of millions of bucks, but she has also worked very hard and is incredibly talented. (I’m serious. It’s hard to believe that “Like a Prayer” came out more than 30 years ago because it still gets me on my feet any time I hear it.) No, their money doesn’t bother me and neither does their fame. What does bother me, though, is the hypocritical virtue-signaling they all displayed in signing something like this. In fact, it’s hard to see it as anything other than an insult to the intelligence of the rest of us. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP After all, we’re not stupid, and we know these people aren’t schlepping it. We know that Penelope Cruz, for example, is in fact not sleeping on a bale of hay in an abandoned barn somewhere – and we also know that both capitalism and her devotion to productivity are two major reasons why. If you’re rich and you’re famous, go ahead and live like you are. You’ve earned it! But please at least respect the rest of us enough to not pretend that you’re devoted to minimalist living – after all, if you really were, you would start by trying it yourself. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KAT TIMPF

Former President George W. Bush releases a message to the American people amid COVID-19 pandemic. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  While the Biden campaign leaked this weekend that they are secretly organizing “Republicans for Biden,” two videos went ‘viral’ last week – that either directly or possibly implicitly – had Republicans attacking President Trump. The first, by former President George W. Bush, was ostensibly a unifying patriotic message about America – and how Americans join together – across parties – during times of attack, such as COVID-19. But many saw in the video an implicit criticism of President Trump – and how he has responded to the pandemic. Many noted that Bush had publicly not voted for Trump in 2016 and wondered if he’d be even more vocal this year. Among those was the president, who responded to the Bush video by asking why the former president had not called for putting partisanship aside during the impeachment of Trump. ARNON MISHKIN: BIDEN'S VICE PRESIDENTIAL PICK – THIS MAY BE THE MOST IMPORTANT FACTOR TO CONSIDER The second video was by the group calling themselves “The Lincoln Project” – who are actively raising money to defeat the President. They created an ad “Mourning in America” – a riff on the famous 1984 “Morning in America” ad for Ronald Reagan. The ad frontally attacked President Trump and blamed him for the government response to COVID-19, the death toll and the economic fallout. The president was equally direct in his response – tweeting that the people behind the ad had lost presidential campaigns in 2008 and 2012 (John McCain and Mitt Romney) and had been beaten by him in 2016. He called them RINOs – “Republicans in Name Only” – in other words, the people who only support part of the president’s agenda, but aren’t willing to support the entirety of the Trump program. But the president – and the entire Republican party – run a clear risk in trying to run without the support of many who are not entirely supportive of Trump, especially if Biden is trying to organize them. Indeed, it was the RINOs who arguably put Trump over the top and into the White House in 2016. And while many Trump supporters may not like them, they’re going to need them again in 2020. For the president, who currently is running at 45 percent approval in the RealClearPolitics averages, he’s going to need to keep the votes of all those RINOs who “held their nose” and voted for him in 2016. Much has been written about the fact that Trump won a preponderant share of the votes of people who had unfavorable views of both Trump and Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. Indeed, according to the Fox News 2016 exit poll, Trump won the vote of about 5 out of every 10 people nationally who had unfavorable views of both Clinton and Trump. By contrast, Clinton won only 3 out of 10, while two out of 10 opted to vote for a third-party candidate (or didn’t vote). In important swing states, the difference was even starker. For example, in all-important Wisconsin, Trump won 6 out of 10 of their votes. And who had unfavorable views of both Clinton and Trump? In large part, they were Republicans or Republican-leaning Independents. In other words, they were RINOs. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It’s clear from digging into the Fox 2016 exit poll results. Among the 18 percent of Americans who disliked both, only 1 in 5 called themselves “Democrats” while a third called themselves Republicans, and another third called themselves “Independents.” And most of those independents “Lean Republican.” Almost two-thirds of them, in fact, said they voted for the Republican House candidate. Basically, it’s not so much that the folks who disliked both “took a risk” on Trump – as the vast bulk of them “went home” to their respective parties. That’s important for President Trump’s reelection efforts – and for Republican candidates in general. For the president, who currently is running at 45 percent approval in the RealClearPolitics averages, he’s going to need to keep the votes of all those RINOs who “held their nose” and voted for him in 2016, or else he’s going to need to figure out how to ensure that he can get a significantly higher turnout of his vote in 2020. He’s never going to win over the folks at “The Lincoln Project” – but he needs to ensure that voters who applauded President Bush’s video don’t think of it as an attack on President Trump – and act accordingly. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And it’s an even higher priority for Republicans running for other offices in November. Looking back to 2016, Republicans won control of the House by a slim margin, with Americans voting for House Republicans over Democrats roughly 51-49. But if you exclude the votes of Americans who disapproved of both Trump and Clinton, the Democrats would’ve won by 53-47. In statewide Senate contests, the disparity was equally or even starker. The bottom line: You may not like these “RINOs” – but you’re going to need to figure out a way to win them over in order to win in November. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ARNON MISHKIN

Thousands have died in New York nursing homes; insight from Fox News medical correspondent Dr. Marc Siegel. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Ida Zelcer, age 91, is a Holocaust survivor who saw her dear brother Hershel burned alive in front of her by the Nazis when he was 5. Nevertheless, she managed to survive, to make it to America and to raise a family, including a son, Dr. Alan Zelcer, my father’s cardiologist, who has saved his life in the past month from COVID-19 and then from skyrocketing blood pressure. Dr. Zelcer learned from his mother to value how precious and fragile life is, and how best to honor and protect it. 
      Ida Zelcer
       Ida lives in a skilled nursing facility in Palm Beach County, Florida, known as Lakeview Care Center. Dr. Zelcer chose this place for a reason. It is a well-lit, clean place with kind, highly skilled and caring staff. BENNETT & LEIBSOHN: CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE — COMPARE FLORIDA WITH NEW YORK, AND LOOK AT THE RESULTS SO FAR Lakeview is a great example of a nursing home that is taking seriously Gov. Ron Desantis’s edict that these facilities are “ground zero” for COVID-19. Gilda Anderson, Lakeview’s administrator told me in an interview that “we screen our staff daily prior to entering the building, including taking their temperatures. Our staff … are wearing the required PPE (Personal Protective Equipment) and we’re enforcing all infection control protocols.” Dr. Zelcer told me that he receives a phone call notifying him whenever a patient in his mother’s nursing home tests positive for COVID-19. The patient is then immediately isolated and the concerned staff is on the phone with an infectious disease specialist at Delray Medical Center, where the patient is frequently transferred. The patient is not returned to Lakeview Care Center until they are completely symptom-free and have received negative tests for COVID-19. New York state had the opposite policy until Gov. Andrew Cuomo reversed course Sunday. It was a complete disgrace and showed disregard for our most vulnerable treasure that New York was allowing COVID-19 positive patients into our nursing homes. 
      The Lakeview staff ready for another day.
       Consider that more than 5,000 people have died from COVID-19 in New York's nursing homes since March 1, which is three times the number of COVID-19 deaths (1,669) in the entire state of Florida, a state of comparable size and population, which also has major urban centers. Until Sunday, New York was not mandating testing of workers in their nursing homes the way Florida has. Florida also has a directive from the governor to aggressively test nursing home patients as well. The solution to New York’s nursing home COVID-19 problem is to look to Florida as a role model. We need to separate out people who are sick and could have the virus. Be on the lookout not just for cough, shortness of breath and fever in our elderly, but bowel problems, loss of sense of taste and smell, discolorations on toes and fingers, swollen legs (blood clots), and above all changes in behavior and fatigue. 
      A family visit at Lakeview.
       CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Any suspected COVID-19 patient should be isolated and a nearby hospital (with an established protocol with the nursing facility) should be contacted. Deep disinfection in the nursing home should be a daily event, and all staff and residents should be tested frequently for COVID-19 (the test is only 60 to 70 percent accurate) as they are at Lakeview Care Center. Diabetes, obesity, heart and lung disease and being immuno-compromised put people at additional risk (along with age) and residents with these conditions should be treated with extra care and caution. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Trump administration should issue a set of guidelines based on the way Lakeview Care Center conducts business, and these guidelines should be sent to every governor of every state for every skilled nursing facility in the country. I would add one guideline that I haven’t seen anywhere. As the weather warms, it is time to bring our nursing home residents out of doors and allow them to see their families in the flesh while observing very careful rules of social distancing. It is those moments that make life most worth living, for Ida Zelcer and her wonderful son, and for us. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. MARC SIEGEL

FOX Business’ Stuart Varney discusses a tweet from Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., that appeared to celebrate the oil crash. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  After being subjected to two months of stay-at-home orders, social distancing, skyrocketing unemployment and a crashing economy, many of Hollywood’s most prominent figures are now demanding we continue this misery to fight the spread of the coronavirus pandemic – and do a lot more as well. In a remarkable and disturbing letter published by French publication Le Monde, more than 200 artists, singers and Hollywood actors and actresses urged leaders and “all of us as citizens” to abandon “the unsustainable logic that still prevails and to undertake a profound overhaul of our goals, values, and economies.” Because of the pandemic, “it is unthinkable to go back to normal,” the celebrities wrote. “Pollution, climate change, and the destruction of our remaining natural zones has brought the world to a breaking point.” JUSTIN HASKINS: CORONAVIRUS AND SOCIALISM – AOC AND FRIENDS PEDDLING FALSE CURE FOR WHAT AILS US What, exactly, do these Hollywood sages contend can save humanity from destruction? They don’t spell out the details, but it sure sounds an awful lot like socialism to me. For example, in order to avoid the “existential threat” of a “massive extinction of life on Earth,” the signatories say we must give up the “pursuit of consumerism and an obsession with productivity” and instead embrace a “politics of social equity” – a strategy that would require a “radical transformation.” With Marxist phrases like “obsession with productivity” and “radical transformation,” the letter sounds like something you might hear listening to one of Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez’s riveting Instagram rants, or perhaps a call for a revolution at a Bernie Sanders campaign rally – before the millionaire socialist senator from Vermont was forced out of the presidential race by the Democratic Party establishment. What makes socialist propaganda like the Le Monde letter so frustrating is that it’s absolutely oozing with hypocrisy. Elite leftists love to lecture the rest of us about the dangers of the “pursuit of consumerism” and cry about the alleged harm climate change imposes on humpback whales – or whatever the cause of the moment is. But at the same time, they fly around the world in private jets and bask in luxury in their multimillion-dollar mansions while being pampered by low-wage servants. Robert De Niro, one of the letter’s most notable signatories, is worth an estimated $500 million or more. Madonna, another signatory, is reportedly riding out the pandemic in a $6.5 million estate in Lisbon, Portugal. Her mansion has been described as “a converted 18th-century palace and has four floors, four bedrooms, seven bathrooms, a guesthouse and even a separate cottage for caretakers.” Here’s an idea: In the spirit of ending “consumerism,” maybe Madonna can start by shipping one of her seven palatial bathrooms to my wife. I get the strong sense she is tired of sharing one very ordinary bathroom with me. When you are swimming in cash and aren’t required to stand in line for 40 minutes just to enter the local grocery store – or at risk of joining the 33.5 million Americans who have filed for unemployment over the past seven weeks as a result of government-imposed economic shutdowns – it’s easy to say that the world shouldn’t “go back to normal.” After all, there aren’t any Hollywood celebrities who are forced to spend their Saturday afternoons battling neighbors at Costco over the last pack of toilet paper. The stars can send their servants shopping for everything they need and don’t worry about having enough money to pay their grocery bills. The letter in Le Monde proves beyond a shadow of doubt that the wealthiest elites on the left have no problem with using this tragic pandemic to force the rest of the world to live under Orwellian conditions in order to “save the planet” and promote economic “equity” among everyone except themselves. As is always the case, society’s most glamorous and powerful socialists are much too important to be subjected to the rules they have imposed on the “little people” who can’t afford the lifestyles of the rich and famous. However, what you won’t hear from Madonna – or anyone else on the far left – is that history has proven repeatedly that the radical policies they have deemed to be vital to saving the planet and humanity have been nothing short of disastrous. Nor will they tell you that it was free-market, pro-liberty policies – not collectivism – that built America into the most advanced economy in the history of human civilization, allowing people to become so wealthy that they could actually afford to strengthen environmental protection policies. Similar reforms enacted around the world in the 20th and 21st centuries have produced equally remarkable results. Following World War II, India adopted numerous socialistic reforms that many on the American left now routinely call for, including the nationalization of key industries. As a result, hundreds of millions of Indians were forced into abject poverty and India’s economic growth lagged behind many of its competitors. By comparison, from 1950 to the early 1970s the Japanese economy grew 10 times faster than the Indian economy. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But since India enacted some modest free-market policies in the1980s, growth has skyrocketed. In the past two decades, poverty has been cut in half and about 200 million people have moved out of poverty, according to estimates by former American Enterprise Institute President and current Harvard professor Arthur Brooks. The key to improving human welfare and the environment isn’t to force 99 percent of the world to live in ever poorer conditions while people like Madonna instruct the rest of us from her Lisbon palace about proper living standards. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The blueprint for healthier, wealthier societies was discovered long ago, and begins and ends with empowering individuals with property rights and civil liberties. No other strategy can better repair our broken world following the COVID-19 era. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JUSTIN HASKINS

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  The FBI coordinated very closely with the Obama White House on the investigation of Michael Flynn, while the Obama Justice Department was asleep at the switch. That is among the most revealing takeaways from Thursday’s decision by Attorney General Bill Barr to pull the plug on the prosecution of Flynn, who fleetingly served as President Trump’s first national security adviser. Flynn had been seeking to withdraw his guilty plea to a false-statements charge brought in late 2017 by Special Counsel Robert Mueller. KT McFARLAND: BARR RIGHT TO DROP FLYNN PROSECUTION – THOSE WHO FRAMED FLYNN MUST BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE While working on the Trump transition team in December 2016, Flynn spoke with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak, in conversations that were intercepted by our government (because Russian-government operatives, such as Kislyak, are routinely monitored by the FBI and other U.S. intelligence agencies). Among the topics Flynn and Kislyak discussed was the imposition of sanctions against Russia, which President Obama had just announced. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That these conversations took place has been known for over three years — ever since a still-unidentified government official leaked that classified information to the Washington Post. For almost as long, it has been known that the FBI became aware of the Flynn–Kislyak discussions very shortly after they happened. What was not known until last week was that then–acting Attorney General Sally Yates was out of the loop. She found out about the discussions nearly a week afterward — from Obama, of all people. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This was at a White House pow-wow on Jan. 5, 2017. That was the day when the chiefs of key intelligence agencies briefed top Obama White House officials on their assessment of Russia’s meddling in the campaign. After the main briefing, the president asked Yates and FBI director James Comey to stick around to meet with him, along with Vice President Biden and National Security Adviser Susan Rice. Yates was taken aback when Obama explained that he had “learned of the information about Flynn” and his conversation with Kislyak. She was startled because, she later told investigators, she “had no idea what the president was talking about.” CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Hosts and reporters of Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network give thanks to all the moms across America. Sunday, May 10, is Mother’s Day in America. Usually, restaurants would be packed with reservations for every table available, florists would be busy filling and delivering orders and people would be out celebrating the special women in their lives. But Mother’s Day is going to look very different this year. We will be honoring mothers in the midst of a global pandemic that has caused the deaths of more than a quarter-million people across the world. In fact, for many families, Mother’s Day will actually be a time of sorrow and grief, as they mourn the recent loss of a mother, stepmother, mother-in-law or grandmother. JIM DALY: MOTHER'S DAY 2020 -- TV MOMS' REAL LIFE STORIES CAN TEACH US MORE THAN ANY SCRIPT COULD Restaurants will not be crowded with families on Sunday. Flowers will most likely be delivered by someone wearing a face mask and gloves. And instead of gathering together in churches, parks or homes as they used to, many families will be wishing mom a happy day through a glass window or from the front porch, standing six feet away. Yet there is a silver lining about observing Mother’s Day in the midst of COVID-19. By forcing us to dispense with the commercialized traditions that have taken over this special day — roses, cards, Italian restaurant reservations, personalized jewelry! — this crisis is reminding us of what it really means to honor our mothers. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As a mother and grandmother myself, I can tell you what moms want more than anything else in the world: We want to know that we are loved. As a mother and grandmother myself, I can tell you what moms want more than anything else in the world: We want to know that we are loved. I always take great delight in the moments when my grandchildren spontaneously hug me or kiss me, or when my son, Jonathan, or daughters-in-love call me just to say hi or to ask how I am doing or how they can pray for me. Those simple gifts of love are more precious to me than any box of chocolates, bouquet of flowers or bottle of perfume. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Being a mother is both the most difficult and the most rewarding job a woman can have. Though you cannot put a price tag on motherhood, one recent survey found that all the jobs a mother does at home — chef, math tutor, interior designer, tax accountant, driver, cleaner, counselor etc. — would be worth at least $160,000 a year. No other job on Earth demands so much of a person, but a mother’s greatest reward is not a six-figure salary. It’s the love of her children. While I may miss our old Mother’s Day traditions this year, I am blessed to know that I am loved by my husband, by my children — one who is in heaven — and grandchildren and by God himself. That is more than enough for me.

Hosts and reporters of Fox News Channel and Fox Business Network give thanks to all the moms across America. When my mother died 8 years ago, I was overwhelmed by the love and consolation that poured in from friends. Lots of cards, emails and phone calls – more empathy than I could have ever imagined. My friend Tim wrote me a particularly beautiful note. He’s a man of the old school, writes on thick paper with a fountain pen, always painting wonderful pictures with his words. “We only have one mum,” he began his note. “Her loss is incalculable.” DANIEL HOFFMAN: ON MOTHER'S DAY, LET'S CELEBRATE THESE VIRTUES THAT MAKE OUR NATION STRONG He was right, of course. It’s a biological fact. Every person is born of one woman. We enjoy her company for a finite amount of time. Some for a short while and others for many years. If you love your mother, however long it is, it’s never long enough. From Joan Batura, I learned so many things – the importance of a deep faith, the power of a smile, the importance of a listening ear, curiosity and compassion, a love of radio – and the value of newspapers, book stores and the public library. “If you love reading, you’ll never be lonely,” she once told me. She was right. 
      Paul Batura with his mother and father
       But as another Mother’s Day comes, I’m reminded that my mom isn’t the only mother who has changed my life in many wonderful ways. Jeanette Breen was another mother who shaped my outlook on life in mighty ways. “Mrs. Breen” was mom to Derek, Sean and Collin, but she was also the fun neighborhood mom to all of us. Her back door was always open, and her fridge was full of good things to eat. She’d make buttery popcorn in an old red pot, and we’d watch the latest heavyweight bout, or a hockey or baseball game, on the television in the den. She was a midwife – a trendsetter – who balked at conventional medicine and always had a spirited opinion. “It’s a full moon,” she would say. “I’m going to be busy.” And she was right – lots of babies are born during full moons. She was also fearless, uninhibited, too. When she hosted a party to celebrate the Rangers winning the Stanley Cup in 1994 (breaking a 54-year drought), she somehow managed to get their captain Mark Messier’s phone number and called to invite him to the bash. From Mrs. Breen, I learned to be unconventional and not worry about what “other” people think.  She had an “others first” mentality. And she was just fun and a bit eccentric. When she’d misplace something, she’d run around the house yelling, “Help me, Tony, help me!” A Catholic, she was calling on Saint Anthony, the patron saint of lost things. I’m forever indebted to my wife Julie’s mother, Cindy Hamilton. You won’t find a sweeter woman more grounded in what matters most. Cindy’s rearing produced the wife of my dreams. 
      Young Woman gives flowers to her mother with love
       Mother-in-law jokes are plentiful, but there’s nothing funny about the importance of the mother responsible for raising the woman you love and to whom you commit your life. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER From Cindy, I’ve learned the importance of unconditional love and loyalty. She is a faithful woman who never tires of doing the right thing. As the mother of our three boys, Julie is a mom who has changed my life more than anyone in the world. She makes our home such a pleasant and fun place, even fills it with wonderful music and singing as she sits and plays at her piano. In her art, she’s taught me to be more expressive in mine, to write from my heart more than my head. 
      Julie Batura
       From Julie, I’ve learned to enjoy the moment, savor and cherish the time because the kids grow fast and the seasons change quickly. Nobody gives more of herself than my wife. There are three more mothers I want to laud, all of whom entrusted Julie and me with the greatest of all gifts – our three sons, Riley, Will and Alex. Mother’s Day can be difficult for birth mothers who have agonizingly but sacrificially made adoption plans for their children. I hope they find comfort and assurance in the fact that their selfless act positively changed the trajectory of their child’s life. In our family, Julianna, Joli and Jennifer are celebrated and lifted up as heroes of the highest order. It’s impossible to adequately express your gratitude to women who confer on you the privilege of parenthood. We see their smiles in our boys’ smiles, their wit and warmth in our sons’ respective temperaments. Are we the product of nature or nurture? I think the answer is a resounding “yes” to both. We have a relationship with 2 of the 3 birth mothers in our family. We pray that someday it will be all three. Open adoption is not always possible, but when it is, the relationship can be rich. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Every single one of us is the product of the lives that touch ours, none more so than our mothers and the mother-like figures who have shaped us since childhood. Mother’s Day is more than just the celebration of our moms, it’s a referendum on our futures - and that of the world. Strong mothers make for great families – and no nation will ever be greater than its mothers. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM PAUL BATURA

Dr. Holly Anderson says antibody research is promising. In our interconnected world, where communicable diseases can spread so easily and rapidly, we need to be better able to anticipate and track the path of outbreaks. Think how helpful this capability would be for the coronavirus. We know the current pandemic began in Wuhan, China, but we’re not exactly sure what happened from there. The Chinese Communist Party isn’t exactly being forthright with information to help America and other countries combat the virus. This makes it clear how important it is to have the tools to anticipate how diseases spread, to give us advanced warning to prepare and information we need to be better equipped for future outbreaks. NEWT GINGRICH: CORONAVIRUS MODELING – HOW OUR HYSTERICAL CULTURE LED TO THIS REACTION TO PANDEMIC Fortunately for all of us, someone seems to have broken the code for thinking about a worldwide management system to anticipate communicable diseases. He is Dr. Kamran Khan, founder and CEO of BlueDot and an infectious disease physician. I decided to have Dr. Khan on this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World.” As the second part of my ongoing series on China and the spread of the coronavirus, we discuss how to track the spread of the virus from Wuhan with fascinating new technology and remarkable methods of analysis. Dr. Khan is building a digital, global early warning system for infectious diseases. This system is supported by four key pillars. The first pillar is detection. Clearly, we need to be able to detect outbreaks early to give us time to respond swiftly and effectively. What we learned from the SARS outbreak of the early 2000s is that we can’t simply wait for reports from government agencies to act – a fact that the coronavirus has driven home. The second pillar is dispersion. BlueDot compiles an astonishing amount of anonymous data from airlines and elsewhere to understand the flow of all aircraft around the world and monitor other ways in which a disease may disperse.  The third. pillar is disruption. Not every infection causes an outbreak. Dr. Khan and his team are constantly examining why some “embers” will catch fire and others will not. They look at the specific populations and environments these embers reach through travel, and how they interact with the microbes. What causes disruption that will trigger an outbreak? This is a constant work in progress.  The fourth pillar is dissemination of knowledge. Normally, the public health sector is first to learn about an outbreak. Then there is a trickle-down effect, and eventually, the rest of the health care community, the private sector, and the general public learn about it. Clearly this flow of information is flawed and needs to be changed so each of these groups knows what’s going on earlier, in order to help combat an outbreak.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Dr. Khan and I discuss in detail the spread of the coronavirus from Wuhan, with him applying his system to the current situation and sharing his experiences in trying to get the word out about the virus. We also discuss China’s response to the virus and how infections may have reached the U.S. by examining the flow of travel. Dr. Khan uses big data, artificial intelligence and some of the most advanced digital tools at humanity’s disposal to make each pillar work. This early warning system will not only save lives; it will also save economies. If we can take the appropriate measures to counter diseases before they get really bad, then we may not have to impose the kind of lockdowns that we’re all currently enduring. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I hope you will listen to this week’s episode and learn about Dr. Khan’s work, which is not only fascinating but also essential in a post-coronavirus world. And please look out for Part Three of my series on China and the coronavirus, in which I discuss how to hold the Chinese Communist dictatorship accountable for lying to the world about a local outbreak that soon became a global pandemic. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

Stars are thankful for all the support and sacrifices their mothers made for them and send love to all the moms out there. Mother’s Day has arrived, although as a result of the coronavirus pandemic and sheltering-in-place it’s very different from the days of brunches at restaurants, spa visits and other activities we moms enjoyed before we’d ever heard the term “social distancing.” The holiday causes me to reflect on being a mother and how I got to be one – not the good old-fashioned way, but in more complicated ways. I’ve told the story to my son and daughter and Mother’s Day is a good time to share it with a much wider audience. As I’ve written before, my husband and I adopted our son – who turns 13 this summer – from Pakistan. When I told him how I became his mother, I said I was having difficulty having a baby and I prayed to God for a little boy. LESLIE MARSHALL: ADOPTION FOUND ME, AND MY CHILDHOOD DREAM CAME TRUE I told my son how on our 11th wedding anniversary our phone rang and a woman at the Edhi Foundation in Pakistan said “your son was just born.” We were overjoyed! My husband and I flew from Los Angeles through Chicago and Manchester, England to get to Karachi, Pakistan on a 27-hour life-changing journey. Years later I explained to my son how he grew from a little seed in another woman’s belly, and because she could not care for him (most likely due to lack of finances or illness) she chose to place him in a cradle at the foundation in the hope that the kind people there would find him a forever family. I told my dear son that he was destined to live despite weighing less than 4 pounds at birth, with no incubator available. I said he was destined to my son and I was destined to be his mother. When I first held that sweet little baby in my arms he opened his eyes, looked at me, smiled and stole my heart. At that moment he became my beloved son and I became his mother, forever. Years ago someone told me that when you adopt children, you don’t find them; they find you. And that is exactly what happened. My daughter came into the world in an entirely different way. In 2004 my husband and I lost a child. Our child had a condition called Canavan disease, similar to Tay-Sachs disease. Both my husband and I are genetic carriers for Canavan disease. I carry the Ashkenazi Jewish mutation, while my husband carries the Turkish mutation – despite being of Indian ancestry. Although the chances of carriers like my husband I having a child with this disease are only 25 percent, we opted to go through a process called pre-implantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). This required in vitro fertilization (IVF) As part of this process, the embryos are probed to make sure they don’t have the always-fatal Canavan disease. Sadly, cycle after cycle, our embryos had Canavans. This happened 100 percent of the time with 11 embryos. So in addition to the miscarriages I suffered and the death of a child, I lost an additional 11 children CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER I had some embryos free of Canavan disease frozen. After we had started the adoption process for our son, my doctor’s office phoned and said that I had three of these embryos in the freezer and asked what I wanted to do with them. “What are my choices?” I asked. “Implant or destroy,” I was told. Destroy! Now, I am pro-choice, but it was not my choice to destroy my embryos. The doctor also told me these were not very strong or healthy embryos and the chances of my getting pregnant after being implanted with these were very slim. Nevertheless, I opted to be implanted and about 10 days later the doctor’s office called and told me the pregnancy test was positive. When she was old enough to understand, I told my daughter – who is now 12 – how she was created in a little dish and then placed inside my tummy and grew to become our wonderful child. I told her she was lucky No. 13. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And I told her how I almost drove off the road because I was crying so hard with tears of joy when the doctor’s office called to tell me of my little girl. So although my son came to me through adoption and my daughter through 13 IVF cycles, I tell them often that they are both my miracle babies. And it’s true. I will forever be grateful for my two wonderful little miracles, who make every day Mother’s Day for me. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LESLIE MARSHALL  

The 'Outnumbered' panel debates the Department of Justice's move to dismiss charges against former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn in the Russia investigation. Facts matter. The rule of law matters. It’s a fact that President Trump’s former national security adviser, Michael Flynn, lied to the FBI – he pleaded guilty to the charge. And yet, Attorney General William Barr and his Justice Department effectively pardoned Flynn by filing a motion Thursday to dismiss charges against the retired Army lieutenant general. Flynn’s guilty plea dealt with his communications with Sergey Kislyak, Russia’s ambassador to the U.S., in late 2016 during the transition period after Trump was elected president but before he was inaugurated.  Barr claimed he wants to end the prosecution of Flynn in order “to restore confidence in the system” and that he “was doing the law’s bidding.” In fact, that’s exactly the opposite of what happened. DOJ DROPS CASE AGAINST MICHAEL FLYNN, IN WAKE OF INTERNAL MEMO RELEASE What Barr did – at President Trump’s behest, in my opinion – was another in a long line of instances where we see blind loyalty to a president over the facts, and where the rule of Trump triumphed over the rule of law. This is why, as I said in a Fox News interview on “Bill Hemmer Reports,” the upcoming election in November has never been more important. Since Trump took office almost 1,200 days ago, the Washington Post’s Fact Checker has calculated that the president has made more than 18,000 “false or misleading claims.” Trump’s disregard for facts spans almost every issue, from health care, immigration, climate change, criminal justice and foreign policy to Russia (yes, of course, Russia) and the 2016 election. Even the coronavirus has yielded hundreds more falsehoods from Trump. During this deadly crisis, the president should be leading us with facts and empathy. Instead, Trump has touted fake miracle cures, claimed that “anybody that needs a test can have a test,” blamed President Barack Obama’s administration for leaving him with “nothing,” and said that the virus is “going to disappear.” Trump’s false claims have directly endangered the lives of countless Americans. And how about Trump’s disregard for the rule of law? We’ll get to what his Justice Department has done to erode confidence in our laws, but Trump himself has personally and repeatedly attacked judges and judicial opinions with which he disagrees. When running for president in 2016, Trump responded to U.S. District Judge Gonzalo Curiel’s orders in a class-action case against Trump University by attacking the Indiana-born judge as biased because of his “Mexican heritage” and appointment by a Democratic president. Also during the presidential campaign, Trump called Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg an “incompetent judge” and called for her resignation. During his presidency, on both terrorism and immigration-related rulings, Trump has questioned judicial authority, claimed that judges are biased against him, called courts a “joke" and a "laughingstock,” and even suggested that judges and the court system would be to blame for future terrorist attacks. In November 2018, Trump even engaged in a Twitter spat with Chief Justice John Roberts over the independence of the judiciary. And in February, the president attacked U.S. District Judge Amy Berman Jackson following the conviction of Trump crony Roger Stone for lying to Congress. So it’s abundantly clear that Trump only respects the rule of law when the rule and the law favor him.  But since we’re focused on what amounts to Flynn’s “pardon,” let’s talk about how Barr – one of Trump’s chief enablers – has also disregarded facts and the rule of law since becoming attorney general in February 2019. Trump’s false claims have directly endangered the lives of countless Americans. In March 2019, only a month after being appointed by Trump, Barr sent a “summary” of Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s report to Congress that grossly mischaracterized the report and, in the words of Mueller, sought to create “public confusion” and threatened “to undermine a central purpose for which the Department appointed the Special Counsel.” Next, in July 2019 the Justice Department abruptly ended an investigation into several campaign finance-related crimes allegedly committed by Trump and his personal lawyer, Michael Cohen. Then in February this year, Trump political appointees at the Justice Department overruled the sentencing recommendation of career prosecutors in the Roger Stone case and argued for a more lenient sentence. Finally, on Thursday we saw the motion to dismiss charges against Flynn signed only by Timothy O’Shea, the interim U.S. attorney for the District of Columbia. O’Shea is also a Trump appointee and a former senior counselor to Barr. Notably, just as in the Stone case, the career prosecutor on the Flynn case formally withdrew before O’Shea filed his motion. These withdrawals shouldn’t surprise us one bit. Rank-and-file Justice Department attorneys, both current and former – including some with whom I have spoken – are dismayed by the dropping of charges against Flynn and by Barr’s disregard for the rule of law. Sadly for the American people, what these withdrawals demonstrate is that faith in our governmental institutions is eroding from inside and out.  Let’s be clear here, now is not the time, in the middle of a pandemic, to re-litigate Russian interference in the 2016 election, or the contacts by Flynn and other Trump associates and family members with Russia. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The question of whether Trump and his cronies “colluded” with Russia has become so politicized that the indisputable fact that Russia helped elect Trump and defeat Hillary Clinton has almost become lost in the blatant disregard for the rule of law that has come to represent the Trump administration. So instead, let’s focus on the future and what we can do. One of my heroes, Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall, said: "Where you see wrong or inequality or injustice, speak out, because this is your country. This is your democracy. Make it. Protect it. Pass it on." Here’s the least that we – Republicans, Democrats, and independents – can do: Speak out for facts. Protect our rule of law. Recognize when the president and his attorney general and other enablers disregard facts and ignore our laws, and then call them out on it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Support local, state and federal candidates who will restore the American people’s trust in our president and our governmental institutions. And VOTE, including by mail, for candidates who will protect our democracy – a government for the people, not for one person – and pass it to future generations. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DONNA BRAZILE

Senior care group and Lowe's team up to deliver flowers to mothers who are isolated at home during the COVID-19 pandemic. When my little ones were newborns, I (Becky) spent most of my nights awake. I firmly believe there is a supernatural strength that God gives women when they become mothers because there is no other way a human could operate on so little sleep and so much stress. While my husband did his best to help, many nights I would be the only one awake – well, other than the baby. Those newborn days weren't the only ones where I would find myself awake at night. As my babies grew, I would wake up with restless toddlers, or a sick little boy, or a potty-training little girl. Stress, worry, fear, my schedule, and my responsibilities all stole some of my rest as well. But no matter what kept me awake, I noticed one thing about the middle of the night. JULIE BATURA: CORONAVIRUS HOMESCHOOLING — 5 SURVIVAL TIPS TO GET YOU THROUGH The night can be so dark and lonely. But, friend, it doesn't have to be. We don't have to feel all alone. Because there are women across the world all awake right now doing the very same thing you are. And there is a God who wants to meet you right where you are. And so, a few years ago, I decided this: Every night, I would post a short prayer for women to read who are also awake in the middle of the night. Hundreds of moms would comment on these posts nightly. We heard from women who were awake with their newborns, up with sick children, in the hospital waiting for test results, sleepless because of worry, enjoying the stillness of their houses while everyone else slept, monitoring fevers, changing wet sheets, waiting to hear from children traveling home, anxious about the next day, and going through so many other common motherhood experiences. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As this community grew, we needed a place just for these nightly gatherings. So the Midnight Mom Devotional Facebook page was founded. But I couldn’t manage it alone. Knowing I needed help encouraging the hundreds of women who would gather each night and share their prayer requests, I invited my mom, Susan, to pray and post with me. Today, just four years after that first group of mommas gathered together online to encourage one another in the midnight hours, we reach over 1 million mommas nightly. We’ve also written a collection of all-new prayers for our book, "Midnight Mom Devotional: 365 Prayers to Put Your Momma Heart to Rest." This Mother’s Day, here are a few of those prayers to hold near to your heart or share with the moms in your life. Tonight we pray for the momma who needs to know that her role as a momma is so very important. She needs to understand that as she raises the next generation, she is taking on a precious and important assignment from You. Lord, we know she is doing kingdom work, even when it seems as if she is taking care of ordinary tasks. Help her see motherhood as You do – as a sacred calling given by You. She might feel as though she is just going through the motions, but she is shaping eternity. Bless her tonight. We ask in Jesus’s name. Amen. Tonight we pray for the momma who feels as if she is climbing uphill. She feels as though this mountain has no top and she will never reach the summit. Motherhood is so much harder than she imagined. She loves her children, but the constant daily struggle to do everything is wearing on her heart and mind today. Lord, we pray for this momma. We ask that You would remind her that she is never alone. Let her know that we, a community of praying women all over the world, are praying for her tonight in her climb. Please remind her that You are with her every single step of this journey. Give her sweet sleep tonight as she rests and prepares for another day. We ask in Jesus’s name. Amen. Tonight we pray for the momma who is anxious about world events. It seems as if this world is spinning out of control. The news and social media present every issue imaginable to worry about. She can’t ignore these issues because they are right there every day. She feels powerless to bring about any kind of real change in these events. Lord, the only way a momma can really change world history is by influencing the lives of her children. Show her that by raising these precious little ones, she is reaching into the future and saying it will be better because these little lives will have a positive impact on it. Bless her tonight in the greatest calling: that of motherhood. We ask in Jesus’s name. Amen. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In the stillness and the night, take heart in knowing that women across the world are joining you in prayer and that God is listening and loving you right where you are. Adapted from "Midnight Mom Devotional" by Becky Thompson and Susan K. Pitts Copyright © 2020 by Rebecca F. Thompson and Susan K. Pitts. Published by WaterBrook, an imprint of Random House, a division of Penguin Random House LLC on March 31, 2020. Susan Pitts and her husband, Marc, host and events and minister across their home state of Oklahoma. She is the Midnight Mom Devotional prayer director, praying for the thousands of requests that come in from around the world. She has two adult daughters and three grandchildren.

Education Secretary Betsy DeVos sits down with Martha MacCallum on 'The Story.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here.  Going to school is a core function of a civilized society. Yet, due to the coronavirus pandemic that spurred nationwide lockdowns in March, American schools closed their doors. Since then, most of our nation's 57 million children in grades K-12 have been isolated at home, cut off from face-to-face human contact, friends, sports, school activities and normal life. This cruel and unusual punishment cannot continue indefinitely, especially since it's well-known that the coronavirus mostly affects the elderly and those with underlying medical conditions -- not children. So though the main reason for justifying the mass closure of America's schools is to protect children, our kids are not a high-risk group. Does that warrant this radical upheaval to their lives? Does that warrant the impact on millions of parents nationwide who can't pay their bills and feed their families because they can't go to work with children at home? JASON CHAFFETZ: CORONAVIRUS AND NATIONAL PARKS — TIME TO OPEN THEM UP According to the Centers for Disease Control, 10 children in the U.S. between ages 0-14 have died from COVID-19 as of May 6. As tragic as that is, for comparison, 107 kids in the same age group have died this year from pneumonia and 85 from the flu. But we would never close schools for those deadly diseases. For the 15-24 age bracket, 48 died in the U.S. from COVID-19 as of May 6, while 143 have died in the same age range of pneumonia and 41 from the flu. Similarly, our nation doesn't close down colleges and universities for those non-COVID cases. Parents ought to remember that when school and/or government officials inevitably succumb to teachers unions laundry list of demands come September, which could result in continued school closures, subjecting millions of youth to more unhealthy isolation and subpar online learning. No parent should accept this as "the new normal." The data we have at this time simply doesn't warrant it. Of course, the pandemic is a fluid situation and things could change for better or worse in the coming months. Some have concerns that if kids go back to school they could transmit COVID-19 to teachers or other adults; however, it's simply a guessing game how transmissible it is between these populations. The speculation varies depending on who you ask. But we do know kids can be carriers and transmitters of influenza --another contagious virus that kills thousands each year -- and again, we don't close schools because of it. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In a piece in The New York Times, Apoorva Mandavilli writes, "Jennifer Nuzzo, an epidemiologist at Johns Hopkins University's Bloomberg School of Public Health, said the decision to reopen schools cannot be made based solely on trying to prevent transmission." Nuzzo said, "I think we have to take a holistic view of the impact of school closures on kids and our families. I do worry at some point, the accumulated harms from the measures may exceed the harm to the kids from the virus." Exactly. We can't let the cure be worse than the disease. And if parents don't speak up and demand that schools reopen this fall, that's likely what will happen -- regardless if a resurgence of the virus takes place or not. The stark reality is that the coronavirus may be with us indefinitely, just like the seasonal flu, and we must adapt to it rather than canceling youth sports and revamping the entire U.S. education system. What schools should do is offer teachers and parents a choice. For parents who are afraid to send their children back to school, those students should stay home and either do homeschooling or continue with online learning. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Same with teachers. If any are fearful to return to school, they, too, should remain at home and teach online while the rest of the healthy population gets back together in the classroom. Sound reasonable? If so, contact your local school officials today. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM ADRIANA COHEN

The President participates in meeting with Senior Military Leadership and National Security Team. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. The left's position on the nation's proper response to the coronavirus pandemic, though shrouded in the language of compassion, is incoherent and morally repugnant virtue signaling. Since this calamity began, many national Democratic leaders, the left-wing media and various never-Trumpers have been more interested in smearing President Donald Trump -- no change there -- than helping to solve the myriad problems caused by the coronavirus. They wanted it both ways. President Trump was doing too much, and he wasn't doing enough. Before the outbreak, numerous Democrats were downplaying the virus and condemning Trump as a racist for his China and Europe travel bans. DR. KEVIN OLSEN: CORONAVIRUS FRONT LINES – HERE’S HOW WE TRY TO COPE WITH THE HEARTBREAK Later they blamed Trump for not taking the virus seriously, when in fact, they were taking it less seriously than he was. But being a progressive means never having to say you're sorry -- and that yesterday's inconsistent positions are deemed wiped from our collective memory. From the beginning, Trump and Vice President Mike Pence, along with their medical team, were conducting daily press briefings to inform an anxious nation about the virus and the federal and state governments' efforts to slow the spread, organizing the distribution of medical equipment to hotspots and pushing legislation to provide relief for individuals and businesses devastated by the outbreak. The media used those briefings to humiliate Trump rather than illicit facts to inform viewers. For example, New York Magazine's Olivia Nuzzi asked Trump, "If an American President loses more Americans over the course of six weeks than died in the entirety of the Vietnam War, does he deserve to be reelected?" Editorial after editorial excoriated Trump for every imaginable sin and certainly every death -- while exempting Democratic governors from any accountability for wildly disproportionate cases and deaths in their states. They view everything through a partisan prism, and no crisis is too severe to be exploited for political gain. Trump, they said, was only interested in manipulating the crisis to enhance his reelection efforts. He jumped the gun in expressing his hope to reopen our economy on Easter. He wasn't listening to the medical experts. He didn't care about Americans dying. He was practicing medicine without a license. Unfortunately for these critics, President Trump was deferring to the medical experts, who repeatedly denied that he was ignoring them. Considering themselves the sole exemplars of compassion, progressives insist that their views are the only morally acceptable ones, that all who oppose them are immoral and that so long as they have "good" intentions, neither their motives nor their policies can be questioned -- even if they are inconsistent or cause major harm. Democratic leaders get away with indefensible, one-dimensional thinking, free from scrutiny by an equally one-dimensional media. Their statements are often childishly shallow -- and yet no one challenges them. Take putative Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden, who tweeted Wednesday evening, "I've said it before, and I'll say it again: No one is expendable. No life is worth losing to add one more point to the Dow." While this may strike unthinking people as a compassionate declaration, it is a cheap shot at Trump, other leaders trying to facilitate the reopening of our economy and Americans yearning to be free again -- and to return to work. Biden is simply expressing his party's position: You must choose between those at risk from the virus and reopening the economy. There are no competing interests to balance. Your concern for those unemployed, devastated, isolated, depressed and with other medical problems that are ignored because of the virus is illegitimate. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What's particularly offensive is Biden's reducing our concern for those financially devastated to a class-warfare soundbite ("to add one more point to the Dow") -- as if having a heart for the unemployed is promoting the rich. That doesn't even make sense, but it doesn't have to as long as it serves the narrative that Republicans are heartless. Similarly, the never-Trump group The Lincoln Project produced an ad called "Mourning in America" in which Trump is blamed not just for the Americans who died because he "ignored" the virus but for the economic devastation it caused. That's convenient. These faux conservatives have absorbed the ideas and tactics of their progressive soulmates -- virtue signaling, the shameless advocacy of mutually contradictory positions and consuming hatred for Donald J. Trump. You know that Trump haters from both sides of the aisle have lost any semblance of fairness when their biases compel them to direct their energies toward destroying Trump rather than seeking solutions for our common problems. We should all be working together to reopen the economy while trying to prevent new flare-ups, which happens to be precisely what President Trump and his task force are doing. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Talk is cheap, and finger-pointing is easy, but real-world problems sometimes don't lend themselves to easy fixes. There are no perfect solutions here -- there is no way to avoid death and financial destruction, only to mitigate both. I trust that reasonable people -- hopefully still a majority -- will demand accountability from their leaders but not hold them to impossible standards. While people often look to government during times of crisis, we must understand that there's only so much that government can do and sometimes it can also get in the way. It's time that state governments show a little faith in the American people and respect their prerogative to return to their lives while still exercising responsible behavior to protect themselves and their neighbors. We will get through this. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DAVID LIMBAUGH

Oregon Rep. Greg Walden has one stern message for Democrats that are calling for mail-in voting in 2020: ‘it is really dangerous for the electoral integrity and the outcome of the election.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The coronavirus pandemic has raised serious questions about the integrity and operation of the November elections. Some see the pandemic as an opportunity to make our election process more secure, but others see it as an opportunity for partisan political advantage. Many Democrats are calling for a national “all-mail election,” ostensibly to prevent the spread of COVID-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. But this is a dangerous move because it invites fraud and eliminates the ability for election oversight. California Democratic Gov. Gavin Newsom took a big step to advance mail-in voting when he signed an executive order Friday that will send every registered voter in the nation’s most populous state a mail-in ballot for the November election. NEWSOM ORDER SENDING MAIL-IN BALLOTS TO ALL CALIFORNIA VOTERS SPARKS CONCERNS “No Californian should be forced to risk their health in order to exercise their right to vote,” Newsom said, explaining why he decided to make his state the first in the nation to send mail-in ballots to all registered voters. However, Republicans have objected to the move for very good reasons and may challenge it in court. California Republican Party Chairman Jessica Millan Patterson said in a statement: “To mail out millions of ballots to voter rolls … proven to contain alarming errors throughout the state is not a task that these Democrats can adequately manage or safely execute." The Republican National Committee cites internal polling that backs up such concerns. According to the committee, its poll shows that 62 percent of Americans say there is fraud in U.S. elections and that fraud would concern them under the nationwide mail-in ballot system Democrats have proposed. The committee also said its polling showed that Americans overwhelmingly approve of safeguards against voter fraud such as signature matching, voter identification, and a ballot receipt deadline of Election Day. The national mail-in voting standard advocated by Democrats is nothing more than a ballot harvesting scheme. Ballot harvesting is when political “volunteers” deliver and collect ballots for submission for processing and counting. Some jurisdictions have banned such practices because they at least give the appearance of ballot manipulation and at worst amount to fraud in practice. The Republican National Committee polling shows that 67 percent of voters oppose ballot harvesting. It makes sense that there be uniform standards in federal elections that ensure all Americans are treated equally and fairly when exercising their most valued right as citizens.
In federal elections, there should not be 50 different standards. There should be one. If it is good enough for New York it should be good enough for Florida and vice versa.
Uniform federal election law should include these provisions: ID: A citizen 18 years or older should have to produce a valid photo ID from an approved federal or state agency to register and to vote. Photo IDs have become a necessity since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. You need one to enter a federal building, get on an aircraft, obtain government benefits and for other purposes. Registration: An eligible citizen should be able to register to vote up to two weeks before a federal election by appearing in person at an authorized federal or state government office and making an application. Voting: An eligible voter should be able to appear at his or her designated polling place from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. on the day of a federal election. Early Voting: An eligible voter should be able to vote no earlier than two weeks before a federal election at his or her designated early voting location between the hours of 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. Absentee Voting: An eligible voter – upon the showing of good cause – should be entitled to vote by absentee ballot provided the voter petitions for an absentee ballot in person at the designated place no more than one month and no less than two weeks before a federal election. Voting Machines: Voting machines should be uniform in federal elections. A uniform standard should be established to ensure one voting machine for X number of registered voters at a polling place. Voting protocols: There should be uniform federal rules and protocols for voter IDs, registration, voting, poll watching, voting machines, eligibility, timing, locations, tallying, reporting, challenges, recounts, certifications, candidate eligibility and forms. It is not fair or equitable for 50 states to have 50 different rules for federal elections. If the federal government establishes fair, just and equitable federal voting standards it will force the states to follow suit. Although states will not be required to follow federal rules in state or local elections it would be costly and inefficient not to do so. Federal standards would only be required for any ballot that contains a federal office election.
The federal government has a paramount interest under the equal protection clause of the Constitution to ensure that all Americans are treated the same when exercising their most important and valued right as citizens – the right to vote. 
As a result, the federal government has the affirmative duty to ensure that all aspects of voting in federal elections are uniform. It makes no sense that states have the power to make their own rules and requirements with regard to federal elections that could change the outcome, disenfranchise, confuse, prevent or discourage voting. The goal should be that voting is fair, understandable, convenient and trustworthy. That is not the case today.CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It is not fair or equitable for 50 states to have 50 different rules for federal elections.
Voting should not be so easy that it invites fraud or abuse. If you can take the time to wait in a line for a driver’s license or automobile registration than you can certainly do the same for voting.
Driving is a privilege – voting is a right. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If federal law was able to finally bring order and confidence to our national elections then states would be foolish not to adopt federal standards in their own election protocols.
My vote is for national voting standards that will eliminate state lawsuits, confusion and inequities to registration and voting nationwide. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BRADLEY BLAKEMAN

Cleveland Clinic CEO and President Dr. Tom Mihaljevic argues the coronavirus has had a negative financial impact on hospitals, leading to health care workers getting laid off. He also said hospitals are a safe environment for care. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  While many heroic doctors, nurses and other health care professionals are working long hours and risking their lives to treat COVID-19 patients, others have seen their workloads and hospital occupancy rates drop dramatically as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. This has created a financial crisis and endangered public health. At the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak, public health officials urged hospitals to suspend non-essential medical procedures. U.S. hospitals canceled tens of thousands of elective surgeries and other procedures, and urged patients to make use of telehealth. Americans adapted quickly to this new reality. Doctor visits declined nearly 60 percent from March to April – a stunning amount, according to a new Commonwealth Fund study. Some of the largest drop-offs occurred in surgery and pediatric care. Telehealth visits increased slightly, but not enough to offset the overall drop in care. DR. KEVIN OLSEN: CORONAVIRUS FRONT LINES – HERE’S HOW WE TRY TO COPE WITH THE HEARTBREAK With no patients to treat, a number of hospitals are in dire financial straits as they see massive drops in their incomes. The American Hospital Association estimates hospitals are losing more than $50 billion per month due to the COVID-19 slowdown. That could force 100 hospitals to close within a year, according to a USA Today analysis. Physicians are in a similar predicament. Only half of primary care physicians have enough cash on hand to survive another four weeks, according to a survey from the Primary Care Collective. COVID-19 is expected to push up to 60,000 family medicine doctors out of their practices by June. As revenues continue to decline by huge amounts, physicians have little choice but to sell their practices to hospitals, insurance companies, or private equity groups. Such consolidation could make it harder for patients to access care and would cause health care costs to increase further. The good news for hospitals and medical professionals is that as states begin to relax their coronavirus lockdowns, hospitals are trying to return to normal. Earlier this month, 20 states green-lit the resumption of elective surgeries that had been postponed to preserve personal protective equipment and other resources for the response to COVID-19. Patients who stay away from the hospital and put off necessary care risk dying prematurely. But even without government restrictions on elective surgeries, fear of the coronavirus may keep patients away from hospitals for some time. Nearly half of doctors believe patient visits will only return to pre-COVID-19 levels sometime between July and September. By that point, patients and providers alike will have suffered real losses. Patients who stay away from the hospital and put off necessary care risk dying prematurely. Without people to treat, physician practices and hospitals are losing money. Many could soon shut down. These are some of the unintended consequences of the pandemic. Our leaders must keep them in mind as they work to resurrect the economy in the weeks and months to come. Fear of the coronavirus and confusion over stay-at-home orders have caused even the sickest patients to avoid hospitals. Emergency room visits are down 50 percent across New York City's Health and Hospitals System. Admissions for a certain type of heart attack fell nearly 40 percent in nine major hospitals across eight states in March. The data suggest that even patients experiencing medical emergencies are staying home. Things have gotten so bad that the American Heart Association joined seven other medical groups to remind people to call 911 and go to the hospital if they fear they've had a heart attack or stroke. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Interruptions of medical care are taking their toll on patients. Those awaiting hip replacements spend their days in pain, struggling to move. Some doctors have postponed surgeries aimed at addressing early-stage cancer. The longer these "elective" surgeries are postponed, the more people suffer. Patients in need of treatment aren't the only ones at risk. The COVID-19 lockdown could lead to 22 million canceled or delayed tests for five common cancers by June, according to a new report by the IQVIA Institute for Human Data Science. This reduction in testing could lead to 80,000 missed cancer diagnoses. The same report found that colonoscopies dropped 90 percent between February and April; mammograms dropped 87 percent. New visits for cancer patients declined nearly 40 percent over the same period, while cancellations and no-shows nearly doubled. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Such widespread suspensions of medical care may not have been necessary. The pandemic has not hit our country evenly. While the New York City metropolitan area has been hit hard, many hospitals outside COVID-19 hotspots have been practically empty for the past few months. After months of lockdown, the COVID-19 pandemic has become a public health crisis in more ways than one. While it’s critically important to focus our attention on the deadly pandemic, we have to keep hospitals, outpatient clinics and health care professionals financially solvent so they are there to provide treatment and preventive care for our other important medical needs. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SALLY PIPES   

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. I have been dreading this day for weeks now. The emails started hitting my inbox in a steady stream last month with subtle to pushy reminders to get something nice for my mother this Mother’s Day. And while I would love to send my mother something thoughtful, special and amazing this Mother’s Day, I don’t know where to send it.  My mother passed away the day after her 51st birthday when I was in my early 20s. This will be my 23rd Mother’s Day without her, and while it gets easier, it is never easy. The challenge of Mother’s Day is compounded by surrogate mother loss. My mother-in-law passed away about six months after my own mom, and then I lost my stepmother a few years later when she was just 55. So, while people everywhere are celebrating, I am just trying to minimize the reminders. DANIEL HOFFMAN: ON MOTHER'S DAY, LET'S CELEBRATE THESE VIRTUES THAT MAKE OUR NATION STRONG I am not the only one. In addition to people like me who have lost their cherished moms, there are plenty of others who are estranged from their mothers or never knew them at all. There are women who have wanted to become mothers, but because of medical issues or other circumstances, never had an opportunity to realize that dream, not to mention those women who have endured the devastating tragedy of losing one or more of their children. While any of these circumstances can make this time of year less-than-pleasant, coupled with the extra stress that we have been enduring from dealing with the coronavirus pandemic, the somber feelings seem heightened right now. Speaking of the pandemic stress, dealing with COVID-19 is impacting Mother’s Day plans for many people, as well. Mothers and children may be physically separated, unable to travel or share a meal, all of which creates additional anxiety, particularly for those whose mothers may be older or in ill health. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Mother’s Day is an important day, one that celebrates love, bonding and family. Nobody should feel badly about celebrating and, on the contrary, they should feel immense gratitude in having such blessings in their life. But, for the others, the ones- like me- who find Mother’s Day a bit challenging- I want you to know that you are not alone. I am not here to provide lectures or advice. I won’t be telling you to cherish the memories or to make new ones or to do something in your mother’s honor or anything like that. I just want you to know that you are seen, your pain is normal and you should do whatever is best for you. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The barrage of celebratory information around you may make you think otherwise, but there are millions of people going through something similar right now.   So, a very happy Mother’s Day to those who are celebrating it and please appreciate it while you can. And, for the others, I send you strength and love. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CAROL ROTH

Fox Business Briefs: April jobs report showing a historic loss of 20.5 million jobs; White House reportedly considering a September extension to tax filing. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The new jobs report released Friday proves what President Trump has been saying all along – it’s irresponsible to downplay the suffering of American workers caused by the devastating economic impact of the coronavirus pandemic. While we must do so as safely as possible, it’s time to get America back to work. Our workers know it – and the numbers show it. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the U.S. unemployment rate rose to 14.7 percent in April, triggered by stay-at-home orders and unprecedented economic shutdowns across the nation. This wasn’t unexpected. We all know why it happened. Nonetheless, the left’s reaction has been saturated with pure hypocrisy, complaining about the loss of jobs. UNEMPLOYMENT SURGED TO 14.7% IN APRIL, HIGHEST SINCE GREAT DEPRESSION, AS CORONAVIRUS TRIGGERED 20.5 MILLION JOB LOSSES Keep in mind that these same liberal media elites, along with their Democratic Party allies, have spent weeks attacking protesting workers, Republican governors and President Trump for wanting to reopen the U.S. economy in order to end the high unemployment caused by the pandemic. How can you advocate keeping the economy shut down and simultaneously complain about the loss of jobs? How can you criticize as reckless Americans who, unable to feed their families, asked – demonstrated, picketed, marched and begged – for their right to work, and then bemoan the loss of their jobs? How can you underplay the widespread economic hardship – claiming that the cure could never be worse than the disease – and then complain when it becomes increasingly obvious that the cure may well be worse than the disease? As the smug New York Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo put it when asked to address the suffering of American workers, “get your head around the ‘we’ concept; it's not all about you.” He, of course, still has his job. But President Trump’s critics don’t get to have it both ways. They can’t advocate policies that will kill jobs and then criticize the job losses – at least they can’t do so rationally. Either the jobs report is a sign that we need to start doing everything in our power to safely reopen the U.S. economy, or it isn’t. The Trump administration was always prepared for a temporary economic slump as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, which is why the president has been busy – both independently and working with Congress – crafting and implementing bold fiscal initiatives since the start of this health crisis. The White House spearheaded a historic $2.2 economic trillion relief package, which included direct payments to taxpayers and billions of dollars in loans for the private sector. But it did not do so for the sake of setting yet another economic record. This legislation – along with everything else the president has done in recent weeks and months – was designed to mitigate the impact of the temporary economic plunge that he knew was coming and set us up for the comeback. “It’s fully expected. There’s no surprise. Everybody knows this,” the president said in a recent interview, adding that “those jobs will all be back” as soon as America reopens for business. He is right – and the April jobs report shows it. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics data, roughly 18 million – or 88 percent – of the 20.5 million people who lost their jobs in April have been temporarily laid off. That means their jobs are destined to return with our economic rebound. That’s extremely encouraging and different from prior recessions, where the majority of job losses were permanent. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Investors recognize this reality, which why the stock market continues to recover despite the surging unemployment rate. In fact the S&P 500, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, and the NASDAQ all closed up on Friday following the jobs numbers release. The Dow was up an impressive 455 points, or about 2 percent. Keep in mind that the markets are forward-looking, reflecting where investors believe the economy is going, while the jobs numbers are by their nature backward-looking.  Investors realize that we went into this recession with strong economic fundamentals and those remain strong. The current decline is due to the pandemic, not underlying problems in the economy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Investors are demonstrating their faith in the tenacity of the American people and the Great American Comeback that will inevitably come on the heels of our victory over the invisible viral enemy. The sooner we reopen, the sooner that comeback will occur. President Trump’s emergency policies have built a strong foundation for our country’s economic resurgence – but it's now up to the states to follow through on their duty to their citizens. It’s time for everyone to stop thinking about how the economy might benefit them politically. Let’s focus on returning our nation to prosperity and getting American workers back to work.   CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDY PUZDER

Fox News senior meteorologist Janice Dean discusses her family tradition. As we celebrate our mothers and grandmothers this weekend, I can’t help but think back to some of the quintessential and iconic characters who have played moms on television. As a general rule, it’s almost never a good idea for a child to be “raised” by sitcom parents – but we nevertheless all have our favorite ones. I was only 9 when my own mother died of cancer, so maybe that’s why some of the fictionalized women on my television set played an oversized role in my childhood. Unlike my own situation, every problem on the “tube” was resolved within 30 minutes, and none of the characters ever let me down. DANIEL HOFFMAN: ON MOTHER'S DAY, LET'S CELEBRATE THESE VIRTUES THAT MAKE OUR NATION STRONG Florence Henderson was probably my favorite.  She was best known as Carol Brady, the “lovely lady … who met this fellow” on the iconic 1970s sitcom “The Brady Bunch.” 
      LOS ANGELES - SEPTEMBER 29: Florence Henderson as Carol Brady in THE BRADY BUNCH episode, "Pass The Tabu." Original air date September 29, 1972. Image is a screen grab. (Photo by CBS via Getty Images)
       The program wasn’t much of a ratings hit during its initial run, but the show found its niche when it first aired in syndication in 1975. It’s been on the air ever since. Many people know every episode by heart. Some of the show's success is undoubtedly due to Henderson’s take on the role of family matriarch, which made Mrs. Brady one of the most famous TV moms in history. “I portrayed Carol Brady as the mom I always wished I had,” Henderson once shared, reflecting back on her own troubled upbringing. “I wanted to portray Carol as a loving, fun, affectionate mother and it seemed to resonate with a lot of people who maybe had the same situation I did growing up.” Henderson was talking about people like me. Not only did my mom die when I was in the fourth grade, but my dad struggled with alcoholism and left the family when I was only five. I desperately wanted a stable, idyllic family life -- something like what was found with the Bradys. And while I now know that the shows I watched as a boy romanticized family life, there’s still something to be said about showing life as it could be … and maybe, to some point, as it should be. After all, who doesn’t want to grow up in a home where mom and dad love each other? Where the kids know they can trust and depend on their parents to provide a sense of safety and draw good boundaries? “Leave it to Beaver” is often lampooned these days as a show that isn’t just outdated – but also a series that exaggerated life during the 1950s and early 1960s. Well, of course, it did. It was television! Reality shows didn’t come along for almost 50 years -- and we all know some of the "reality" in those shows is equally staged. June Cleaver’s sweetness reminded me of my own mom’s tender heart. As my mother lay dying, she asked me to go buy and then plant chrysanthemums outside her window. They were her favorite flower. 
      circa 1955: Studio portrait of American actor Barbara Billingsley seated and wearing a white blouse with lace stitching over a black ruffled skirt. She played June Cleaver in the television show 'Leave it to Beaver.' (Photo by CBS Photo Archive/Getty Images)
       I did exactly as she told me. By the time they grew and bloomed, my mom was gone, but every time I saw them – and see the flower – I think of her. I believe that was her plan from the beginning. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What few people know is that Barbara Billingsley, who played the character, was actually widowed 6 months before the show debuted. Her real life was nothing like the Cleavers. She later said the role was a “happy experience” and “very timely” as she processed her grief. It gave her hope that better days were coming. Clair Huxtable on the “Cosby Show” was played by Phylicia Rashad. Her character was a smart woman who loved her children and was also their advocate – but who understood a mom has to be willing to teach her children hard lessons. Bill Cosby’s horrific crimes have tarnished the legacy of the show, but in a recent interview, Rashad shared that a goal of the series was “to show and demonstrate that people are much more alike than we could ever be different.” Rashad recalled the late Nelson Mandela telling her he used to watch each week from prison with the guards – and that the humor and diversity of the program softened them and drew them closer. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “That’s the power of good intentions,” she noted. And that’s the power of a positive example. Good television and redeeming stories can inspire us – and so can the real-life trials and triumphs of the people who play the roles of the program's iconic characters. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JIM DALY

Rep. Adam Schiff and the entire apparatus of official Washington has been exposed by these transcripts, as well as by the documents just released in the Michael Flynn case. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The arrival of the Chinese coronavirus has killed tens of thousands of Americans and put tens of millions more out of work. But the crisis has also forced to the center serious conversions about issues that matter to the future of the country. Issues like: the dangerous rise of Chinese global dominance, the porousness of our domestic borders, America’s crumbling infrastructure, and government corruption and incompetence. Over the past two months, you may have asked yourself: Why weren’t we talking about these things before? They’re important. Good question. There’s a simple answer to that. We didn’t have time to consider the fundamental health of America because we were busy talking about Russia. In Washington, Russia is all we talked about for three years. All normal business in the capital city came to a halt, as we embarked on a bizarre scavenger hunt in search of Russian President Vladimir Putin’s spies. KT MCFARLAND: BARR RIGHT TO DROP FLYNN PROSECUTION – THOSE WHO FRAMED FLYNN MUST BE HELD ACCOUNTABLE Even at the time, the whole thing seemed absurd. Now we know it was worse than absurd. This wasn’t history’s longest episode of mass hysteria. It was instead an elaborate and intentional hoax, staged by the most unscrupulous and power-mad political operatives this country has ever seen. Sound like an overstatement? How do we know that? Because they have admitted it. On Thursday the House Intelligence Committee – chaired by Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif. – finally released 57 transcripts of testimony delivered to the committee behind closed doors during the Russia investigation. What do the transcripts reveal? We’re not going to ask you to trust us on this one, it’s too important. Instead, we’re going to quote from the transcripts directly: Jim Clapper, President Barack Obama’s director of national intelligence, said: “I never saw any direct empirical evidence that the Trump campaign or someone in it was plotting or conspiring with the Russians to meddle with the election.” Compare that to his Twitter feed. Former Obama administration U.N. ambassador Samantha Power was asked by the committee if she had any evidence of collusion with the Russians. She replied this way: “I am not in possession of anything – I am not in possession and didn’t read or absorb information that came out of the intelligence community.”  Obama administration National Security Adviser Susan Rice said: “I don’t recall intelligence that I would consider evidence.” Amazing. And here’s former Obama administration Attorney General Loretta Lynch. Asked if she saw evidence of Russian collusion, Lynch replied: “I do not recall that being briefed up to me.” Notice Lynch’s word choice here: “I do not recall.” For three years, our entire political system revolved around the hunt for Russian spies. We were told again and again in order to justify this that collusion was the greatest crime ever committed in American history. Yet the attorney general, a close friend of President Barack Obama’s, claims she “does not recall” if she ever received any evidence that any of it was true. If she’d been Roger Stone when she said that, she would have been charged with perjury on the spot. We’d be watching her sentencing right now. Of course, Lynch probably thought the transcript of those remarks would never be made public. That was clearly Evelyn Farkas’ assumption. Farkas is a former Defense Department official from the Obama administration. She became a fixture you may remember on cable television, as news outlets scrambled for puppets with legitimate-sounding resumes to push the Russia collusion narrative. Dumb people who would say anything. In those categories, Farkas delivered in spades. Here she was in March 2017 speaking on MSNBC: “I was urging my former colleagues and frankly speaking the people on the Hill – it was more actually aimed at telling the Hill people – get as much information as you can, get as much intelligence as you can before President Obama leaves the administration,” Farkas said. “Because I had a fear that somehow that information would disappear with the senior people who left. So it would be hidden away in the bureaucracy that the Trump folks – if they found out how we knew what we knew about the Trump staff dealing with Russians – that they would try to compromise those sources and methods, meaning we would no longer have access to that intelligence.” And Farkas added: “So I became very worried because not enough was coming out into the open and I knew there was more. We have very good intelligence on Russia. That’s why you have the leaking. People are worried.” “We have very good intelligence on Russia,” Farkas claimed. “We knew what we knew.” But she didn’t know anything. Farkas was lying, as purely as a liar can lie. Once under oath behind closed doors, Farkas admitted that. “I didn’t know anything,” she said. It was all lies, literally all of it, even the core claims about hacking that formed the basis of the entire story and the investigation that followed. In 2016, during the campaign, someone stole information from the Democratic National Committee’s email server. It wound up online and embarrassed Hillary Clinton. Democrats quickly blamed the theft on Russian agents, and therefore Donald Trump, who was supposedly the pawn of the Russians. In fact, there was never real evidence that that actually happened. The Democratic National Committee, as you may have read, never allowed federal investigators to inspect their email servers. That’s odd behavior for people who claim to be the victims of foreign espionage. Instead, the party’s servers were inspected by a third-party company called CrowdStrike. Adam Schiff’s committee interviewed the president of CrowdStrike Services and CSO Shawn Henry. Schiff questioned Henry directly. He asked if Henry knew when the Russians had stolen the data from the DNC servers. Henry’s reply, which we’re seeing for the first time is this: “As it relates to the DNC, we have indicators that data was exfiltrated. We did not have concrete evidence.” Later, Henry admitted he only had only “circumstantial evidence” that the Russians were involved at all. Adam Schiff heard those words directly, he heard them from the one person who would know for certain. Schiff knew there was nothing substantial at the core of the Russian collusion story. At the very center, it was hollow, it was a sham. But Schiff never suggested this in public. Instead, he did the opposite. He spent years on television telling you it was totally real, shut up. Here are comments Schiff made on different occasions on several TV programs: “So there’s clear evidence on the issue of collusion and this adds to that body of evidence.” “There’s ample evidence of collusion in plain sight and that is true.” “You can see evidence in plain sight on the issue of collusion. Pretty compelling evidence.” “And there is significant evidence of collusion.” “This is ample evidence and indeed there is of collusion of people in the Trump campaign with the Russians.” “I think there’s plenty of evidence of collusion or conspiracy.” “All of this is evidence of collusion.” “There is significant evidence of collusion between the campaign and Russia.” In case you weren’t counting during that montage, Adam Schiff said “evidence” nine times in that clip. Every single time was a lie. If you were following this closely at the time, you might have suspected this. Schiff never produced any of this so-called evidence. He just asserted its existence. After a while, we noticed. We confronted Schiff about it when he came on this show. He never answered our question. Instead, he accused us of treason. Here is part of our exchange: CARLSON Look right into the camera and say, "I know for a fact the government of Vladimir Putin was behind the hacks of John Podesta's email." SCHIFF: Absolutely, the government of Vladimir Putin was behind the hacks of our institution and the dumping of information – CARLSON: Of John Podesta's e-mail. SCHIFF: Not only in the United States, but also in Europe – CARLSON: OK, you're not – you know what? You're dodging. SCHIFF: And Tucker you are – CARLSON: Look and say, "I know they did John Podesta's e-mail. They hacked this." SCHIFF: And I think that Ronald Reagan would be rolling over his grave. CARLSON: You can't – Ronald Reagan. SCHIFF: You're carrying water for the Kremlin – CARLSON: I am not carrying water for – you're making – look, you're a sitting member of Congress on the Intel Committee ... SCHIFF: Would you -- and the president-elect … CARLSON: ... on the Intel Committee and you can't say they hacked – SCHIFF: You're going to have to move your show to Russian television. Adam Schiff is a sociopath. He will do or say anything to achieve power. He is unfit to hold office. He should resign. And not just Adam Schiff. The entire apparatus of official Washington has been exposed by these transcripts, as well as by the documents just released in the Michael Flynn case. In November 2019, government attorney Brandon Van Grack defended the FBI’s decision to interrogate Flynn at the White House with no lawyer. Van Grack said: “The FBI was engaged in a legitimate and significant investigation into whether individuals associated with the campaign of then-candidate Donald J. Trump were coordinating with the Russian government." In that same filing, Van Grack wrote that Flynn’s phone call with the Russian ambassador was of paramount importance. “It was imperative that the FBI determine whether and why such communications with the Russian ambassador had occurred,” according to Van Grack. Both of those statements from Van Grack, we now know conclusively, are lies. In its filing this week, the Justice Department revealed that in early January, the FBI had already known there was “no derogatory information” tying Michael Flynn to the Russian government. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Nor did they need to know whether Flynn had spoken with Russian Ambassador to the U.S.  Sergey Kislyak. They knew he had. They were listening. They had a word-for-word transcript of the call. In other words, Van Grack was lying in his filing. This is not only of importance to Donald Trump. This is important to every American, because things fall apart when high-level officials do things like this for political reasons. There’s a reason nobody trusts the government anymore. And it’s not just Democrats who you should blame for the corrosion of our public life. The vast majority of the Russian collusion investigation, including the testimony you just heard, occurred during the first two years of this administration. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At the time, Republicans controlled both houses of Congress and every single committee. They had the power to expose this hoax and to shut it down. But they did not. We can only speculate why. Maybe they were too cowardly to tell the truth. Or maybe, deep down, a lot of them agreed with the aims of all of this. Either way, it’ll be very interesting to hear Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, Sen. Richard Burr of North Carolina and so many other useless Senate Republicans – the total phonies who tell you they’re representing you but don’t – explain why they didn’t really do anything to stop the derailment of America while it was in progress. Adapted from Tucker Carlson’s monologue from “Tucker Carlson Tonight,” on May 8, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Former Deputy National Security Adviser KT McFarland tells 'Fox &amp; Friends' that she wants to know who knew what and when in the Obama administration. After more than three long years, the Justice Department has finally lived up to its name by dropping charges against my former boss, former National Security Adviser and retired Army Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn. The filing of charges against this decorated military leader and public servant – who I served with briefly as his deputy on the National Security Council – amounted to a massive injustice. Flynn has gone through hell, racked up massive legal expenses, and been forced to sell his home to pay his legal bills. The American people deserve to know who was responsible for the outrageous framing of Flynn – and those responsible must be held accountable. This is vital to ensure that baseless political prosecutions like this never happen again to officials in any administration, Democrat or Republican. DEMS ASK IG TO PROBE BARR’S ‘POLITICIZATION’ OF JUSTICE DEPARTMENT AFTER FLYNN DECISION The Trump-hating media and Deep State bureaucrats who have wanted to derail the Trump presidency since its earliest days made Flynn, me and others collateral damage in their anti-Trump crusade. They have dragged our nation through rancor and division and fanned the flames of the anger that threatens to consume American democracy. Rather than wait for the next election and let the American people decide at the ballot box who should be our president, these Trump opponents took things into their own hands in an unprecedented and improper manner. The Trump opponents arrogantly thought they knew better than the American people who should lead our nation. They were willing abuse their power, break laws, sacrifice their integrity and crush innocent people in their quest to destroy the Trump presidency. Trump haters claim Attorney General William Barr concluded Thursday that charges against Flynn should be dropped because Barr is a stooge for the president. This accusation is absurd.  In fact, the unjust and baseless prosecution of Flynn has more in common with the show trials of dictatorships than it has with the American system of justice. The real reason the Justice Department moved to drop Flynn’s prosecution is that the department never had a case against Flynn in the first place. Internal documents that were never supposed to see the light of day and only recently became public make this crystal clear. And there is likely to be another trove of documents released in the near future. In their entirety, these documents are likely to show a pattern of abuse of power and wrongdoing by senior officials of the FBI, Justice Department, intelligence community, and perhaps even very senior officials in President Barack Obama’s White House. The documents will add to the revelations about how a cabal of government officials tried to bring down a duly elected president of the United States in what amounts to an attempted coup. In fact, the unjust and baseless prosecution of Flynn has more in common with the show trials of dictatorships than it has with the American system of justice. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Lavrentiy Beria, the head of Soviet dictator Josef Stalin’s secret police, once famously said:  “Show me the man, and I’ll find you the crime.” This is an eerily accurate description of how the FBI treated Flynn when officials framed him, despite the fact that in reality, he had done nothing illegal. The attorney general’s well-justified decision to dismiss charges against Flynn may be the end of Flynn’s three-year nightmare. It will give me and others satisfaction that justice has at least in part been served. But hopefully, things won’t stop there. Donald Trump was elected president by the American people in a historic election in order to go to Washington and drain the swamp. The swamp creatures – the closed ecosystem of permanent bureaucrats, career congressional politicians (of both parties) and the Washington press corps – were so entrenched that they had come to see themselves as the rightful rulers of the nation. But in fact, they are simply the servants of the real rulers of our democracy – the American people. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP How high did the conspiracy go in trying to hobble President Trump, tangle him up with endless investigations and move against him with impeachment? That’s what we need to find out now, and Attorney General Barr is doing his job and seeking justice by working to uncover the truth. Barr deserves the gratitude of the American people for what he doing – not political attacks from partisan Democrats who are focused on doing everything possible to undermine President Trump and making him a one-term president. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KT MCFARLAND

Effectiveness of New York lockdown in question; reaction and analysis on 'The Five.' Billy Joel might call it a New York state of ingratitude. As the Empire State and America’s largest city endure COVID-19, their most powerful Democrats ooze a truly revolting lack of appreciation for those who have helped their constituents survive this ongoing microbial attack. Rather than say “Thank you,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo, New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and New York City Council President Corey Johnson bite the hands that heal their state and metropolis. JASON CHAFFETZ: CORONAVIRUS AND NATIONAL PARKS — TIME TO OPEN THEM UP “If you don’t have a health care crisis in your community, please come help us in New York, now,” Gov. Cuomo said March 30. Americans heeded his call. On April 2, he announced that some 21,000 health care workers from coast to coast rushed in to aid their countrymen on the Hudson. “These are beautiful, generous people,” Cuomo said, “and New Yorkers will return the favor.” Cuomo just returned the favor. “We’re not in a position to provide any subsidies right now because we have a $13 billion deficit,” Cuomo said Tuesday. “We are in dire financial need.” Consequently, out-of-state medical personnel who earned wages back home while volunteering their talents for at least 14 days must pay New York state tax on such income. Albany also expects full compliance with its dense tax paperwork. That morning, Mayor de Blasio was customarily crass. “Every day, President Trump resembles, more and more, Herbert Hoover, the president who ignored the Great Depression, who didn’t care to put America back on its feet, who has been now remembered in history as someone who failed at the most basic responsibility, which is to protect the people he serves,” de Blasio said. De Blasio called President Trump “a former New Yorker who seems to enjoy stabbing his home town in the back” and, while demanding a federal bailout of Gotham’s bloated books, de Blasio added: “I’ll give him another chance to show that there’s a beating heart there….” De Blasio also used grotesque language April 19 while begging Trump for taxpayer dollars: “Are you going to save New York City or are you telling New York City to drop dead?” The remarkably self-absorbed de Blasio seems unaware of the Niagara Falls of assistance that Team Trump cascaded into New York City: The reliably partisan and relentlessly embarrassing de Blasio should thank Team Trump for this literal airlift and sealift of emergency support. Instead, he most likely will bash Trump daily, between now and Election Day. Corey Johnson is Cuomo and de Blasio’s brother in thanklessness. The far-left Democrat who runs the über-liberal City Council attacked a group of non-New Yorkers who came in peace to salve COVID-19’s epicenter. The Rev. Franklin Graham — son of the late, legendary preacher Billy Graham — runs Samaritan’s Purse. This faith-based non-profit arrived March 28, raised 14 tents in Central Park, and created a 68-bed outdoor field hospital. The evangelical Christian organization came upon request of Mount Sinai Hospital, just across Fifth Avenue. This fine establishment has treated me, as a loyal and highly satisfied patient of the Mount Sinai Health System. It was founded in 1852 as The Jews Hospital.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Samaritan’s Purse has provided at least 333 New Yorkers with free care. And, since its personnel have labored in the Empire State for more than a fortnight, they must pay New York state taxes on salaries earned as they mended Gothamites. Unfortunately for Samaritan Purse’s sake, it embraces traditional marriage, which makes it unfiltered evil to Johnson and other local leftists. So, despite claiming that “NYC should be a city for all of us,” Johnson demands that Samaritan’s Purse fold its tents and get lost. “It is time for Samaritan’s Purse to leave NYC,” he exploded on May Day, via Twitter. “This group, led by the notoriously bigoted, hate-spewing Franklin Graham, came at a time when our city couldn’t in good conscience turn away any offer of help. That time has passed. Their continued presence here is an affront to our values of inclusion, and is painful for all New Yorkers who care deeply about the LGBTQ community.” So, a bunch of Christians waded into a disease-filled city chock full of gay people, treated 300+ patients — in cooperation with an historically Jewish hospital — without quizzing them about their sexuality or spirituality. And Johnson tells them to bugger off. Who’s spewing hate here? It was OK, Johnson argues, to have these inclusion-affronting homophobes around when New York City needed them. But now that the crisis has abated somewhat, these pain-inducing homophobes should beat it. Johnson would have been more principled had he blocked Samaritan Purse’s trucks at the Holland Tunnel upon arrival. That stance would have been bold, albeit ugly. But accepting this group’s aid for one month and then telling them to scram is just plain mercenary. Something is far more vital here than Samaritan Purse’s private-sector beliefs on gay marriage, a matter that the public-sector U.S. Supreme Court affirmed in June 2015. What’s vital is preventing New Yorkers from dropping dead due to COVID-19, as did 108 disproportionately black and Hispanic Gothamites on May Day alone. This escapes Johnson. Rather than thank these volunteers for serving 333 New Yorkers, some of whom might be gay, the openly gay Johnson bullies these good Samaritans like the bigot that he is.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If Corey Johnson’s Manhattan residence ever suffers a blaze, will he stop firefighters to confirm their support for gay marriage or will he thank them for showing up and let them douse the damn flames? Samaritan Purse’s Franklin Graham takes all of this remarkably in stride: “We were there to save lives,” he told Faithwire. “We weren’t there to argue with people.” CLICK HERE TO GET MORE FROM DEROY MURDOCK

Former U.S. Attorney Brett Tolman reacts to the Michael Flynn charges being dropped, the latest Russia probe transcripts and the release of a jailed Texas salon owner who reopened amid COVID-19. If the "first rough draft of history" in the news media sounds dubious, the second draft made by Hollywood will almost certainly be worse. I'm not talking about documentaries, which can be judged as journalism. I'm talking about movies and TV shows, which will inevitably be pressed to dramatize things so they are evermore loosely "based on real events." CBS has been preparing a miniseries based on former FBI Director James Comey's memoir, pompously titled "A Higher Loyalty." In the memoir, he lectured, "Ethical leaders choose a higher loyalty to those core values over their own personal gain." But the personal gain was sweet for Comey. First came the high-roller book deal with 850,000 copies, heavily promoted by all the Democrat-repeating networks. In Comey's case, that included an hourlong prime-time ABC "news" special during which he was interviewed by that nonpartisan George Stephanopoulos. EX-ACTING AG MATTHEW WHITAKER: DOJ'S FLYNN DECISION GOOD START BUT THERE'S MUCH MORE TO DO The book sold like hotcakes to Trump haters. Add some more millions for his optioning the book to Hollywood for "entertainment." Production was slated to begin last November, but there's no word if it was anywhere near done before the coronavirus pandemic kicked in. Apparently, CBS Television Studios hasn't even decided where this Heroic Comey miniseries will land, either on Showtime or the CBS All Access streaming service, where it would be an easy match with the network's Trump-trashing drama "The Good Fight." Comey will be played by Trump-hating actor Jeff Daniels, who recently made the New York media swoon by starring as heroic lawyer Atticus Finch in "To Kill a Mockingbird" on Broadway. The miniseries director, Billy Ray, said Daniels was picked because he had "instant integrity, loads of warmth, intelligence, complexity and gravitas." That's obviously how they expect to portray Jim Comey: as another heroic lawman on the actor's resume. Ray promised he would make a "fair, responsible and comprehensively documented account of real-life events," CBS said in a press release. But current events are intruding on Comey's memoir and his picture of a heroic and nonpartisan FBI battling a president with no respect for the rule of law. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER For example, new documents have surfaced that purport to show the FBI agents who investigated President Donald Trump's former national security adviser Michael Flynn sought "to get him to lie" so they could "prosecute him or get him fired." Does that sound nonpartisan? Comey bragged to MSNBC's Nicolle Wallace in 2018 that he flouted the usual protocols for interviewing a top White House official. Usually, the White House counsel is contacted and an interview is carefully arranged. In this case, Comey just sent in his agents, the ones scheming to "prosecute him or get him fired." Former Comey aide Josh Campbell admitted in his own memoir that Comey said, "We just decided, you know, screw it." Flynn didn't see the attack coming. He said sure and did the FBI interview -- without a lawyer present. He walked right into shark-infested waters and lied to the sharks, turning his life upside down. Attorney General William Barr has decided to vacate Flynn's conviction, finding the adventurous FBI interview was "untethered to, and unjustified by, the FBI's counterintelligence investigation into Mr. Flynn." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I think we can guess the CBS miniseries will glide right over the latest developments to keep its focus on Heroic Comey, no matter how much that narrative is collapsing. It's likely the series will be the latest in a line of conservative-smearing historical dramas aired by CBS/Showtime, from the Clarence Thomas-whipping "Strange Justice" to "The Reagans." But CBS -- the Dan Rather network -- lectures the rest of us to stop spreading disinformation. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TIM GRAHAM

The Justice Department is ceasing its prosecution of retired Lieutenant General Michael Flynn on charges of lying to federal investigators; Chief White House correspondent John Roberts reports. The decision by the Department of Justice to drop criminal charges against Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn is critical to restoring confidence in the Department of Justice. The now revealed FBI effort to entrap this patriotic American who had served his country in uniform for more than thirty years and was director of the Defense Intelligence Agency and President Trump’s short-lived National Security Adviser was shameful. But it was far from the only dishonorable episode of the FBI under its former director James Comey. Comey and other politicized Department of Justice officials openly meddled in the 2016 election. They spied on American citizens without proper justification, circulated Russian disinformation in the form of a dossier, and conspired to have a special counsel appointed all in an attempt to remove a duly elected President Donald J. Trump from office. GREGG JARRETT: ENDING MICHAEL FLYNN PROSECUTION EXPOSES AND DESTROYS TRUMP-RUSSIA COLLUSION HOAX Even though Comey was chastised by Justice Department Inspector General Michael Horowitz for violating Justice Department and FBI policies, Comey has yet to face any real legal consequences that his actions deserve. This is even as he bragged about violating standard practice in sending FBI agents to interview (and entrap) General Flynn, saying it was “something I probably wouldn’t have done or gotten away with in a more…organized administration.” Notice how with a sense of self-righteousness and Washington insider arrogance he blames the Trump administration for his own misdeeds. What we have learned about the FBI under his leadership is disheartening to all who have served honorably within the Department of Justice. We all now know many of the names involved in the DOJ’s and FBI’s political campaign against the president—Peter Strzok, Lisa Page, Kevin Clinesmith—and their conduct is beyond troubling. I was chief of staff to then-Attorney General Jeff Sessions when he made the decision to fire FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe for lying under oath. The decision was ironic, as McCabe was the one who had initiated the investigation into Sessions for allegedly lying under oath to Congress about having had no discussions with Russian officials during the presidential campaign. What we have learned about the FBI under his leadership is disheartening to all who have served honorably within the Department of Justice. McCabe had also been involved with getting General Flynn to plead guilty for making false statements under oath (about speaking with Russian Ambassador Sergy Kislyak after Donald Trump was elected president but before he was inaugurated). McCabe was apparently so desperate to polish his reputation in the media that he thought it was worth breaking the law to do so, lying to FBI agents about leaking information to the press. It made me wonder how much time was wasted at the Department of Justice spinning national news media or trying to set traps for President Trump and his allies instead of doing the nation’s work in supporting law enforcement and serving the American people. I became a U.S. Attorney in 2004 and remember well James Comey’s stirring farewell speech in the Great Hall of the Justice Department, as he retired as Deputy Attorney General. In that speech he talked about our sacred duty to maintain the “reservoir of trust and credibility” that had been built up by the Department of Justice. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER With what now reads like tragic irony, he said that “The protection of that reservoir requires vigilance, and unerring commitment to truth, and a recognition that the actions of one may affect the priceless gift that benefits all.” The FBI and the Department of Justice are full of hard-working, dedicated, law enforcement officials. But the priceless gift of all their work was tarnished by the politicized few who decided that their obsessive opposition to then-candidate and now-president Donald J. Trump justified any action, no matter how illegal or how it violated Department of Justice standards and practices. As acting Attorney General, I did my best to restore confidence in the Department of Justice. I tried to replenish that “reservoir of trust and credibility” upon which it depends.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Our current Attorney General William Barr is doing an extraordinary job of returning the Justice Department to its proper and necessary role, to upholding the laws and constitution of the United States, and to the fair and impartial execution of justice. The dropping of charges against General Flynn is a beginning—but it is only a beginning. There is much more to be done.   CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MATTHEW WHITAKER

Michael Flynn did not commit a crime and they knew it. If you were paying any attention to the news Thursday afternoon -- and we suspect you were -- you know there is a passionate debate underway right now among political partisans over the Justice Department's decision to drop the case against General Michael Flynn. They are screaming. OBAMA KNEW DETAILS OF WIRETAPPED FLYNN PHONE CALLS, SURPRISING TOP DOJ OFFICIAL IN MEETING WITH BIDEN, DECLASSIFIED DOCS SHOW But there shouldn't be a debate because there actually isn't a debate about why the case was dropped. We already know. DOJ officials explained it in detail. Read the filings; it's worth it. They're online. Clearly, almost nobody commenting on the case has read them, and they should. The documents are shocking, not to Republicans or Democrats, but to Americans. We've outlined much of what we knew about the Flynn case in previous segments on "Tucker Carlson Tonight," how a corrupt FBI official called Peter Strzok decided to derail Mike Flynn, using any means necessary. At one point, Strzok considered charging Flynn under something called the Logan Act. The Logan Act is a 220-year old law that in the entire span of American history has never been used to convict a single person. In fact, no one has even been indicted under the Logan Act since before the Civil War. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And by the way, it's probably unconstitutional. You probably couldn't do it now if you want it. But Strzok didn't care. His goal was to keep the investigation going, whether he had a legal justification for doing that or not. By January 4th of 2017, the FBI had already completed its investigation of Flynn, which was thorough. After four months of looking into Flynn, and they found "no derogatory information of any kind linking Flynn to Russia." Now, in a fair investigation, the kind that we have a right to expect as Americans, it would have ended right there. And according to the DOJ, it should have ended right there: "The Department does not believe there was a legitimate basis to investigate and prosecute the designated National Security adviser for communicating with a foreign ambassador and seeking to mollify geopolitical tensions in advance of the inauguration of the next President." How often does the FBI set people up? How many other lives have they destroyed without the public knowing about it? In other words, this isn't about Michael Flynn. It's about you. And that's the essence of it right there. Michael Flynn did not commit a crime, and they knew it. How did they know? Because the FBI had already tapped Michael Flynn's phone, which itself is a shocking outrage -- completely unacceptable in a free country that, for some reason, nobody in Washington seems to notice or care about. They should. Because the FBI already knew what Flynn had said in the call in detail, there was, the Department announced, "no justification or need to review Mr. Flynn as to his own personal recollections of what had been said." Because they knew. In other words, the whole thing was a setup from the first moment. Now we know this for certain. We're not speculating because we have Peter Strzok's text messages to his creepy government lawyer girlfriend, Lisa Page. But what if we didn't have those text messages? We almost didn't. At first, you'll recall, the FBI claimed they had been lost due to some "technical glitch." So, we almost didn't find out what really happened in this case. Michael Flynn almost went to prison. And that gets to the nub of all of this, the most important question of all: How often does the FBI set people up? How many other lives have they destroyed without the public knowing about it? In other words, this isn't about Michael Flynn. It's about you. It's scary to think about that. Most people in Washington seem determined not to think about it. They are intent on excusing all of this. Ilhan Omar was among the first to chime in on the news today. "White privilege at work," she tweeted. Omar didn't explain what in the world Mike Flynn's case might have to do with his skin color, which he cannot control. But she denounced the decision is racist, anyway. Surprised? You shouldn't be surprised. Ilhan Omar is a person who clearly married her own brother in an immigration scam, who passionately hates the country that saved her, who reduces every conceivable issue to the most vicious kind of race-baiting. Can a single human being actually be as loathsome as Ilhan Omar? It's hard to believe. She's like a parody of repulsiveness. Sometimes, you doubt she really exists; the Republican National Committee. must have created her. We can't confirm that, of course. We can say with confidence the RNC did not create cable news. The dummies there were almost as angry as Ilhan Omar was. Watch Jeb Bush's former flak take a break from sucking up to professional Harvey Weinstein enablers like Noah Oppenheim to lecture the rest of us about smear campaigns. Nicolle Wallace, MSNBC host: Mike Flynn's lawyers have been engaged in a smear campaign very, very similar, torn out of the same playbook as the smear campaign Donald Trump ran against many of the same FBI leaders. Unidentified male: The idea that the Justice Department could do this. You called it stunning. It's past stunning. This is the collapse of the Justice Department. This is a political and incredibly destructive thing to the rule of law. Unidentified male: It's not good for the rule of law. It's not good for morale. And it's not a fair outcome in this case. Jeremy Bash, former chief of staff for the CIA and Defense Department: Today, we've seen the political corruption of the justice system that Mike Flynn has long been calling for. The Justice Department had nothing to do with this. This was the White House, 100 percent. Elie Honig, CNN legal analyst: The fix is in. This is an absolute injustice. What the federal government did to Mike Flynn was demonstrably and provably unfair, and anyone who refuses to admit that in the face of overwhelming evidence should not wield power. So, what exactly are these people saying? What argument are they really making? Mike Flynn was set up by corrupt law enforcement officials. They suggested their goal was to "get him to lie so we can prosecute him or get him fired." That's not speculation. The FBI wrote that down on paper. Flynn faced a maximum of five years in prison. Are the people you just saw really arguing that Flynn's prosecution was legitimate? Are they arguing he should serve the time behind bars? It's enough to make you dizzy. Keep in mind, these are supposed to be "liberals." Okay, so whatever happened to their commitment to civil rights? To fairness? In fact, there's nothing liberal about the arguments they are making. This is the most brutal kind of power politics disguised with lies. "This moment represents the full collapse of an apolitical Justice Department," wrote CNN's legal analyst Susan Hennessey. MSNBC's justice analyst, Matthew Miller, agreed with that: "Barr is giving Flynn treatment that would not be available to any other American." And just in case you wondered if all these responses were coordinated -- because of course, they were -- the world's angriest former labor secretary, Robert Reich, wrote this: "Under William Barr's stewardship, the Justice Department has become nothing more than a political tool for Trump to wield against his enemies and withdraw against his friends. This is how dictatorships are built." Pause and consider this. Once again, it is head-spinning in its falseness. It's the opposite of what's true. Dropping the case against Michael Flynn means the Justice Department is now a political tool? No. Flip it around 180 degrees. The attorney general dropped the case because the Justice Department was already being used as a political tool to remove the national security adviser to the United States. That's the whole point. It's not a debate. No honest person could reach any other conclusions. Read the documents yourself. But these are not honest people. These are people who applauded when Adam Schiff of California baselessly denounced his political opponents as Russian agents, including this show. Naturally, Schiff himself weighed in, too. He couldn't help himself: "Flynn pled guilty to lying to the FBI. about his illicit Russian contacts. His lies do not now become truths. This dismissal does not exonerate him." Wait, what? Is Adam Schiff, the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, now claiming that a call between the incoming national security adviser and the Russian ambassador to the United States is "an illicit Russian contact?" He is claiming that. This is insanity, and it is calculated insanity. And in the end, I hate to tell you, it may work. It is entirely possible your grandchildren will be reading Adam Schiff's version of history 20 years from now. That's why they're saying it. That's the goal. In the meantime, you should consider what it would mean if unscrupulous liars like these were ever to take full control of this country. They know Michael Flynn is not a dangerous criminal. If he was a dangerous criminal, they would be working to free him from jail. No, they wanted Flynn crushed purely because he happened to be in the way of the power they seek. And that's why they're still trying to put Roger Stone behind bars because he mocked them to their faces and that diminished their authority. Roger Stone may still go to prison, by the way -- we'll keep you posted. But the question is how many other inconvenient Americans would they bankrupt and imprison if they could? Let's hope we never find out. In the meantime, you should ignore their yelping. Turn it off. This is an offense against equal justice, they scream into the camera. Right. The very same people who demand day after day that we hold American citizens to completely different standards based on how they look. Now, they're telling you justice must be blind. It's absurd. It's insulting. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The essence of fairness in every country at every time is fairness. Fairness. What the federal government did to Mike Flynn was demonstrably and provably unfair, and anyone who refuses to admit that in the face of overwhelming evidence should not wield power. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 7, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Former CIA and FBI agent Tracy Walder joins 'Fox &amp; Friends' to discuss her new book 'The Unexpected Spy.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. While serving in a Middle East war zone, my CIA colleagues and I were tasked with recruiting a sensitive source, whose reporting would later save U.S. lives. With the benefit of diverse skills and backgrounds, our group, which included analysts, collectors and disguise technicians, among others, designed a successful plan. We made secure contact with this high-value target and developed a clandestine relationship with him. That sensitive operation, which went off without a hitch, reflected the ethos of inclusion. Striving for a 360-degree optic on the most complex challenges, stakeholders rally to ensure no key issue, viewpoint or analytical angle is neglected. Everyone’s input matters. The best leaders for whom I worked enabled a diverse and inclusive environment because of their high moral and ethical standards and because they understood there was no better process for conducting espionage. TREY GOWDY: WHY FAIRNESS MATTERS — ALWAYS During the past quarter-century, in particular, these enlightened leaders demonstrated an increasingly serious commitment to promoting officers and selecting them for assignments based on their performance, absent discrimination based on race, ethnicity or gender. The promotion of Gina Haspel to lead the CIA and Beth Kimber as the first woman deputy director for operations were long overdue and reflected the time it took to correct for past gender discrimination. It was not only progressive leaders who drove this transformational change but also junior female officers like Tracy Walder, author of the recently released “The Unexpected Spy,” whose extraordinary commitment and expertise helped shatter the CIA’s glass ceiling. Overcoming floppy baby syndrome and being bullied as a child, Walder went straight to work at CIA after graduating from USC. The Oklahoma City bombing and 1997 Peter Bergen interview with Usama bin Laden sparked her interest in “being part of the solution” and led her to serve as an FBI special agent in Los Angeles after leaving CIA in 2004. For Walder, serving at CIA was less of a job and more of a calling. When American Airlines Flight 77 crashed into the Pentagon, Walder recalled, “that plane might as well have crashed into the south side of my body.” She was working at CIA in the Counterterrorism Center (CTC) when Al Qaeda struck on Sept. 11. She later served for an extended period in Iraq. She spent her CIA career first targeting terrorists and then the weapons of mass destruction they sought to acquire. If there is one thing I learned during my career at CIA, it’s that a person’s true character is revealed under the most stressful situations. If there is one thing I learned during my career at CIA, it’s that a person’s true character is revealed under the most stressful situations. Some people remain composed and work the problem, while others lose control over their emotions. Walder literally showed cool under fire, when she injured her back and had to undergo emergency medical treatment during combat. She deftly contended with the misogynist foreign intelligence officers with whom she worked on counterterrorism. An African liaison officer disdainfully called Walder “Malibu Barbie” and some of the European services showed no interest in her input until they realized she was such an authority on the subject. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Walder, who poignantly recounts the strong bonds she enjoys with her mother in “The Unexpected Spy,” is now married and raising a daughter. She has been teaching at an all-girls school since leaving the FBI in 2010. She had always wanted to be a teacher but was drawn to public service out of patriotism and the intellectual challenge. Serving in the crucible of post-9/11 CIA and FBI operations, Walder gained the experience, which makes her an exceptional role model. No doubt on this Mother’s Day, the Walder family is celebrating motherhood and the extraordinary influence of mothers in our society. Not to take anything away from the pleasant, commercialized aspects of the holiday, including flowers, chocolates and cards, but in 2020 we would do well also to commemorate what makes our nation strong — meritocracy. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “If you could do a brilliant job,” Walder writes of her time at CIA, “nothing outside of that — not race, religion, or sexual orientation mattered.” This is not to say such best practices are even now uniformly followed in the CIA or FBI, but they are words to live by in the workplace and in our classrooms. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DANIEL HOFFMAN

Every day and in every community, the coronavirus pandemic is bringing out the best in Americans. Take a look at some inspiring images of Americans pulling together in a time of crisis. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  On Zoom yesterday a friend asked me how I was doing in the midst of the pandemic. “Without dismissing the death and economic pain,” I answered, “honestly, I find the whole thing epic. I feel invigorated and called to serve.” “Easy for you to say,” he said. “You’re a charismatic leader. Of course you think this whole thing is epic and invigorating. You’ve never been a worrier.” He’s wrong. I worry a lot. I worry someone I love will die alone in the ICU. I worry my retirement savings won’t come back and I will be cheated out of spending the last years of my life in calm and comfort with the woman I have loved since the moment I first saw her walk into the room 35 years ago. TREY GOWDY: WHY FAIRNESS MATTERS — ALWAYS My millennial kids and their entire generation will be marked by this crisis for the rest of their lives, the way the Great Depression marked my grandparents, and I fear that most of them will need help for a decade or more before they can fully stand on their own two feet. I worry my congregation will lose families and our schools will lose students who might now consider religion a luxury not a necessity; leaving themselves, the institution and the community I have worked my entire adult life to build, physically and spiritually empty. When my head aches deep behind my eyes and temples, which it does a lot lately, I worry I have the virus. When I leave the cemetery after burying yet another COVID-19 victim, like the handful of mourners allowed to attend – distanced, masked, unable to hold or be held – I feel panic, despair and doubt. But I don’t give into fear for long. Instead, I fight back with faith. In these surreal, frustrating and anxious months I have turned most often to the 23rd Psalm. Many Jews, Christians and Muslims, and religious and non-religious people, know it well. I have read its famous words for decades, but never has it comforted me more than during these strange, uncertain days, especially the seemingly simple verse “Yea though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I shall fear no evil, for You are with me.” That simple sentence reminds me that we are all walking, step by step, through something. We will not remain on this terrible journey forever. To have faith is to know this crisis will end. After all, what is a valley of shadows? A shadow, no matter how long or how dark, is actually proof of light. It is impossible for a shadow to exist unless somewhere, somehow a powerful light still shines. I have already felt glimmers of insight as I travel through the valley of COVID-19. The shadow cast upon the world by this pandemic is frightening and yet, so too an ever-present reminder that even in the darkest hour, our light, God’s light, the light of our love for the dearest of family and friends, the light of our love for our cities, neighborhoods and the simplest blessings of daily life we so often took for granted, still shine. COVID-19 has stripped away a lot of nonsense from my life and in that stripping away something beautiful has emerged; a knowing that we were better meant to be home, closer to God and the people we love most.     And like many, I am asking enlightening questions. Do we really need so many suits, ties, shoes, purses and outfits to wear? How many meetings do we really need to attend? Did we need to spend so much time away from home for so many years? How much do we have to spoil the earth by driving and buying, driving and buying, driving and buying? COVID-19 has stripped away a lot of nonsense from my life and in that stripping away something beautiful has emerged; a knowing that we were better meant to be home, closer to God and the people we love most. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The days of the ancient Jewish calendar begin at sunset; darkness pregnant with light. The Hebrew months begin when the moon is new, in its darkest phase, just a slim crescent of light against the black sky. The Sages remind us that we see light through our pupil, the darkest part of our eye. It is powerful and profound that the Talmud requires even the blind to recite the ancient blessing for the new moon; affirming with faith what cannot be seen. Right now, we are all called to affirm a light we sometimes cannot see through our anxiety, pain and tears. Darkness is the moment for faith. Believe me, I am not campaigning for it, nor does the position exist, but if there was such a job as Chief Rabbi of Those Who Suffer, and I held that job, here is what I would say to the world right now. I would remind everyone that life is long. Long enough to restart, to rebuild, to take more pictures, to create more memories, to heal. I would remind them to have faith that the moon will soon enough be full, reflecting the sun’s great power for warmth and light. I would quote Albert Camus who said, “In the depths of winter, I finally learned that within me there lay an invincible summer.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I know the overwhelming, cold darkness of a desert valley that sometimes engulfs us all. I am walking that valley myself, like so many others. But I also know the human spirit endures. The valley may be long and the shadows too. But we are walking toward the day we emerge slowly but surely back to laughter; to holding and being held. We are walking toward a life deeper in gratitude and deeper in faith that the sun will rise no matter how dark the night, as it did yesterday and as it will tomorrow. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM STEVE LEDER

Nurses shoulder grief when families are kept away from COVID-19 patients; Matt Finn reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  COVID-19 doesn’t care how old you are, your position in life or how healthy you seem to be. It doesn’t care about how other diseases work, even when it looks closely related to them. This terrible new enemy wreaks havoc on its victims, unchecked and unphased by any and all therapies we throw at it. Only recently have we identified a well-known, simplistic but effective intervention – proning (putting patients on their stomach) – as being efficacious. But it’s not a cure, simply a way to buy time for patients to hopefully heal on their own. COVID-19 leaves physicians feeling inept and weaponless in this battle. We push experimental therapies, adapt interventions meant for other diseases with limited success and chase laboratory values that would otherwise spell impending disaster yet rapidly correct days later without intervention. ROBERT RUNCIE: CORONAVIRUS RELIEF – WHY SCHOOLS MUST BE THE HEART OF NEXT STIMULUS PACKAGE It feels as if we are shooting arrows against a brick wall in a feeble attempt to breach it; any crack in the mortar is a hope that is dashed away by the fact the wall still stands. Yet, we all carry on. On the orders of physicians, our teammates in nursing, physical therapy and respiratory therapy are donning re-used and decontaminated protective gear (meant to be worn once) to enter the rooms of infected patients innumerable times per shift to draw labs, adjust infusion doses and help to prone them. This exposes them to the virus time and time again. Each decision we make as physicians to obtain an additional lab or add a new medication weighs on us that much more. This all takes a significant toll on the mental health of our health care providers. While we are used to dealing with difficult situations and death, this is a whole new beast. This unseen enemy threatens us directly and constantly. Did I touch my mask before washing my hands? What about when I adjusted my glasses? Did I just infect myself? These thoughts cross our minds hundreds of times throughout the day. COVID-19 lives in our workplaces, in our neighborhoods and in our own homes. Arriving home each day, even though I leave my hospital scrubs and shoes at work, I still take my shoes off outside my door and disrobe completely after entering my house. I immediately throw my street clothes in the wash and jump in the shower to get clean – scrubbing under every fingernail and inch of my body. I wipe down my phone, keys, wallet and backpack with disinfecting wipes and then wash my hands again. As hard as this is for the patients and health care providers, it is worse for families. They are unable to see just how sick and close to death their loved ones are. It’s almost impossible to comprehend that their loved one could get this sick, this quickly, when days earlier they were walking around in the park together. It’s hard to explain but what often happens is these patients were maintaining some baseline level of function but underneath, they were likely sitting on the edge of a cliff that was only revealed once they were infected with COVID-19. Then the curtain was pulled back and we could see how unhealthy they really were. We see this in “otherwise healthy” younger patients who have undiagnosed high blood pressure, high cholesterol and obesity. And, of course, older patients who before the virus could “manage just fine,” but needed assistance with daily activities or couldn’t really walk more than a few feet without stopping. We break down. We cry. We feel our breath get short and chest get tight. “Is this COVID or just anxiety?” we wonder. The families plead with us on Zoom calls, asking for experimental therapies they saw on TV or in an Internet search. How do you explain that these are just experimental, not always available and, in the age of evidence-based medicine, will not likely be administered without a clinical trial to evaluate effectiveness? While always grateful for our efforts, they continue to push and push, offering to send us articles and news stories, and who can blame them? I would want everything to be tried for my family member as well – even if there is no evidence for it. But that’s not how medicine works. While connecting with patients and families has always been a significant part of the job for ICU doctors, it has become almost a full-time endeavor – explaining behind a mask and over video conference with our palliative care colleagues, why we can’t “just inject donor plasma” into their loved one. The emotional burden weighs heavy as well, from family members who feel guilty for infecting their loved one, to those whose family member we suggest is made “do not resuscitate” because they likely wouldn’t benefit from chest compressions if their heart stopped. They inevitably break down crying, inconsolable. And it is made all the worse because we cannot reach out to hold their hand from behind a screen. We break down too, inside. We look at each other after these calls – “That was terrible. This is terrible. What else can we do?” Nothing. And so, we get on, calling the next family. Because that’s all we can do. It is overwhelming, yet we hold it together for the families and each other. The virus is constantly on our minds and feels impossible to escape. Even when we’re off duty it sits there. In the conversations with families that we replay in our minds. In the burden of knowing we asked the seasoned nurse, a member of the higher risk age groups, to enter the room and expose herself to the virus again. In the questions and concerns from our own families. And constantly, unwaveringly, on TV. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER We break down. We cry. We feel our breath get short and chest get tight. “Is this COVID or just anxiety?” we wonder. Some reach out to professionals or colleagues to talk, others meditate or run. Some self-medicate with alcohol while others just bundle it all back inside. The day ends, the dreams begin and then we wake up to do it all over again. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Tucker Carlson blasts Joe Biden, who once championed victim-centered Title IX rules, for hypocrisy amid his sexual assault allegations In the wake of Tara Reade's allegation that former Vice President Joe Biden sexually assaulted her when he was a senator in 1993 – an allegation that Biden strongly denies – he and his supporters have finally got it right when it comes to assessing claims of sexual assault. Significantly, the position Biden now holds is based on the same philosophy behind the U.S. Education Department regulations released Wednesday that will govern how institutions of higher education and K-12 schools handle students' accusations of sexual misconduct. Biden and his backers now say that when a sexual misconduct allegation is made, the accuser needs to be heard and respected. But importantly, the accuser’s claims need to be subject to rigorous investigation free of any presumption of guilt. After all, our entire justice system is based on the principle that anyone accused of a crime is presumed innocent until proven guilty. DEVOS PROCLAIMS TITLE IX RULE CHANGE FOR CAMPUS SEX ASSAULT CASES 'REBALANCES THE SCALES OF JUSTICE' The purpose of the new Education Department rules – issued under the authority of the federal anti-discrimination statute known as Title IX – is to ensure that "every survivor of sexual violence must be taken seriously, and every student accused of sexual misconduct must know that guilt is not predetermined," Education Secretary Betsy DeVos said. In order to ensure that guilt is not predetermined, the rules guarantee due process for accused students – something that was sorely lacking under the Obama administration's 2011 guidance on the same topic. The new due process requirements for universities include: the presumption of innocence; written notice of the allegations; an opportunity for the accuser and accused to review the evidence; a live hearing; an impartial decision-maker; and the right of the accused and accuser to each be represented by an adviser who can cross-examine and challenge evidence, subject to the typical "rape shield" exceptions. The accuser is also protected from having to come face-to-face with the accused during the hearing and is not required to divulge any medical or psychological records. Schools are required to respond promptly to all reports of sexual misconduct and to investigate all complaints filed. ALYSSA MILANO EXPLAINS SILENCE ON JOE BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT ALLEGATION, SAYS MEN DESERVE ‘DUE PROCESS’ The new rules also increase transparency. Colleges are required to disclose the materials used to train their Title IX staff. Transcripts or recordings of hearings must be kept and made available to the parties. And the parties cannot be prohibited from speaking about the allegations. Compare that to the Obama administration guidance. The guidance came in a "Dear Colleague letter" that did not go through the notice and comment process required for regulations and was withdrawn in 2017. The letter encouraged schools to deny due process protections to accused students – even when they faced expulsion – and mandated the lowest possible standard of proof for conviction. As a result, accused students were commonly denied the presumption of innocence and even access to evidence favorable to their defense, as well as the details of the charges against them. The 2011 letter was inspired by the same "women need to be believed" mantra that we've been hearing from Democrats and their allies until very recently. The most notable example came when Christine Blasey Ford alleged now-Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh had sexually assaulted her when both were teenagers. Exactly like Biden, Kavanaugh vehemently denied the allegation against him.  Biden's take on Ford was typical of comments Democrats made during Kavanaugh’s Senate confirmation hearing for a seat on the Supreme Court: "You’ve got to start off with the presumption that at least the essence of what she’s talking about is real, whether or not she forgets facts," Biden said. Hence, it's not surprising that Democrats liked the Obama guidance, despite their traditional support for due process (even for illegal immigrants), and attacked Secretary DeVos' proposal for new rules in November 2018. One of the critics of the proposed new rules was Joe Biden, who championed the 2011 guidance as vice president. This is an interesting stance for someone whose inappropriate touching could easily lead to a Title IX hearing if he were a student. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., joined in the criticism, characterizing the proposed Education Department rules and their due process guarantees as "utter contempt for survivor justice." Actress and #MeToo activist Alyssa Milano called the proposed regulations "Betsy's s----- gift." Yet those same Democrats and their countless like-minded colleagues are now calling for due process for Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee for president in the November election. Addressing the allegation against Biden, Pelosi paid lip service to "the idea that women will be heard and be listened to," but added that "there’s also due process.” Milano responded to the allegation with a sudden realization, saying: “So we have to find this balance in the 'believe women movement' and also giving men their due process. And, you know, realizing that we're destroying lives, if we publicly don't go through the right steps in order to find out if an accusation is credible or not.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Even Biden was not afraid of looking like a hypocrite. Asked about the allegation against him on MSNBC, he qualified "believing the woman" by adding "then it's vetted, looked into.” Given this change of heart in recent weeks, Democrats and their allies might have rethought their opposition to the new Title IX rules. But the early indications, following Wednesday's release of the finalized regulations, indicate otherwise. Biden immediately denounced the rules, saying they would “strip survivors of their rights,” and vowed to reverse them. Similarly, Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., said "this rule is not about ‘restoring balance,’ this is about silencing survivors." You'd think that Joe Biden would finally understand that only a fair adjudication process can determine which party in an alleged sexual assault is the true survivor of an injustice. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Instead, Biden, Murray and their colleagues continue to mischaracterize due process, the linchpin of American justice, as "silencing" the accuser – at least when the person who is accused is not a prominent Democrat. Joe Biden wants the presumption of innocence when he is accused of sexual assault, but doesn’t want students accused of sexual misconduct to get the same right. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CURT LEVEY

World War II veterans Harry Miller and Jewish refugee from Nazi Germany Colonel Frank Cohn reflect on the lessons they learned during their time in the service. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.   Exactly 75 years ago – on May 8, 1945 – World War II ended in Europe, while the end of the war with Japan still lay ahead. “Our victory is only half over,” President Harry Truman cautioned on Victory in Europe Day –the long-awaited VE Day Today we are fighting a very different global war – this time against a microscopic killer virus. And unlike in World War II, we are fighting not just in foreign lands but on American soil. QUEEN ELIZABETH TO DELIVER TELEVISED ADDRESS TO HONOR 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF VICTORY IN EUROPE DAY The soldiers in today’s war are the heroic health care workers risking their lives to treat the sick, the medical researchers seeking a vaccine and treatments, and the millions of people out of work as they stay home to avoid spreading the coronavirus. 
      British girls, of the Picture Division of the London Office of War Information, dance in the street with American soldiers during the V-E Day celebrations in London, May 8, 1945. (Photo by Photo12/UIG/Getty Images)
       Our struggle with the coronavirus is giving us a taste of the uncertainty the World War II generation lived with for years. We can imagine how good it felt when church bells rang out in London signaling the end of the war in Europe. “The unconditional surrender of our enemies was the signal for the greatest outburst of joy in the history of mankind,” wrote British Prime Minister Winston Churchill. No doubt there will be great joy around the world with COVID-19 – the disease caused by the coronavirus – will be defeated with the power of modern medical science. For America, VE Day was a turning point. Adolf Hitler’s Nazi darkness was defeated, but fear of Soviet dictator Josef Stalin’s Red Army was driving the world to look to America for help over an even longer period. In that spring of 1945, America took on the role of the world’s military superpower. For many near the battle lines in Germany, the big global political shift was very personal. America’s advancing Army was a beacon. Refugees fled to the American lines to avoid capture by the Soviets. Consider the following very different experiences near VE Day. Teenage Auschwitz survivor Samuel Pizar saw the white star on an American tank from his hideout in a barn in southern Germany. 
      UNITED STATES - MAY 08: Huge crowd gathered in Times Square to celebrate VE-Day, the end of WWII in Europe. (Photo by Herbert Gehr/The LIFE Picture Collection via Getty Images)
       “God bless America, God bless America,” Pizar shouted as he ran toward the tank. U.S. Army Cpl. Bill Ellington lifted Pizar “through the hatch and into the warm embrace of freedom” as described by President Bill Clinton on the 50th Anniversary of VE Day in 1995. German rocket expert Werner von Braun was one of the scientists hiding in the woods who surrendered. Von Braun turned himself in to Pfc. Fred Schneikert from Sheboygan, Wis., giving America the Cold War advantage in missiles and rockets that would send satellites and humans into space. Also surrendering to American forces was German Air Force Lt. Peter Wegener, 28, the builder of hypersonic wind tunnels, who became a professor at Yale University. Already crossing the lines were 375 rare white Lipizzaner horses hidden at a farm in Czechoslovakia. In Hungary the Red Army had already shot 18 Lipizzaner stallions. U.S. Army Col. Hank Reed and Capt. Tom Stewart plunged 35 miles across the border to bring out stallions, broodmares and foals with help from allied POWs, surrendered German soldiers and a few Russian Cossacks at the farm. “We thought we had a chance to save a sliver of culture,” recalled Louis Holz, one of the American soldiers. “People ask me all the time why I did it, and after all these years I still don't know,” Stewart told Sports Illustrated in 1995. Wolf Schneider, 20, was raised to be a Nazi and was horrified when his homeland of Germany lost the war. Six months later he was translating for the U.S. Army. “Working for the Americans I had the wits to realize what good people they were and how well they treated us,” Schneider told Britain’s The Guardian in 2015. “Just the fact that we were well-fed was a big deal.” Victory in Europe left America as the strongest protector of the gains won in World War II. Delegates were already meeting in San Francisco to form the United Nations. America’s military strength and commitment were essential to hold the fledgling coalition together. “I scarcely need tell you that beneath these triumphs lie poisonous politics and deadly international rivalries,” Churchill wrote to his wife Clementine, who was actually in Moscow with the Red Cross on VE Day. As it turned out, the world didn’t get much of a break, as the Cold War soon began and lasted until the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. America’s power has been used with great benevolence for the past 75 years. Sadly, this 75th VE Day finds some doubting U.S. leadership. Historian Rick Atkinson wrote in The Wall Street Journal May 2 that he sees the postwar order “sputtering” as the “current pandemic has exposed grave shortcomings in American leadership” alongside deep fissures with allies and a “decline in American willingness to lead with aspirational, albeit imperfect, moral authority.” Don’t believe it. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER America is still carrying the mantle of leadership that settled on our shoulders in 1945. NATO is stronger than ever with 29 members. On this 75th anniversary of VE Day, America’s military is on guard far from our own shores, and still leading allies from the Persian Gulf to the Pacific. The same qualities that drew many to see America’s Army as a line of salvation before most of us now alive were born still shine through today. Of course, a big task looms. As with 1945, the coronavirus crisis marks a turning point in world affairs. Now the U.S. must lead with allies and confront, contain and curtail China before we risk the world won in 1945. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Churchill in 1945 wanted to ensure the United Nations “does not become an idle name.” You wish Churchill was here to give the U.N.’s World Health Organization a kick in the pants and a stiff dose of reform. Americans have not forgotten or given up. Like Capt. Stewart rescuing the Lipizzaner horses, we may not always fully understand why we take the risks of leadership around the world, but we do. On VE Day we remember and honor sacrifice, commitment – and above all, hope. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REBECCA GRANT

A less redacted memo from then-Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein to former Special Counsel Robert Mueller is released; John Roberts has the details. Finally, three years coming, the Justice Department is showing a little more leg on the Rosenstein “scope” memo – the directive by which then-Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein defined the parameters of the investigation he’d appointed Special Counsel Robert Mueller to conduct. Of course, the games never end in the Trump-Russia probe, so there’s a hitch. The scope memo remains partially, tantalizingly redacted. Disclosure is limited to Rosenstein’s purported grounds for investigating four members of the Trump presidential campaign: Carter Page, Paul Manafort, George Papadopoulos and Michael Flynn. But six lines of text, which appear to describe a fifth person, and the supposed basis for investigating that person, remain blacked out. GREGG JARRETT: ENDING MICHAEL FLYNN PROSECUTION EXPOSES AND DESTROYS TRUMP-RUSSIA COLLUSION HOAX CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Does this redacted section refer to President Trump? We do not know. We do know that the FBI had opened a criminal investigation of Trump, based on the untenable theory that a president’s firing of the FBI director could amount to obstruction of justice. The last 200 pages of the special counsel’s voluminous report, moreover, demonstrate that the cabal of activist Democrats that Robert Mueller recruited to conduct the investigation tried like hell to make an obstruction case on Trump. But was that aspect of the special counsel’s enterprise licensed by Rosenstein’s scope memo? For some reason, we’re not being told. The scope memo is dated August 2, 2017. It is worth recounting why it was necessary. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Rosenstein appointed Mueller on May 17, 2017. In doing so, as I explained repeatedly at the time, he failed to comply with federal regulations. The appointment of a special counsel is proper only if there is a factual basis to support a criminal investigation that the Justice Department is too conflicted to conduct. The Russia investigation was not a criminal investigation; it was a counterintelligence investigation. The latter focuses on the activities of foreign powers for information-gathering purposes, not on criminal activity for prosecution purposes. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

DOJ moves to drop criminal case against Michael Flynn; reaction and analysis on 'The Five.' The collusion house of cards has finally and fully collapsed. In a stunning turn of events Thursday, the Justice Department dropped its case against former National Security Adviser Michael Flynn. Exculpatory documents concealed by the FBI and federal prosecutors for more than three years showed that the retired Army lieutenant general never lied or committed a crime. The FBI knew Flynn did not collude with Russians. He is a patriot, not a traitor. DOJ DROPS CASE AGAINST MICHAEL FLYNN, IN WAKE OF INTERNAL MEMO RELEASE   The notion that candidate Donald Trump conspired with Moscow to steal the 2016 presidential election was always an implausible phantasm built on a foundation of Russian disinformation commissioned by the Hillary Clinton campaign and Democrats. The malevolent James Comey, fired director of the FBI, knew this but it didn’t deter him. He and his lieutenants sedulously stacked the cards, one by one, against Trump by exploiting the bogus allegations and pursuing an illicit investigation designed to drive him from office. House Intelligence Committee Chairman Adam Schiff, D-Calif., and his sycophants in the media propagated the Russia hoax by insisting there was “solid evidence” that Trump was a secret Kremlin asset and predicting the imminent demise of his presidency. Except no such evidence ever existed. Collusion was nothing more than an illusion and a delusion. Tragically, people like Flynn became collateral damage amid the carnage of corruption, dishonesty, abuse and injustice.     But the weight of all the lies and propaganda has inexorably toppled the house of cards in a slow-motion crash. I have long argued in numerous columns and two books that the retired Army lieutenant general was set up and framed by Comey, FBI Assistant Director Andrew McCabe and disgraced FBI agent Peter Strzok. They invented a perjury trap under false pretenses and deceived Flynn. Their goal was “to get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” They knew Flynn was innocent – and hidden records proved it. The two agents who interviewed him in January 2017 concluded "that Flynn was not lying."        The FBI knew Flynn did not collude with Russians. He is a patriot, not a traitor. Special Counsel Robert Mueller and his team of partisan prosecutors also knew Flynn was not lying, but they didn’t care. Utilizing the full force of the federal government and their unlimited resources, they intimidated and bullied an innocent man into pleading guilty to making a false statement. To accomplish this, they threatened to criminally charge Flynn's son unless the father capitulated to their demands. That aspect of the coerced plea was hidden from the court when Flynn threw in the towel. He was financially ruined and his reputation shattered. He was forced to sell his home. Thanks to the intrepid work of Flynn’s new counsel, Sidney Powell, and a review of the case ordered by Attorney General William Barr, the ugly and unconscionable actions of the FBI and Mueller’s hit squad were uncovered and exposed. The distinguished retired three-star general has now been vindicated. In a recent column, I wrote that Flynn became "the victim of one of the worst miscarriages of justice in modern times” and “he should sue the very people and government that persecuted him under the pretext of a legitimate prosecution.  GREGG JARRETT: NEW EVIDENCE ON MICHAEL FLYNN — DROP ALL CHARGES AND LET HIM SUE HIS PERSECUTORS Let the litigation begin. Damages should run into the millions of dollars. Flynn deserves it. And the Justice Department should now consider whether crimes were committed by those who deliberately obscured the truth and arguably obstructed justice.      Another card that fell this week came from the Office of Director of National Intelligence. The office notified Schiff that transcribed interviews of 53 witnesses who appeared behind closed doors before the House Intelligence Committee in 2017 and 2018 would be released to Congress and the public, despite Schiff’s best efforts for more than two years to bury the testimony. Why would the chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, who has demanded transparency from Trump, want to hide the truth about him? Because the declassified 6,000 pages produced not a scintilla of collusion evidence. Zero. Of course, Intelligence Committee Chairman Schiff knew this all along, since he questioned the witnesses. He just didn’t want the American public to know it, inasmuch as it completely undermined his false collusion narrative. "Schiff is in panic mode,” a senior administration official told Fox News. Not a single witness provided any evidence of collusion, according to two sources familiar with the transcripts. SOURCES SAY RUSSIA PROBE TRANSCRIPTS AFFIRM OFFICIALS CAME UP EMPTY ON COLLUSION: 'SCHIFF IS IN PANIC MODE' The transcripts utterly discredit Schiff and expose him as a poseur. For years during television appearances, Schiff professed to have uncovered the hobgoblin of a grand conspiracy involving Trump. Yet, he refused to offer any proof. He pretended that he was privy to evidence that he did not have. As I wrote in my book “Witch Hunt: The Story of the Greatest Mass Delusion in American Political History: “The more Democrats and the media worked in concert to advance their hallucination that Trump had colluded with Russia, the more audacious Schiff became in his public denouncements of the president. He frequently insinuated that he had special access to damning information that few others could procure. Even after the House Intelligence Committee issued its majority investigative report concluding that it had all been a hoax, Schiff announced, ‘I can certainly say with confidence that there is significant evidence of collusion between the campaign and Russia.’ He produced no such evidence because it did not exist.” On CBS’ “Face the Nation,” Schiff ventured that Trump “may be the first president in quite some time to face the real prospect of jail time.” This claim was ludicrous, of course. Yet, Schiff was so heavily invested in the scam and the celebrity it brought him that there was no reversing course. He knew it was untrue. But like a guy with a counterfeit bill, he kept trying to pass it off to others. Schiff is living proof that the truth always has a nemesis. Still another card fell this week when the Justice Department belatedly made public the unredacted version of the so-called “scope memo” penned by then-Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein in August 2017 detailing the scope of Mueller’s Russia investigation. Rosenstein authorized Mueller to specifically target Trump campaign aide Carter Page for "colluding with Russian government officials with respect to the Russian government’s efforts to interfere with the 2016 election for President of the United States.”  However, Rosenstein already knew that these allegations, based on the anti-Trump “dossier” –composed by ex-British spy Christopher Steele – had been discredited by the FBI. Seven months earlier, bureau agents had located Steele’s primary source of information. That source debunked the “dossier” as exaggerations and fabrications, according to the findings of Justice Department Inspector General Michael Horowitz. At that point, the FBI should have shut down its probe. Instead, Comey persisted. When Comey was fired in May 2017, Rosenstein appointed Mueller to launch a new investigation – even though the deputy attorney general well knew there was no credible evidence that supported the appointment of a special counsel under federal regulations. Mueller knew this as well, since he was given the FBI files. On “Hannity” on Fox News on Wednesday, Senate Judiciary Chairman Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., stated that “the legal foundation to justify Mueller’s appointment in my view does not exist. … That’s why this (scope) memo is so important.” GRAHAM SAYS MUELLER PROBE 'SCOPE MEMO' SHOWS INVESTIGATION 'WAS ILLEGITIMATE TO BEGIN WITH' Graham is correct. The Mueller investigation was illegitimate from the outset, even though it eventually found no evidence of a collusion conspiracy. Rosenstein misconstrued – and thereby misused – the special counsel regulations. An “articulable criminal act” must first be identified. It must antecede the appointment, not vice versa. But when Mueller was appointed, the FBI had developed no such evidence. That was confirmed by Steele’s source, as well as the subsequent testimony of Comey and former FBI lawyer Lisa Page. The evidentiary premise of a crime was conspicuously missing. Thus, Mueller began his investigation in search of a crime, reversing the legal process mandated under the regulations. None of this seemed to matter to Rosenstein. He was determined to get rid of Trump. Evidence shows he plotted to secretly record the president and then use the recording as evidence to try to remove the president from office under the 25th Amendment. As a result, Rosenstein should have been disqualified from any involvement in the special counsel case. It was not possible for someone so noticeably antagonistic to the president to be an unbiased and neutral party overseeing that investigation. Not only was the naming of a special counsel unauthorized, but the FBI’s original investigation launched in July 2016 was improper. In an interview on Fox News last month, Attorney General William Barr called the three-year Russia probe “one of the greatest travesties in American history.”  BARR SAYS TRUMP WAS RIGHT TO FIRE INTEL WATCHDOG, CALLS RUSSIA PROBE 'ONE OF THE GREATEST TRAVESTIES' CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Barr made it abundantly clear that it should never have happened. He said: “Without any basis, they started this investigation of his (Trump’s) campaign, and even more concerning, actually is what happened after the campaign, (There was) a whole pattern of events while he was president … to sabotage the presidency … or at least have the effect of sabotaging the presidency.”  Barr has vowed “to get to the bottom of it.” With his appointment of Connecticut U.S. Attorney John Durham, the attorney general has committed his department to holding individuals accountable. “If people broke the law, and we can establish that with the evidence, they will be prosecuted,” Barr promised.  There is no doubt that Comey, McCabe, Strzok, Rosenstein, Schiff and a great many others were intimately involved in the scheme to sabotage Trump. They managed to initiate the Trump investigation with no evidence of a crime and then convince the country that an unparalleled investigation was necessary.   CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Their phony collusion narrative was a conspiracy in and of itself, contrived as a political instrument and then weaponized by unscrupulous government officials.  Now that their house of cards has collapsed, it is time for a reckoning.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREGG JARRETT    

DOJ asks judges to drop Flynn prosecution; former Deputy National Security Adviser K.T. MacFarland reacts. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Attorney General William Barr’s decision to drop the prosecution of retired Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn is an ugly, but necessary element of the cleanup of the Justice Department and FBI in the wake of their failures in the Russian collusion probe. While Flynn had pled guilty to lying to federal investigators, the revelations of FBI shenanigans by people whom the Trump administration has since fired or have resigned justified the extraordinary step of letting Flynn go. Dropping the charges against the former national security adviser, like the firing of James Comey as FBI director and the removal of his circle of aides, is an important step in restoring control over a law enforcement agency that believed it had a right to pick and choose who were acceptable leaders for our nation rather than respecting the electoral process. GREGG JARRETT: FLYNN COVER-UP — FBI'S WRAY MUST GO. AMERICANS NEED DIRECTOR THEY CAN TRUST The recent disclosures of FBI memos in the case show that the bureau set up Flynn in a “perjury trap.” A perjury trap refers to the case when the FBI seeks to get a witness to lie solely to charge him with lying. It is not the job of federal prosecutors to try to prosecute everyone who may be lying about something — if that were the standard, the FBI would have its hands full just in Washington, D.C., policing our elected politicians. Instead, the FBI should only charge witnesses for lying when it is “material” to the investigation of some other crime. The released note of an FBI official preparing for the Flynn interview asked if agents should “get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” There is no mention of investigating any true substantive crime. Here, it does not appear that the FBI could have investigated Flynn for any crime or any true counterintelligence reason. The Justice Department prosecuted Flynn for allegedly lying about whether he had discussed sanctions with the Russian ambassador, Sergey Kislyak, during the transition period from the Obama to the Trump administrations in December 2016. DOJ argued that this might have violated the Logan Act, which essentially prohibits private individuals from interfering with the foreign policy of the United States. The law itself has never given rise to a successful prosecution and almost certainly violates the free speech clause of the First Amendment. Comey and his aides simply believed that Trump was unfit for office and were determined to use underhanded investigatory methods to oppose him. They hoped they could use Flynn to cooperate in incriminating others in the Trump campaign, perhaps even the resident himself.   But even if the Logan Act were good law, Flynn was already acting in an official government capacity as a member of the transition and future national security adviser. It would be Flynn’s job to discuss such matters with ambassadors from foreign countries, and from his long experience in military intelligence, Flynn would know that the FBI would routinely monitor calls with foreign ambassadors under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. In other words, Flynn would have had no reason to lie. The FBI’s wrongdoing is also strongly supported by the highly suspect means it used to conduct the interview. The agents began the interview under the fiction that they were meeting with Flynn to discuss a business matter in his role as national security adviser, on his first day on the job, which would have been normal. But the FBI did not notify White House counsel to be present, as required by White House-DOJ rules, and bureau lawyer Lisa Page advised slipping in warnings for the witness’ rights unobtrusively. And Flynn did not ask for any counsel. Comey later boasted that he could never have gotten away with this in a more organized administration. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Why did the FBI engage in such lengths? Even after all these shenanigans, the FBI agents concluded that Flynn had not lied. The bureau's leadership revealed their true intentions when they decided to keep the probe open and ultimately handed it over to Robert Mueller’s investigation. Flynn just became a pawn in the broader effort by Comey and Mueller to investigate the claim that Trump had conspired against Russia.  Comey and his aides simply believed that Trump was unfit for office and were determined to use underhanded investigatory methods to oppose him. They hoped they could use Flynn to cooperate in incriminating others in the Trump campaign, perhaps even the resident himself.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But as the Mueller investigation itself showed, there was no criminal conspiracy between Russia and the Trump campaign. Flynn had pled guilty for nothing. Now Attorney General Barr has corrected that mistake, and taken another step in the cleaning of the Augean stables that had become the FBI. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JOHN YOO

ICU nurse Anthea Noel gives an update on how frontline workers are holding up as COVID-19 pandemic drags into May. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  We all know a nurse. Nurses are everywhere. Nurses have, and will continue to be, an integral part of our lives. They are with us on our most vulnerable days, cheer us on as we recover, or hold our hands and comfort us when we don’t. Nurses have a duty to care – a call to service. The public puts its faith and trust in nurses, wisely so. During this pandemic, all of our nurses rise up every day to meet new challenges, from our pediatric nurses now caring for adults, to nurses in our nursing homes not only looking after residents, but serving as their companions in this time of isolation. The pace of work has been unprecedented, as patients continue to fall ill to the virus – but nurses still come. REAR ADM. JOHN POLOWCZYK: FEMA'S CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE IS SAVING LIVES They are fully present and in action – in hospitals, nursing homes and clinics – as well as on the phone, at the drive-up tent and out in the community. Nurses lead and advocate, take charge, respond and rise again. They take new approaches to tackle problems that are new and unique. They connect to each person, with a mission – to use a holistic approach to care with expert skills and to serve all with compassion. 
      Sarah Vittone, assistant professor at Georgetown University School of Nursing &amp; Health Studies and a clinical ethicist at the Edmund D. Pellegrino Center for Clinical Bioethics at Georgetown University Medical Center.
       In collaboration with physicians, nurses are crucial to the management and therapy of patients. They are adept in symptom science, and absolutely essential to the care of patients as the COVID-19 crisis wears on. Nurses are on the front line to stem the tide and make progress in the suppression of this deadly virus. Listen to your nurse: Stay home and wash your hands. We have learned a lot over these past 90 days of this pandemic, and there is much more to learn. Nurses continue to move toward patients, heroes in their own right, moving headfirst into the fire. It is courage and solidarity that give our nurses the strength to carry on. While there is relief coming, we are not there yet; Many hospitals are full, and we are still braving the storm. In places across the country where there is calm – hold fast and stay alert. There is hope; Research is underway to find treatments and vaccines. Nurses are guided by their ethics to do good, to help patients be their best, to keep them from harm and to see that each patient gets the just and fair care they need. Nurses advocate for patients with respect and support each patient’s unique condition and resolve to survive. We are thus obligated in this reciprocal relationship to safeguard and protect our nurses, and all health care and essential workers. Some patients are recovering, and this brings hope. Patients are cheered by their nurses as they leave the hospital. And we should all cheer the nurses. Keep the faith. We can all do this. Pray when needed. Be brave. And know that if you do get sick, there will be a nurse to greet you and to help you navigate this devastating illness.  Nurses also comfort the dying. They bind their patients to their families over the Internet and phone and are ready in the spiritual moment, sometimes speaking the last words a dying patient hears. They hold the person’s hand, albeit with gloves on, and take on the role of becoming their patients’ loved ones. The distress and sorrow in these moments are incredibly powerful. Yet nurses ply resilience and press on. Let me suggest how to help nurses in this difficult time. First, stay well yourself. Keep your distance and, of course, wash your hands. Second, keep all our health care teams protected, including everybody – from the physicians, the techs, the environmental services staff – virtually everyone in the health care industry. For that matter, keep all our community essential workers safe – the bus drivers, the grocery clerks and everyone keeping the community going. All are needed to keep us moving forward. Third, if you are able, give to your local charities and support your neighbors. It will take a village to contain this pandemic. Fourth, keep connected. Our reliance on one another is still strong, even when we are apart. Call or write. Take care of each other. Fifth, cheer on our nurses, always, not just during National Nurses Week. Honk your horns and blink your lights. Ring bells. Tie a ribbon around your door, your tree or anything nurses can see. Make masks and wear them. Sixth, and finally, keep the faith. We can all do this. Pray when needed. Be brave. And know that if you do get sick, there will be a nurse to greet you and to help you navigate this devastating illness. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER I am inspired by our Georgetown students, alumni and nursing colleagues who have offered their own messages of hope and compassion, in the Jesuit tradition of cura personalis, or care for the whole person. For every nurse who is in the fight and for those who are ready and willing to join – believe in yourselves and be strong. Stay true to yourself. Our hope and faith are with you all. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Many states continue to ease restrictions on their self-imposed lockdowns amid the coronavirus crisis; Fox News correspondent Jonathan Serrie reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Perhaps there is no better way to be socially distant than going into the mountains, into a park or out in the barren desert. Scientists tell us to be socially distant, and being outdoors and socially distant is even better. Counter to science and common sense, the Interior Department is keeping far too many of our national parks closed. More people will attend a Gov. Andrew Cuomo press conference than my campsite by the Grand Tetons. Yet, the Grand Tetons are closed indefinitely. Yellowstone National Park remains closed with no announced re-opening. It is a bit smaller than half the size of New Jersey. If I stay 300 feet from a bear and six feet from other people, why should it remain closed? I go to Yellowstone so I can enjoy the beauty and get away from people. Yet, it is closed. SEN. RAND PAUL: CORONAVIRUS REACTION — IS YOUR GOVERNMENT EMBRACING TYRANNY? Canyonlands National Park is in part in San Juan County, Utah. San Juan County is bigger than New Jersey averaging less than two people per square mile. New Jersey has more than 1,000 people per square mile. If I want to stay away from the virus, being in Canyonlands certainly appears to be safer. Yet, it is closed. The Post Office is open. Most of the national parks are closed. I can get on an airplane, but I can’t go into the Grand Canyon. It makes no sense. President Trump joined Interior Secretary David Bernhardt at the White House April 22 where the president touted that our national parks will be open. “We will move to open them quickly,” said the president. Evidently not. One of the excuses for not opening the parks now is the influx of people that will converge on the gateway towns. They don’t have the resources to deal with a potential flare-up of COVID-19. If a restaurant, hotel or local business feels the risk is too high, then don’t open, but denying Americans access to their parks is fundamentally wrong and counter to the goal of socially distancing. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Inside the parks, it is totally understandable if all the accommodations and food operations are not functional. I don’t go to a national park to buy corndogs and churros as I do at Disneyland. Tell people before they enter a park what is and is not available and they can make their own decisions. This week Bryce Canyon and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park partially opened, so we know it can be done. Opening all the national parks will go a long way in giving people a safe outlet to get outside. It will help us all and it will lessen the pressure on the state parks. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In Utah, Gov. Gary Herbert opened the state parks weeks ago, but on Wednesday they turned off the flow of water at Gunlock State Park due to overcrowding. Utah has five (Dubbed the “Mighty Five”) of the most picturesque national parks in the country, but since four are still closed the state parks are filling the void and bringing record crowds. Open the national parks, the public is more dispersed, and pressure is relieved from the state parks. Wash our hands. Stay at least six feet apart from others. Breathe fresh air and get outside. It seems like the right formula, if only our government will allow us to do it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JASON CHAFFETZ

The family of Ahmaud Arbery is demanding justice after new cell phone video of the February shooting is revealed; Jonathan Serrie reports from Atlanta. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Our nation and the entire world are dealing with an unprecedented pandemic. The coronavirus has halted the global economy, left thousands dead and put poor nations into famine. In this extraordinary time, the thought of political division seems unthinkable and yet we see it, either in politicians fighting over our response to the virus or in relation to issues involving presidential candidates. If the coronavirus has taught us anything, it would be that it’s time to realign our priorities for the better. GEORGIA SHOOTING OF AHMAUD ARBERY SPURS OUTCRY I understand if people think otherwise. At one point I just lived for watching my favorite sports team or going shopping for a fresh Zara suit and that new pair of loafers. But today my priorities just seem different. That’s why it has been so difficult to watch the news lately, particularly the story of the cold-blooded shooting of Ahmaud Arbery in February in a neighborhood outside Brunswick, Ga. With the recent release of a video of the shooting, the story is now all over TV and social media. I understand the passions surrounding it, but we cannot let this terrible story become politicized. Instead, we must lock arms as Americans in the name of human rights. The death of 25-year-old Ahmaud Arbery should anger all Americans, particularly the citizens of Georgia. The video is horrifying. It shows Arbery jogging down the street in a suburban neighborhood and attempting to run around two armed white men and their pickup truck, which is stopped in the middle of the road. A shot is fired and Arbery is seen desperately defending himself against one of the men while the other stands in the back of the truck. A second shot is fired. And then a third. According to the police report, the two white vigilantes – Gregory McMichael and his son Travis – told police there had been a series of burglaries in the neighborhood and they thought Arbery, whose family said he was out for a jog, fit the description of the burglar. This horrifying crime, with two white vigilantes literally taking the law into their own hands, defies all common human decency.  There is no justification for this.  The older McMichael told police he was in front of his house when Arbery jogged by. He ran inside to alert Travis and grabbed a .357 Magnum, according to the police report, and Travis armed himself with a shotgun. They “didn’t know if the male was armed or not,” Gregory McMichael told police. Then they gave chase and the black men they were hunting was soon dead on the street. This horrifying crime, with two white vigilantes literally taking the law into their own hands, defies all common human decency. There is no justification for this. The thought that any American feels like they have the God-given right to hunt down another human in broad daylight, someone they “suspect” might have committed a burglary, is beyond disturbing. If I, a black man, had jumped into a truck with my father and lynched a white man while he was jogging in Georgia, we would have been arrested immediately. Or even possibly shot down when the police arrived to arrest us. But Gregory and Travis McMichael are still free. They haven’t even been arrested, though perhaps that will change now that the release of the video has brought attention – and justifiable outrage – to the case. I run an education program in the Georgia State Prison system that focuses on business and leadership transitions. The vast majority of my students are black men, ranging from their early 20s to late 50s. Many are serving 10 to 20 years for drug-related offenses. Most have never committed a violent crime and certainly not murder. Because of them, the tragic death of Ahmaud Arbery hits especially close to home. Could they be the next victims of a lynching like the one in Georgia? This should not be the reality in America in 2020. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Two years ago, lawmakers of both political parties and President Trump put politics aside and made unprecedented moves to improve our federal criminal justice system through the First Step Act. Because of that action, several thousand black men have gotten their excessive sentences reduced and have returned to their families. As Americans, it’s time to get past the politics when it comes to the realities facing our black men in the current criminal justice system. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In that spirit, lawmakers and President Trump must speak up and encourage states like Georgia and many others to hold racially motivated hate crime offenders accountable, while bringing fairness and balance to prison sentencing which disproportionately affects black men. An immediate bipartisan push for justice will help to make sure that Ahmaud Arbery did not die in vain, while bringing a country closer together around the principles that make us all proud Americans. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JACK BREWER

They want you to shut up, obey and do what you're told. Get the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. We spent months now assessing the coronavirus pandemic, mostly from a medical standpoint. TEXAS ATTORNEY GENERAL TELLS JUDGE TO FREE DALLAS WOMAN 'UNJUSTLY JAILED' FOR OPERATING HAIR SALON We now know a lot more about the virus than we did back in March and February and we're grateful for that, Facts are always better than speculation. But it's possible that in doing that, we've spent maybe too little time considering the rest of the country, the many millions of Americans who will never face serious health risks from this virus. So, the question is -- and we should be asking this a lot -- how are they doing? Well, more than 30 million of them are now unemployed. 30 million. That is so many people that it's hard to digest what it means, or what it is going to mean five years from now. For some context, that is double the job loss from the Great Recession of 2009. That took us 10 years to recover from; many never did recover. In fact, the entire middle class never recovered. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So, how long will 30 million take? That's a terrifying question. In fact, it's too scary for many of our leaders to consider. It implicates their judgments, their policies. So, they're determined to ignore that question, and they're even more determined that you ignore it, too. You are absolutely not allowed to think about that, much less talk about it. How many times in the last week have you clicked on a video a friend sent, only to discover it has been deleted by YouTube, Google, because it criticized the people in charge? We've never seen anything like this in the history of our country. It used to be a free place. We bragged about it. But it's happening and not just online. How many times in the last week have you clicked on a video a friend sent, only to discover it has been deleted by YouTube, Google, because it criticized the people in charge? We've never seen anything like this in the history of our country. It used to be a free place. The police commissioner of New York announced this week that political protests have been banned in America's biggest city. How long have they been banned? Well, for as long as his boss, Bill de Blasio, says they're banned. So, it could be a while. It's nice when voters aren't allowed to criticize you. As the commissioner explained, that's the law now: "These are laws that have been passed down through executive order." Yeah, got that? "Passed through executive order." But wait, by definition, executive orders aren't "passed." No legislature signs off on them. They're ordered. That's why they are orders. Whatever -- details. Shut up. You'd think some civil libertarian judge somewhere would do something about all of this. They're always inventing new rights for illegal aliens, usually the right to free stuff at your expense. There are a lot of those. Maybe we could get some of those rights, too. But no, you're just an American. Do what you're told. Shelley Luther just learned that lesson in the hardest way. Luther owns a salon in the City of Dallas. In March, she closed her business; the government told her to. Shelley Luther, to her enormous credit, was not intimidated. Instead of groveling, apologizing and begging forgiveness, which is what he wanted, she told the judge what was so obviously true. For people who don't have salaries that are guaranteed by taxpayers, this lockdown, as it continues, has been a catastrophe. She lost all of her income when she shut it down because that's what our leaders demanded. And then she waited. And she waited and she waited. And a month later, her business was still closed, and she was out of money. Finally, she decided she had no choice. Her back was against the wall. So on April 24, she reopened her salon. The government warned her not to do that. They sent her a citation. She did it anyway. Reporter (narrating): Dallas salon owner Shelley Luther vowed to remain open in defiance of state orders, tearing up a citation she received. Shelley Luther, salon owner: I could be used as an example, or they'll go away, or I don't know. I'm not going to shut down. "I can be used as an example," Luther said. She was assuming that other business owners in Dallas might follow her lead. But the government took notice. They wanted her to be an example, too, but in a very different way. Police arrested Luther. They dragged her before a Dallas County judge called Eric Moy. That was Luther's bad luck. Moy is a deeply irresponsible person. He is a political hack. He's a self-described Democratic Party activist. He once circulated a chain letter denouncing Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas as a race traitor. Eric Moy lectured Shelley Luther about how she was a bad person. Dallas County Judge Eric Moy Your actions were selfish, putting your own interests ahead of those of the community in which you live. They disrespected the executive orders of the state, the orders of the county and this city. What a pompous fool. But he's got a lot of power. He's a judge and Shelley Luther was sitting before him. Luther, to her enormous credit, was not intimidated. Instead of groveling, apologizing and begging forgiveness, which is what he wanted, she told the judge what was so obviously true. For people who don't have salaries that are guaranteed by taxpayers, this lockdown, as it continues, has been a catastrophe. Luther: I have to disagree with you, sir, when you say that I'm selfish. Because feeding my kids is not selfish. I have hair stylists that are going hungry because they'd rather feed their kids. So, sir, if you think the law is more important than kids getting fed, then, please go ahead with your decision. But I'm not going to shut the salon. "Feeding my kids is not selfish." Moy was unmoved by this. He is not worried about feeding his kids. He went to Harvard Law School. A 2007 article in The Washington Post describes this man as someone  "with a weakness for Cuban cigars and the finest steaks." What a poser. As a judge, Moy has continued to collect a salary of about $150,000 throughout the shutdown. He can take that forever. He can afford all the finest steaks he wants, at least until meat supplies run out. Moy sentenced Luther to a week behind bars. So, that's what's going on in Dallas. Small business owners who are going under -- these are people with employees who are struggling to buy food -- are being punished for the crime of earning a living by authoritarian buffoons, goons who are living off their tax dollars. How's that for an arrangement? Meanwhile -- and this is the best part -- actual criminals are going free. Three weeks ago, the City of Dallas began releasing more than 1,000 inmates from the county jail. Some are in for serious felonies. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Authorities said they had no choice. They had to save the inmates from the virus, the very same virus that Shelley Luther will likely be exposed to in jail where she is now for trying to earn an honest living. It's hard to believe any of this is real. Unfortunately, it is real. It's happening right now. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 6, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Joe Biden records are on total lockdown, despite the request to unseal purported Tara Reade complaint; reaction and analysis from NY Post columnist Miranda Devine. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Joe Biden is the apparent Democratic presidential nominee. After all, he had a seemingly insurmountable lead in delegates going into the rescheduled August convention in the postponed Democratic primary race. Biden was winning the nomination largely because he was not the socialist Bernie Sanders, who terrified the Democratic establishment. Biden was also not Michael Bloomberg. The multibillionaire former New York City mayor jumped into the race when Biden faltered and Sanders seemed unstoppable. But Bloomberg spent $1 billion only to confirm that he was haughty, a poor debater and an even worse campaigner. He often appeared to be an apologist for China and seemed clueless about the interior of the United States. MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS AND NURSING HOMES — CUOMO, THIS NY TRAGEDY IS ON YOU The least offensive candidate left standing was Biden. Many Democratic primary voters initially had written him off as an inept retread, a blowhard and an impediment to the leftward, identity-politics trajectory of the newly progressive Democratic party. On the campaign trail, Biden insulted several voters, using insults such as “fat,” “damn liar” and, weirdly, “lying dog-faced pony soldier.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Long ago he spun tall tales about how in his youth he had taken on a Delaware street gang with a 6-foot chain or slammed a bully’s face into a store counter. More recently, he taunted President Trump with tough-guy boasts about taking him behind the proverbial gym and beating him up. Biden has been unable to keep his hands off women. Even his supporters cringed when he was seen sniffing the hair, rubbing the shoulders or whispering into the ears of unsuspecting females, some of them minors. Stranger still, Biden waxed on about his commitment to the #MeToo movement. The handsy Biden has insisted that women who made accusations of sexual harassment must be believed. The more House Democrats attacked Donald Trump for supposedly pressuring Ukraine to investigate Biden’s wheeler-dealer son Hunter, the more Biden’s own suspect dealings with Ukraine surfaced. Such scrutiny followed from Biden’s boast, caught on video, that he had leveraged Ukraine by threatening to withhold $1 billion in loan guarantees unless a Ukrainian prosecutor was fired. That prosecutor had wanted to investigate the Ukrainian company for which Hunter Biden worked. During the year-long rise, fall and rise of his campaign, the 77-year-old Biden often appeared confused. He was occasionally unable to remember names, places or dates. Biden would try to speak extempore but seemingly forget what he was trying to say. The coronavirus epidemic and subsequent lockdown seemed to offer rest for Biden. But the more he recuperated from campaigning and sent out video communiques from his basement, the more he appeared to confirm that his problem was not simple exhaustion or age but real cognitive impairment. With the Democratic nomination a lock, Biden assumed liberal reporters would allow him to campaign as a virtual candidate. They would forget his lapses and ignore prior controversies, including the sexual assault allegations by Tara Reade, a former Senate aide. At first the media complied — as it always had with Biden’s troublesome habit of violating the personal space of women, his bizarre put-downs on the campaign trail, his exaggerated he-man stories, his mental lapses and his dealings with Ukraine. Again, to the Democratic establishment, Biden was far preferable to Sanders. Had the socialist Sanders won the nomination, he likely would have wrecked the Democratic Party in 2020. suddenly the press decided that Biden was no longer worth shielding. Yet the change of heart was not entirely for fear of appearing hypocritical. But Biden misjudged the liberal media. Reporters were at first willing to overlook his liabilities. But the more Reade persisted in her accusations and the more the media ignored them, the more embarrassing the media’s utter hypocrisy became. Journalists had torn apart Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh over allegations of sexual assault, after all. So suddenly the press decided that Biden was no longer worth shielding. Yet the change of heart was not entirely for fear of appearing hypocritical. Rather, the media seems terrified of Biden’s increasingly obvious cognitive decline. In other words, the media was most certainly not going to be degraded on behalf of a nominee who may no longer seem viable. In the three months before the Democratic National Convention, Americans will witness some of the strangest political scrambling in presidential campaign history. Simply put, how does the Democratic Party cut from its neck an albatross — one who has the most delegates but is likely not up to serving as president? And how to do the deed without inciting the moribund Sanders campaign and his army of Bernie bros? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP A host of Democratic donors and operatives would like Biden to disappear, clearing the way for a replacement such as New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, failed 2016 nominee Hillary Clinton or former first lady Michelle Obama. But even if Democrats know why Biden must go, they haven’t a clue about when or how. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

Legislative assemblies are meeting virtually all over the world; congressional correspondent Chad Pergram reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Seemingly overnight, the coronavirus pandemic has changed our way of life. Many businesses have shuttered – some permanently – and millions of Americans are teleworking for the first time. Churches and schools are closed, and while some states have begun to reopen their economies, the majority of Americans continue to live by strict social distancing guidelines. Within the last five weeks, a record 30 million Americans have filed for unemployment, and some believe we are approaching the highest unemployment rate since the Great Depression, despite hitting a 50-year low only a few months ago. ALEXANDER WARNS CONVENING CONGRESS 'CREATES A HIGHLY EFFICIENT VIRUS-SPREADING MACHINE' WITHOUT PROPER TESTING In the midst of this crisis, the voice of the American people must be heard as the federal government works to respond to this unprecedented challenge. Congress provides that voice. In a world where it’s no longer safe to be within six feet of each other, Congress must adapt. On April 30, I convened the first-ever virtual Senate hearing as chairman of the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. Subcommittee Ranking Member Sen. Tom Carper, D-Del., and other subcommittee members joined the videoconference roundtable. Over the course of the two-hour session, we heard from three expert witnesses in Senate procedure, government technology and congressional modernization to get a better understanding of the benefits and challenges of Congress working remotely. The video of the roundtable is on our subcommittee website so the public can watch, just as if we met in our hearing room. Our goal was twofold: first, to have an informed discussion on the feasibility of implementing remote work protocols in Congress, including a bipartisan remote voting resolution I introduced; and second, to demonstrate that a remote hearing was not only feasible, but could be as successful as a traditional in-person hearing. The experiment was a success on both fronts. Senators and witnesses easily conversed from the safety of homes and offices, with one witnesses even testifying from her pick-up truck cab in a rural area in New Mexico. In times of crisis, congressional proceedings no longer need to be confined to a cramped hearing room in the Capitol building. In fact, several committees are now considering holding virtual hearings this week, because even though the Senate is in session, social distancing guidelines favor a remote process. In addition, the roundtable produced a substantive discussion about the feasibility of Congress implementing a remote voting and participation system during times of extraordinary national crisis. My resolution would allow the majority and minority leaders of the Senate to jointly agree to a 30-day period of remote voting, with a full Senate vote required to extend the order. In conjunction with our roundtable, the Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations released a report examining the underlying legal framework and technical feasibility for remote voting. The Constitution and Supreme Court precedent make clear that the Senate may set its own rules for how it operates, and creating a temporary remote voting system is no exception. Likewise, off-the-shelf technologies are available to create and secure a system through authentication and encryption. The Senate would not be the first legislative body to work remotely. Several states have decided to continue legislative business in the past month, including allowing members to vote remotely. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The European Union has implemented a remote voting system for its legislative body, while the Parliament of the United Kingdom is beginning to experiment with holding virtual proceedings. This is also not the first time an extraordinary crisis has required us to think about unprecedented actions to ensure the continuity of Congress. Some may remember that under the threat of a nuclear attack during the Cold War, the federal government built a secure bunker for Congress to convene should Washington be attacked. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And in 2001, after 9/11, there was concern about another terrorist attack. Then, as now, we must plan for every contingency so that Congress can continue to operate and continue to represent all Americans, especially when our country goes through challenging times. Our roundtable showed that a remotely working Congress, while not perfect, can allow us to work safely while we defeat the coronavirus. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SEN. ROB PORTMAN

'Created Equal: Clarence Thomas in His Own Words' director Michael Pack weighs in. With six months to go until the 2020 presidential election, 77-year-old former Vice President Joe Biden is campaigning in his basement and loving life. Sleepy Joe lets his consultants tell him what to think and what to tweet, limits his gaffes and tries to control his message. And since he can’t hold campaign rallies due to the coronavirus pandemic, the world can’t see the energy vacuum he creates during the largely incomprehensible rambling speeches he used to give in half-empty high school cafeterias. Yes, other than seeing New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo grabbing a lot more news coverage that he is getting, these are easy days for Joe Biden. He’s got the luxury of being able to sit back and criticize President Trump from the cheap seats as the president deals with the enormous challenges associated with the unprecedented COVID-19 crisis. TIM GRAHAM: BIDEN HIDES FROM MEDIA SOFTBALL QUESTIONS – TRUMP TAKES TOUGH QUESTIONS BY LIBERAL MEDIA SHARKS If nothing else, Biden is demonstrating that he’s an extremely talented Monday morning quarterback, which is not a redeeming quality for a real leader. Biden is practicing what I call the “Tahiti strategy” – staying off the grid until Election Day so you don’t make any unforced errors. In other circles, it’s called the “prevent defense.” But as we all know, sometimes choosing this minimalist approach prevents you from winning the game. The coronavirus pandemic has created for Biden something of a forced Tahiti strategy and at the moment it’s buoying him in the polls a bit. Although just a snapshot in time, recent survey data is indicating that the Trump-Biden match-up will make for yet another highly competitive presidential election contest. For instance, even in the midst of extreme economic hardship created by the COVID-19 pandemic, the latest Reuters-Ipsos poll found that Americans believe that the president “was better suited to create jobs” by a margin of 45 percent to just 32 percent for Biden. In an election that will likely come down to a virtual coin flip in many battleground states, these numbers showing a sizeable advantage for President Trump in the all-important category of job creation are telling. As President Trump gets brutalized by Biden’s allies in the Trump-hating media – who criticize his every move for purely political purposes – Biden is instead treated with kid gloves. His media supporters know that one good punch would put him on the canvas. As evidence, look no further than the brewing Tara Reade scandal. The mainstream media went out of its way not to ask Biden about her serious, credible, and corroborated claims of sexual assault against him. It was only when the situation reached critical mass that Biden was forced to do an interview to answer questions about the alleged 1993 assault. The interview with MSNBC’s Mika Brzezinski made it clear why Biden hasn’t held a press conference in 34 days. When left to his own devices, Sleepy Joe is a disaster waiting to happen. In light of the Reade allegations, we can only imagine how Biden would handle tough questions on topics such as the new Title IX sexual misconduct standards and due process protections for campuses that the Education Department released this week. Mr. Vice President, does the Democratic Party support due process in sexual assault cases or not?  Why in your case and not now-Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh’s? The only positive thing for Biden coming out of the interview with Brzezinski is that he was able to deny the charges on the record without blowing himself up on national television. The downside is much more plentiful. For reasons that don’t pass the smell test, Biden is refusing to open all of his records during his career in the U.S. Senate for public inspection. He says a review of those papers – held at the University of Delaware – would give his opponents the opportunity to take his record in the Senate out of context. “There’s a lot of … speeches I’ve made, positions I’ve taken, interviews that I did overseas with people, all of those things relating to my job,” Biden said. “|And the idea that they would be made public … while I was running for public office, they could be really taken out of context.” This mind-blowing statement is the epitome of Joe Biden the out-of-touch career politician straight from the swamp. Does he really think the American people aren’t paying attention? Biden makes a habit of bragging about his career in the Senate and uses his 36 years there as one of the reasons he should be elected president. He is essentially asking voters to just take his word for it when it comes to his record in the Senate. Unfortunately for Biden, the American people want proof. So his records at the University of Delaware must be opened. During his interview with Brzezinski, Biden tried his best to convince her that any complaint filed against him by Reade wouldn’t be stored in Delaware, but more likely in the U.S. Senate or National Archives. While this may turn out to be true, what about notes, letters, photos, or memos-to-file concerning Reade? This is why Biden must allow a search. However, opening the vault in Delaware is not just about records relating to Tara Reade. Biden is interviewing to be president of the United States and the American people are entitled to see the body of his work during the three-plus decades he spent in the Senate. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER If Biden keeps the vault sealed, the chants of “what’s Biden hiding” will grow louder every day. Is Biden hiding his record on busing? His relationships with segregationist senators? His papers in support of the Iraq War? His treatment of Anita Hill? His support for cutting Social Security?  His beliefs about criminal justice reform? His meeting with Russian President Vladimir Putin? These questions are not going away. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At some point, Biden is going to have to come out of the basement and face the music. No one is handed the presidency; you have to earn it. We know President Trump the ferocious campaigner will be asking these questions in every battleground state and at all three presidential debates –- where Biden will have no place to hide and no one to lean on. Hopefully, the mainstream media will do its job and ask Biden the tough questions as well. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE

K-12 school districts across the country are studying reopening strategies amid COVID-19; Alicia Acuna has an update. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The coronavirus has decimated our economy. As a nation, we’ve lost more jobs in the past month than we added in the decade of recovery and growth after the Great Recession. Nearly every segment of the economy in Florida has been shut down. Analysts expect the state to lose at least 20 percent of projected revenue this fiscal year. The loss could be even greater if Disney, Universal, the cruise lines and the rest of our tourism industry remain shuttered. Florida is not alone. States across the country are in dire straits. Those of us who lead school systems are bracing for massive cuts, as education is often the largest share of state and local budgets. But America must remember: What we do to our schools, we do to our future. NIKKI HALEY: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS – HELP THOSE TRULY IN NEED, BUT STOP WASTING BILLIONS ON OTHERS If we don’t protect education during this crisis, who will we be when it is over? I am the superintendent of Broward County Public Schools. With 271,000 students and 34,000 employees, we are the sixth-largest district in the nation and the biggest employer in our area. Over the past two weeks, I have told our community, which is already struggling to cope with the pandemic, that we must prepare for things to get even more challenging. We are doing all we can to save money. Our district has implemented staffing caps and a hiring freeze; halted all discretionary spending; and is renegotiating contracts, reducing overtime and travel, and exploring Medicaid reimbursement for mental health supports and services for children with special needs that must now be provided outside of school buildings.  Superintendents everywhere are taking similar steps. Chiefs for Change, a bipartisan network of state and district education leaders of which I serve on the board, recently released “Schools and COVID-19,” a digital report that explains what systems are doing in five key areas: students’ basic needs, technology, distance learning, support for high school seniors, and the economic impact. Given the tremendous challenges of the moment, and the untold millions in unforeseen expenses, my fellow chiefs and I are deeply concerned that the federal stimulus funding provided to date is woefully insufficient. The disruption caused by school closures has a significant, negative impact on students — and that will continue even after children return to school.  In 2009, lawmakers approved approximately $100 billion to help education systems deal with the effects of the Great Recession. Although today’s crisis far exceeds anything the country has experienced in our lifetimes, the recently approved Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act includes $30.75 billion for education. And that is for both higher education and K-12. When you break it down even further, elementary, middle and high schools will get $13.5 billion to support students now and plan for educational recovery going forward. For weeks, 56 million children have been out of school, and we still don’t know when it will be safe to reopen our buildings. The disruption caused by school closures has a significant, negative impact on students — and that will continue even after children return to school. The longer the crisis goes on, the greater their needs are likely to be. Education systems need significant federal resources to: In addition, systems need payroll tax credits to help offset the cost of newly mandated emergency family and paid sick leave for employees. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER This crisis has changed our lives and created immense strain in every sector. But we cannot ignore one fundamental truth: What we are able to achieve as a people is directly tied to how well we educate our children. Schools must be at the heart of the next stimulus package. If we forsake our students now, we renounce the promise of our country for generations. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Reaction and analysis from RealClearPolitics editor Tom Bevan. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Claire Berlinski writes an amazing blog called “Claire’s Invariably Interesting Thoughts.” She recently wrote a series headlined “The Years of Living Hysterically: Reflections on Joe Biden, Tara Reade, #MeToo, and our Hysterical Culture.” The concept of “the hysterical culture” explains much of what I have been wrestling with living in Rome during the pandemic. I have had the opportunity (requirement) to avoid meetings and travel and have had the time to watch and reflect. NIKKI HALEY: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS – HELP THOSE TRULY IN NEED, BUT STOP WASTING BILLIONS ON OTHERS Two generations of over-protecting our children, seeking safe places, announcing “trigger warnings,” hyperventilating on social media, and having radio and TV starving for things to fill continuous 24/7 cycles have all built up to a crescendo of noise. “If it bleeds it leads” is an old rule of local news. You can add to that the need to create suspense and to hype each event as big, bigger, the biggest ever (just think of weather reports during hurricane season). The bigger the threat the better. The larger the number the better. When the Imperial College of London reported in mid-March that its model predicted the COVID-19 virus could kill as many as 2.2 million Americans and more than 500,000 Britons if governments did nothing to control the spread of the virus, it became the benchmark for radical policies that were unbelievably destructive to society. What might have been a more dangerous but manageable pandemic (which would be the fourth since 1975) suddenly became the species threatening, Spanish Flu-Black Death-end-of-times threat that required the most radical, draconian public health restrictions and economically suicidal behavior in modern history. Consider the human cost of the last three pandemics. These are the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s figures: Keep in mind that our population was about 40 percent smaller in the late 1950s and '60s, so the numbers from those pandemics look smaller than they are relative to what we are experiencing today. In fact, their impacts were felt widely. Yet, these three pandemics were dealt with as medical events, and economic and social life proceeded with minimal disruption. The combination of news media desperation for something about which to be hysterical, the Chinese Communist Party’s role in hiding and then lying about the new virus, and absurdly overstated claims of supposedly scientific modelers has led to the greatest self-inflicted economic disaster in history. Today, the combination of news media desperation for something about which to be hysterical, the Chinese Communist Party’s role in hiding and then lying about the new virus, and absurdly overstated claims of supposedly scientific modelers has led to the greatest self-inflicted economic disaster in history. The Chinese Communist dictatorship’s deception is the first great scandal of the COVID-19 virus. We should have thorough congressional hearings into the dictatorship’s role from November 2019 through February 2020. But, the extraordinary influence of supposedly expert modelers is the second great scandal. We should also have congressional hearings into their destructive impact. In some cases, modelers completely misinformed government leaders, the news media and ultimately the public about the scale of the threat. The most influential model was the one created by the Imperial College in London, which estimated more than 500,000 Britons would die and more than 2.2 million Americans would die if governments did nothing. The model projected that in both countries the hospitals, intensive care units and ventilators would be overwhelmed. Faced with a projection that five times as many Americans could die this year as were killed in all of World War II, President Trump had no choice but to close the country. To tie the comparison to a more recent event, the Imperial College model predicted almost 1,000 times as many Americans would die from the virus as died in the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Estimates of imminent death on this scale can make almost any radical response seem rational. Unfortunately, too few people examined the assumptions behind the Imperial College model. First, it assumed an infection rate of over 80 percent of the population of the United States. By comparison, the deadliest pandemic in modern history was the Spanish Flu (also H1N1) of 1918-1919. It only infected 28 percent of the U.S. population. Second, the Imperial College predictions were based on a model of taking zero precautions. Of course, this is an entirely irrational assumption based on basic human behavior. Just because the government is not forcing you to stay inside your house, limit contact with people and wash your hands doesn’t mean that human beings will not take the precautions. All our experience from past pandemics shows this. So, projections that were disconnected from common sense and reality were able to guide public policy. The truth is, we should have immediately expected these dire predictions to be complete bunk. It turns out the chief author, Neil Ferguson, has become famous for making wildly absurd predictions about public health issues. As the Committee To Unleash Prosperity reported in its newsletter, citing reporting by the British newspaper The Telegraph: “Ferguson has been wrong so often that some of his fellow modelers call him ‘The Master of Disaster.’ “Ferguson was behind the disputed research that sparked the mass culling of 11 million sheep and cattle during the 2001 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. He also predicted that up to 150,000 people could die. “In 2002, Ferguson predicted that up to 50,000 people would likely die from exposure to BSE (mad cow disease) in beef. In the U.K., there were only 177 deaths from BSE. “In 2005, Ferguson predicted that up to 150 million people could be killed from bird flu. In the end, only 282 people died worldwide from the disease between 2003 and 2009. “In 2009, a government estimate, based on Ferguson’s advice, said a ‘reasonable worst-case scenario’ was that the swine flu would lead to 65,000 British deaths. In the end, swine flu killed 457 people in the U.K.” I’ll add that Dr. Ferguson has since resigned because he was caught breaking the draconian lockdown rules he championed in order to carry out an affair. This deserves a serious congressional investigation. We were being guided in national policy by people who had no realistic scientific basis for – or demonstrable faith in – their claims. In effect, much of our pandemic public policy was being driven by fake science (which exists as a partner with the fake news and enthusiastically creates hysteria whenever it can). For perspective, nearly two weeks after the Imperial College’s March 16 report – and despite the media’s rabid embrace of it – National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr. Anthony Fauci’s initial top-end prediction for American fatalities was 10 percent of the Imperial College’s ludicrous 2.2 million figure. By April 9, after reviewing more real data, Fauci downgraded his prediction to roughly 60,000. As of this writing, the latest CDC numbers are at 68,279. This is much closer to Fauci’s prediction. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The whole role of hyping supposedly scientific, dire modeling predictions on issues like climate change is a key to understanding the bad policies left-wing scientists are trying to browbeat us into endorsing. As I write in my upcoming book "Trump and the American Future," I first encountered this phenomenon of fake science in modeling when I taught environmental studies at West Georgia College in the early 1970s. We used a fascinating book called "The Limits to Growth." "The Limits to Growth" was published in 1972 by a group called the Club of Rome. It used computer simulations to project when the earth would run out of various raw materials. Through this computer modeling, it projected a gloomy future of limits that would require radical left-wing policies to avoid. After a couple of years, I began to realize the entire book was an absurdity. It ignored that innovations in resource management and efficiency would profoundly decrease our resource consumption. There is a rule in computing: Garbage in, garbage out. If you enter the wrong assumptions, you will get the wrong answers. The idea that using a computer suddenly makes some projection scientific or valid is ridiculous. Garbage data leads to garbage answers. (In fact, Ferguson’s COVID-19 model used 13-year-old code that was written for influenza – not a coronavirus.) CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If we look at all the different models of the COVID-19 viruses and their impacts on government policies, we will discover an extraordinary range of mistakes, which led to extraordinary damage to society. Congress should investigate the entire modeling-advising process just as it should investigate the Chinese Communist dictatorship’s role in spreading the virus in the first place. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

Dr. Marc Siegel and Senator Rand Paul discuss how government overreach has impacted physicians during the coronavirus crisis Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. “Of all tyrannies,” C.S. Lewis once observed, “a tyranny sincerely exercised for the good of its victims may be the most oppressive.” We’re seeing the truth of these words play out right now all across the country, and if you don’t believe me, just look at the headlines. While we try to help each other stay healthy and safe, state and local authorities are seizing unprecedented amounts of power in the supposed pursuit of that goal, setting dangerous precedents along the way. RACHEL BOVARD: US TO WHO AFTER CORONAVIRUS — WE WON'T GET FOOLED AGAIN Economic czars in the form of governors, including in my own state of Kentucky, are taking it on themselves to decree which businesses will live and which will shutter for continually extended lengths of time, leaving those who have poured their entire lives into their businesses to try to pick up the pieces and do their best to survive and feed their families in the meantime. The czars decide who can and can’t get medical treatment and restrict fundamental liberties such as the right to gather to worship. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear went so far as to tell some churchgoers their license plates would be scanned, and they would be forced to quarantine for two weeks – never mind that, having an interest in their own health, these worshippers are more than capable of conducting their services safely. Innocence is not allowed to be presumed. Comply or else. In Michigan, a self-appointed monarch dictates away basic needs such as landscaping. Not willing to let a little thing like the state legislature get in her way, she simply charges ahead and ignores it when it refuses to support continuing a state of emergency. Gov. Gretchen Wittmer seems to have forgotten she serves the people of Michigan and is not living in Buckingham Palace a century ago when subjects would bow obediently to their sovereign. Incredibly, in California, a paddleboarder was chased, not by one but two government boats – all while he was about as socially distanced alone in the ocean as one can get. I've heard of high-speed car chases in California, but this might be the first high-speed boat chase involving a paddleboarder. Concerns are also being raised both at home and abroad over excessive use of force. In West Odessa, Texas, the county sheriff showed up with a SWAT team in response to a local bar reopening and protesters peacefully assembling. Surreal news footage shows the owner being taken away by an officer, hands behind her back. Let’s take an important second to get something straight: I actually support the concept of states taking the lead in responding to the pandemic, and I applaud President Donald Trump for following this approach as he focuses on broader federal efforts that no state could do on its own. Is it any wonder, when tensions are already ratcheted up due to the virus itself, that we are seeing false accusations and outright violence and threats? But it does not excuse abuse of authority. It does not require executives to ignore their legislatures or place unreasonable or unconstitutional burdens on Americans, and we should call those overreaches out when we see them. In fact, I have said time and again that reopening our nation will require an even more tailored local response, right down to the city level. Bowling Green is not New York City or even Louisville, for example, and should be free to take different steps to get its local economy going again. This means state and local leaders working with each other instead of acting unilaterally. In some cases, authority figures are turning Americans against each other, echoing stories we once thought we would only hear coming out of the Soviet Union or Communist China as neighbors are encouraged to turn one another in to the authorities if they see or even suspect anything less than perfect compliance with often arbitrary guidelines. Mayor Bill de Blasio, saying, “[W]e still know there’s some people who need to get the [social distancing] message,” has encouraged New Yorkers to take a picture when they think social distancing guidelines aren’t being followed and text it to the city. “[A]ction will ensue,” promises the mayor. Is it any wonder, when tensions are already ratcheted up due to the virus itself, that we are seeing false accusations and outright violence and threats? A dad and mom taking their young kids into a bank to try to open a joint account are criticized for supposedly not socially distancing enough and are – anonymously – turned in to Child Protective Services on false accusations. A woman identified as a teacher in New Jersey wishes “a long, painful death” from coronavirus on students playing football. We read stories of alleged choking over social distancing, and the antagonism plays out in attacks online. C.S. Lewis also warned us that “[t]he robber baron's cruelty may sometimes sleep, his cupidity may at some point be satiated; but those who torment us for our own good will torment us without end for they do so with the approval of their own conscience.” There is little government cannot – and has not tried – to justify with the words “for our own good” or “to keep us all safe.” And once that justification – even if genuinely offered – is allowed to automatically stifle debate, actions build “without end.” You don’t have to look far back into our own history to see where such roads can lead, as the federal government’s response to 9/11 morphed into surveilling innocent Americans. Yet I and others cannot even bring the issue up in Congress without being accused of not taking our national security and safety seriously. Already, we hear talk of how much additional surveillance we will be expected to tolerate due to the pandemic – for our own good, of course. As concerning as these issues are, I remain encouraged by the many positive stories that exist of Americans coming together to face this challenge, and I am confident we will beat it as we have so many others. But it’s imperative we do so while protecting both life and our unique way of life – defined as one that gives the benefit of the doubt to freedom and responds from that philosophical grounding. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Recent events again prove the Founders’ wisdom in deliberately spreading power out and decentralizing our system to try to curb infringements on our liberties. That is supposed to set us apart, and it is up to each of us to make sure it continues to do so. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SEN. RAND PAUL

Missing most of their 17,000 volunteers here is how God’s Love We Deliver is still providing medically tailored meals to New Yorkers in need and how you can help while keeping a safe social distance. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Thursday is the National Day of Prayer – arriving as people around the world are pleading with God to stop the spread of the coronavirus that has brought death and economic hardship to people around the world. Why doesn’t God seem to be answering these prayers? It’s a fair question – and one that I have even asked myself. What’s important to understand is that God doesn’t operate on our schedule, because He sees things we either can’t or don’t. As a colleague once observed, all of our questions would be answered if we sat in God’s seat and saw things from His perspective. VIRTUAL' NATIONAL DAY OF PRAYER AMID CORONAVIRUS My friend Dr. Tim Keller, a prominent pastor and author, put it even more succinctly when he noted: “God will only give you what you would have asked for if you knew everything He knows.” It was President Harry Truman who signed the National Day of Prayer into law back in 1952, and President Ronald Reagan who established the annual celebration for the first Thursday of May each year. That its history is bookended by a Democrat and a Republican seems fitting to me. That’s because prayer isn’t just bipartisan – it transcends politics and long predates any body politic. Prayer has played a foundational role in America. The Pilgrims arrived in 1620 seeking religious freedom. Special days of prayer designations occurred at the start of the Revolutionary War. The Civil War years saw President Lincoln call for two days of prayer – in 1861 and 1863. It’s true that we often turn to God in times of crisis, but what about the ordinary and even the mundane? I’ve seen God answer my prayers in some seemingly curious ways. Orphaned as a young boy, I struggled to find guidance and good role models while growing up. By the time I reached high school, football was becoming something of a god to me. I was enjoying great success as a quarterback and was being recruited to play for Division One colleges. At the same time, I felt uneasy about the sport and knew it was becoming too important to me. I was beginning to make football an idol. During one game in the huddle, I prayed, “God, if you don’t want me to play college football, break a bone today but don’t let it hurt.” I broke my collarbone in the very next play. It didn’t hurt at all – but I had been given my answer. Since college, I’ve asked God and received His guidance many times over matters of my career. I once had an opportunity to make a major job change and prayed fervently about it. The answer was clear – don’t do it. In retrospect, I’m so glad I didn’t. I prayed for my wife before I even met her – and asked the Lord to reveal her to me if He really wanted me to get married. He did. We’ll be married 34 years this August.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In church circles, you’ll often hear people talk about “praying for God’s will” – which is a good thing. But it seems kind of mystical and nebulous. How can we ever know for sure since He doesn’t speak audibly? It seems to me that God often answers our prayers by either opening or closing doors. Don’t overthink it. If you’re wanting a job and there’s only one offer on the table, I think that could be a pretty good sign that’s the job for you – at least for now. People lament why God answers some prayers and not others, but the fact of the matter is that He answers all of them – just not always to our satisfaction.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s continue praying for those who grieve and those who are in the thick of this ongoing battle to defeat COVID-19. I believe God is up to something well beyond our sight or understanding. Lately, I find myself resonating with the words of the late C.S. Lewis, who wrote: “I pray because I can’t help myself. I pray because I’m helpless. I pray because the need flows out of me all the time, waking and sleeping.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM DALY

Fox News senior judicial analyst Judge Andrew Napolitano tells 'Fox &amp; Friends' that he's surprised Michiganders did not protest sooner against the state's stay-at-home order. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. I have been taking some heat from friends and colleagues for my steadfast defense of personal liberties and my arguments that the Constitution -- when interpreted in accordance with the plain meaning of its words, and informed by history -- does not permit the government to infringe upon personal freedoms, no matter the emergency or pandemic. For those who agree with me, worry not. We will persevere. For those who trust the government, worry a lot. You are not in good hands. The purpose of the Constitution is to establish the government and to limit it. Some of the limitations are written in the Constitution itself. Most of the limitations that pertain to personal freedoms are found in the Bill of Rights -- the first 10 amendments. REP. WARREN DAVIDSON: CORONAVIRUS RELIEF — MAKE CONGRESS WORK AGAIN BEFORE MORE DEALS APPROVED These amendments were ratified to restrain the federal government from infringing upon personal liberties. Since the enactment of the 14th Amendment in 1868, and subsequent litigation, these amendments, for the most part, restrain the states as well. The courts have characterized these protected liberties as fundamental. So, the rights to thought, speech, press, assembly, worship, self-defense, privacy, travel, property ownership, interstate commercial activities and fair treatment from government are plainly articulated or rationally inferred in the first eight amendments. The Ninth is a catchall, which declares that the enumeration of rights in the first eight shall not mean that there are no other rights that are fundamental, and the government shall not disparage those other rights. The Tenth reflects that the states have reserved powers to themselves. The Ninth was especially important to its author, James Madison, because of his view that natural rights –- known today as fundamental rights –- are integral to each person, and they are too numerous to list. In the next century, the anti-slavery crusader Lysander Spooner would explain it thusly: “A man’s natural rights are his own, against the whole world; and any infringement of them is equally a crime, whether committed by one man, or by millions; whether committed by one man, calling himself a robber, ... or by millions, calling themselves a government.” Natural rights collectively constitute the moral ability and sovereign authority of every human being to make personal choices -- free from government interference or government permission. Thomas Jefferson wrote in the Declaration of Independence that government derives all its powers from the consent of the governed. And Madison understood the Ninth Amendment to declare that our personal choices are insulated from government interference so long as their exercise does not impair another’s rights. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER From this, it follows that if governments interfere with our personal choices -- and we have not consented to their power to interfere -- the interference is invalid, unlawful and, because our personal choices are essentially protected from governmental interference by the Bill of Rights, unconstitutional. Now, back to the present-day restraints during this pandemic. The current interferences with the exercise of rights protected by the Bill of Rights devolve around travel, assembly, interstate commercial activities and the exercise of religious beliefs. These infringements have all come from state governors who claim the power to do so, and they raise three profound constitutional issues. The first is: Do governors have inherent power in an emergency to craft regulations that carry the force of law? The answer is no. The Guarantee Clause of the Constitution mandates a republican (lowercase “r”) form of government in the states. That means the separation of powers into three branches, each with a distinct function that cannot constitutionally be performed by either of the other two. Since only a representative legislature can write laws that carry criminal penalties and incur the use of force, the governor of a state cannot constitutionally write laws. The second constitutional issue is: Can state legislatures delegate away to governors their law-making powers? Again, the answer is no because the separation of powers prevents one branch of government from ceding to another branch its core powers. The separation was crafted not to preserve the integrity of each branch but to assure the preservation of personal liberty by preventing the accumulation of too much power in any one branch. We are not talking about a state legislature delegating to a board of medical examiners in the executive branch the power to license physicians. We are talking about delegating away a core power -- the authority to create crimes and craft punishments. Such a delegation would be an egregious violation of the Guarantee Clause. The third constitutional issue is: Can a state legislature enact laws that interfere with personal liberties protected by the Bill of Rights, prescribe punishments for violations of those laws and authorize governors to use force to compel compliance? Again, the answer is no because all government in America is subordinate to the natural rights articulated in the Bill of Rights and embraced in the Ninth Amendment. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We should rejoice that there is resistance to gubernatorial ignorance and arrogance that disregards the Bill of Rights. We need resistance to tyranny in order to stay free. Power unresisted continues to grow and to corrupt. History teaches that most people prefer the illusion of safety to the cacophony of liberty. The only reason we have civil liberties today is because generations of determined minorities -- starting with the revolutionaries in the 1770s -- have fought for them. Today, we are governed by dangerous men and women. For they have taken away our ability to make personal choices, and they have used force to compel compliance. In doing that, they have not only violated their oaths to uphold the Bill of Rights, they also have committed the criminal acts of nullifying our rights. By using the powers of state governments to do this, they have made themselves candidates for federal criminal prosecutions when saner days return. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JUDGE ANDREW NAPOLITANO

CNN host doesn't ask New York governor about nursing home deaths. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  As Gov. Andrew Cuomo's New York state barred people from visiting their loved ones in nursing homes, his state simultaneously forced infected patients into the same places. And now we hear of an extra 1,700 deaths at these homes. The death count is nearly 5,000 now. So, unlike other parts of the world, where people try to slow the spread of the coronavirus, this action accelerated it. Thank God CNN anchor Chris Cuomo pressed his brother on it. In an interview on CNN, Chris Cuomo asked Gov. Andrew Cuomo: “Do you think you are an attractive person now because you’re single and ready to mingle? Do you really think you are some desirable single person, and that this is not just people’s pain coming out of them?” MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS AND NURSING HOMES –  CUOMO, THIS NY TRAGEDY IS ON YOU Gov. Cuomo responded: “I think beauty is in the eye of the beholder.” It helps to have a brother in the news business. And to have a brother in government. Then scandals have a way of disappearing in a big shrug. Plus it means more time to bash President Trump. Chris Cuomo said on CNN: “The president acknowledging that reopening our country will likely kill more of us, but we got to get our country back. How can he accept that when he hasn’t even come close to doing what he can to avoid more pain and death?” Oh really? What do you think the current shutdown is? You think evil and selfish Trump would crater the greatest economy ever for poops and giggles? Wait, you probably do. And in case you missed it, we are already spending trillions of dollars. Why? Well, the president has mentioned it. More than you. Here are some comments the president has made on different occasions: “There has been so much unnecessary death in this country. … After all this death, death that we've suffered. … The whole world is suffering. … The possible number of deaths … countries now are suffering.” “It’s been a horrible time to see such death,” the president also said. “Tremendous death and economic devastation. … The virus inflicted immense physical suffering on many people, but also mental and emotional suffering.” Of course, Cuomo ignored that. Like he also ignores the severe steps Trump has taken to fight the coronavirus – which didn't include issuing death sentences for the helpless elderly in nursing homes. You know the media wishes this is something else they could’ve pinned on Trump. This reminds me of another ignored story, involving an anchor who scolds you for violating shutdowns. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Chris Cuomo said this on CNN of people who venture out during the shutdown: “Look at these fools. Fools! I know they want to be out there. Fools! It’s not about you, what about the other people? And look, I’m not going to castigate you, that’s not my job. I’m not your daddy.” But you must remember that incident with the bicyclist, right? How did Chris Cuomo fight with this guy while he was in quarantine? Chris Cuomo told the bicyclist: “I don’t want some jackass loser, fat-tire biker to be able to pull over and get in my face and in my space and talk bulls---- to me, I don’t want to hear it.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP That happened before Chris Cuomo staged his televised emergence from his basement where he said he remained quarantined after contracting COVID-19. So Chris saves his moral outrage not for friends and family, but you. Even though he’s no angel. But hey – for CNN, nothing is better than brotherly love. Including the truth. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 6, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREG GUTFELD 

New poll shows voter reaction to Biden allegations; Martha MacCallum weighs in. In the general election months of the 2016 campaign, candidate Donald Trump avoided a “formal” press conference for 168 days, until a few days before the inauguration. He took informal questions and faced debate moderators, but nothing “formal.” Trump had mocked Hillary Clinton for going 270-plus days without a press event. Now we’re seeing this game unfold again. While President Trump has given regular press briefings to address the coronavirus pandemic, former Vice President Joe Biden hasn’t had a press conference since April 2. The presumptive Democratic presidential nominee has done cuddly interviews with smitten late-night hosts like Jimmy Fallon on NBC, who gushed over his reciting of Irish poetry, but that doesn’t count. Conservatives on Twitter were amused when liberal New York magazine promoted an article on Twitter this way: “Joe Biden is at his best when he’s neither speaking nor appearing in public. Will his campaign have to abandon its most effective strategy?” HIDIN’ BIDEN? DEM PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATE HASN’T HELD A NEWS CONFERENCE IN OVER A MONTH In the article, Zak Cheney-Rice writes: “Joe Biden’s most effective campaign strategy has been to lie low and let people vote for whatever imagined version of Joe Biden congealed inside their heads.” This is not a strategy that inspires confidence in Biden’s handling of interviews. But a comparison of Democrats and Republicans on press conferences is misleading. A press conference for Trump has the feel of diving into a tank of hungry sharks. A press conference for Hillary Clinton or Joe Biden carries the vibe of getting free pizza and game tokens at Chuck E. Cheese. Biden’s “virtual” press conference April 2 only lasted 20 minutes, and he jabbered for seven minutes before he took his first question. There were only four questioners, all from the liberal media elite. Let’s summarize how he was “tested” by their softballs: First, Andrea Mitchell of NBC asked Biden how badly Trump was doing in providing emergency protective supplies for health care workers, and other alleged administration failures. Second, Bill Barrow of The Associated Press asked how Biden would respond to Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., saying the crisis illustrated how the private sector has failed and we need “Medicare-for-all.” Barrow also asked if Sanders was “confusing” the issue for poor Biden. Third, Jessica Dean of CNN asked about a potential phone call to President Trump and whether Biden thought this would be “productive” and whether the president would actually listen to Biden’s proposals. Finally, Trevor Hunnicutt of Reuters asked if Biden still supported in-person voting for the Wisconsin primary. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Biden’s interview with Mika Brzezinski on “Morning Joe” on MSNBC saw much more traditional furrowed-brow questioning. But that is the exception, not the norm, and was performed to get Biden “beyond” the Tara Reade questions regarding Reade’s allegation that Biden sexually assaulted her in 1993. The norm was the previous 77 questions put to Biden since Reade publicly accused Biden of assaulting when he was a senator representing Delaware. CNN did an hour-long town hall with Biden and couldn’t (or wouldn’t) address it. The norm is waiting to ask a tough question like that until the Biden campaign signals it is “ready.” Instead, NBC’s Chuck Todd threw a bloody softball about Trump’s actions on the coronavirus pandemic:  “Do you think there is blood on the president’s hands, considering the slow response?” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The norm for Trump is to ask him a tough question at almost every opportunity. And not just “tough” questions, but sometimes wildly unfair questions, like Olivia Nuzzi of New York Magazine implying that Trump is somehow responsible for causing all the now more than 71,000 confirmed coronavirus deaths in the U.S. Biden can hide … and the media will cooperate, as they did with Hillary Clinton. Those like CNN media reporter Brian Stelter will try to punish Trump for avoiding press conferences at one point, and then try to punish Trump for having one every day, as the president did when holding coronavirus press briefings. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TIM GRAHAM

'WHO was a disgrace in how they handled this,' says Dr. Marc Siegel criticizing the World Health Organization for letting coronavirus spin out of control Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The World Health Organization (WHO), which failed spectacularly to stop the COVID-19 outbreak, will meet virtually in just a few weeks. President Trump is expected to address the gathering in what will be his first public forum to reckon with the Chinese government over the delays, denials and duplicity that made the world sick — and to shame the leaders of the WHO for taking China’s obvious lies at face value. The evidence of both is clear. The Tawainese government alleges it shared evidence of COVID-19’s contagious properties with the WHO in December. One of WHO’s own doctors said she suspected the virus was highly infectious “right from the start.” Yet the WHO, led by Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, continued to defer to the notoriously deceptive Chinese government, telling the world there was “no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus” on Jan. 14. JAMES CARAFANO: CHINA'S CORONAVIRUS LIES — 3 POSSIBLE REASONS FOR THEIR PROPAGANDA CAMPAIGN  Tedros went on to condemn the travel bans put in place around the world to prevent viral spread, and on Jan. 30, was praising China for efforts that were “very impressive, and beyond words.” The government of China, according to an opinion piece in the Washington Post, still “won’t share actual virus samples from the earliest cases. The Shanghai lab that first released the coronavirus genome was shut down for ‘rectification.’ Critics have been disappeared.” Trump’s speech will also be a time to contemplate the future of the WHO — and America’s role in it. COVID-19 may be the WHO’s most large scale failure, but it is hardly the only one. In 2014, the organization was widely condemned for its abject mishandling of Ebola. An expert review panel deemed the WHO’s response as “late, feeble and uncoordinated,” calling the WHO’s handling of the outbreak “an egregious failure.” A review by the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services found the WHO slowed the entire global response by failing to “declare the epidemic an emergency until the epidemic had significantly expanded in West Africa.” The corruption of the WHO and its affiliates, including the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), have also been notable. The U.S. should leave the WHO behind, and instead focus our existing capabilities on the global health partnerships we already have in place.  As recently as 2017, leaked documents revealed that the WHO spent more on luxury travel than they did on prevention and treatment measures for tuberculosis, AIDS and malaria combined. Tedros, for his part, is accused of covering up cholera epidemics in two countries, so as not to embarrass their leadership. A group of American doctors blasted him as “fully complicit in the terrible suffering and dying that continues to spread.” The PAHO, an affiliate of the WHO that is financed by it, has also been accused of being complicit in human trafficking. A lawsuit filed by four Cuban doctors in 2018 alleges that PAHO “has collected over $75 million since 2013 by enabling, managing and enforcing illegal human trafficking of Cuban medical professionals in Brazil.” PAHO said they were merely helping the doctors “improv[e] their skills.” Both PAHO and its parent organization also regularly promote abortion services. One of the “vital” services that the WHO has provided during the global COVID-19 outbreak was making sure that abortion services — including ensuring women could abort their children at home — were deemed “essential.” The WHO has proven itself sorely inadequate to meet global health needs, particularly in a crisis. So what, if anything, is to be done? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The president has announced a pause on the nearly $500 million the U.S. provides to the WHO — most of it on a voluntary basis. The U.S. should not seriously contemplate returning these funds without significant reforms, including acceptance of Taiwan as a full member. But given the makeup of the WHO — and dominance of the organization by the Chinese — such reforms are unlikely. Indeed, reforms instituted after the Ebola crisis have had minimal impact. So perhaps it is time for a different path. The United States contributes $11 billion annually to global health needs throughout the world, a number that dwarfs its contribution to the WHO. Moreover, between our global health partners and domestic capacities at the Centers for Disease Control and the Office of Foreign Disaster Assistance at USAID, we have a tremendous capability to mobilize, prioritize and direct funding to health crises around the world. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The president should strategically prioritize the work the United States is already doing in this space, rather than rest the fate of a global health response in the hands of a corrupt and inept organization that would rather serve tyrants than the world’s sick. COVID-19 has been a tragedy at a global scale — one that could have been avoided. But in crisis, there is opportunity. The U.S. should leave the WHO behind, and instead focus our existing capabilities on the global health partnerships we already have in place. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM RACHEL BOVARD

New York facing criticism for unused field hospital beds and ventilators; former New York Governor George Pataki reacts. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Two weeks ago, Gov. ­Andrew Cuomo was first asked about his policy that forced nursing homes to admit ­patients infected with the coronavirus. “That’s a good question, I don’t know,” the governor answered, turning to an aide. REAR ADM. JOHN POLOWCZYK: FEMA'S CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE IS SAVING LIVES On Tuesday, Cuomo was asked about a report from The Associated Press that his team had added more than 1,700 deaths to the count of those who died in nursing homes, bringing the total to at least 4,813. “I don’t know the details, frankly,” the governor answered, turning to an aide. Sgt. Schultz reporting for duty! CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Cuomo is legendary for micromanaging and has been praised for his detailed daily briefings during the pandemic. He has closed schools, religious services and businesses because each human life is “priceless.” So with known nursing-home deaths representing 25 percent of all deaths in the state, it beggars belief that the governor didn’t know anything about his office’s fatal policy two weeks ago or the new death totals now. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The only way either could be true is through an extreme case of plausible deniability. Thus, if there’s no proof he knew, he can’t be held responsible, right? Which was the whole point of the Sgt. Schultz defense. That was a sitcom. This is life and death. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

'Tucker Carlson Tonight' investigates the allegation against Joe Biden. We've done a number of segments on "Tucker Carlson Tonight" about Tara Reade and her allegations against Joe Biden. We've told you about Biden's weird reaction to the charges -- he stammered when asked. We told you at length about the infuriating, the sickening hypocrisy of the media and the professional feminist movement. "Believe all women!" No, they don't. It depends on the politics. PELOSI AGREES BIDEN-READE CASE IS ‘CLOSED ISSUE’: 'I'M NOT GOING TO ANSWER THIS QUESTION AGAIN' But one thing we have not yet addressed in any detail is Reade's story itself. What exactly does she say happened between herself and Joe Biden? Is there any evidence to back it up? In retrospect, we probably should have started there, which is really at the beginning. So, we want to take you through the details of the story. Why? Because we think we're going to be hearing a lot more about it, and it's good to be grounded in what the facts are. And here they are. Tara Reade worked as an aide in Joe Biden's Senate Office in Washington from December 1992 through August of 1993. In a recent interview with a journalist named Katie Halper, Reade said that in the spring of 1993, she found herself alone with Joe Biden in an isolated corner of Capitol Hill. She later said it was in the basement of a Senate Office building, but it was in the Senate somewhere. Biden, she said, pinned her against the wall, kissed her and then reached up under her skirt and penetrated her with his fingers. It is horrifying. Reade recalls that she pulled away from Biden when he did this. And as she pulled away, he became angry. "You're nothing to me," she says Biden hissed at her. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Reade says she complained to superiors about being harassed by Joe Biden but didn't provide any of these horrifying details. A short time after she complained, she was fired. That's what she says. Now, did this happen? Did this assault in its particulars take place? So, we can't really know for sure, of course. It was more than 25 years ago. But here's the evidence Reade points to, to support her case. Two unnamed friends of Reade's apparently have spoken to media outlets to say they heard Reade complain about harassment from Biden at the time. Reade's brother and a former neighbor also say they heard something about it. Then there's a recently unearthed CNN clip from 1993 in which an unnamed woman calls into "Larry King Live" and asks Larry King what her daughter should do about problems with a U.S. senator. Larry King, CNN host: San Luis Obispo, California. Hello. Unidentified woman: Yes. Hello. I'm wondering what a staffer would do besides go to the press in Washington. My daughter has just left there after working for a prominent senator and could not get through with her problems at all. And the only thing she could have done was go to the press and she chose not to do it out of respect for him. King: So she had a story to tell, but out of respect for the person she worked for, she didn't tell it. Unidentified woman: That's true. Now that clip just emerged. It was found by someone on Twitter, and that's a real clip. Those of us who cover it [the Reade-Biden story] going forward should be very wary of being used. Again, this is a presidential year. Weigh everything against the facts. Take nothing for granted. The one thing you can be certain of this year is you're being lied to. Reade says the woman you heard is her mother. We can't confirm that because her mother has since passed away. But the facts, at least in broad outline, seem to match. The caller identifies herself as being from San Luis, Obispo. Reade's mother lived there at the time, and that seems compelling. We covered it on the show. But there is evidence on the other side as well, and we feel honor-bound to tell you about it. Just last year, Tara Reade told a very different story about what happened with Joe Biden. In 2019, she said he touched her inappropriately on the neck and shoulders. She said not that she was fired for complaining about harassment, much less being penetrated by Joe Biden. She said she was fired because she refused to serve drinks at an event. And that was the version of the story that Reade's brother remembered when he was asked. When her brother told reporters that Reade had mentioned Biden touching her neck and shoulders, he did not mention anything about assault. Several days later, Reade's brother texted the reporters to say he also now remembered Reade saying that Biden had reached under her clothes and assaulted her. Then there's the question of Reade's politics. We normally wouldn't get into that because it's not germane. But keep in mind this story is unfolding during a presidential campaign. And it's also playing out against the backdrop of fierce infighting within the Democratic Party. The infighting you may not know much about unless you're connected to the Democratic Party. But it's intense, and it's between establishment forces, the people who support Joe Biden who are backing him in this election, and between the many Democrats who still support Bernie Sanders. Now, Tara Reade appears to be strongly in the Bernie Sanders camp. On March 3rd, Intercept reporter Ryan Grim tweeted this: "A head-to-head Biden versus Sanders contest will force voters to take a close look at Biden again. That went very badly for him last time." Now did Grim suggest that we'd be taking a close look at Joe Biden? Reade responded this way: "Yup. Timing. Wait for it. Tic-toc." Well, that's cryptic. Was Tara Reade referring when she said "tic-toc" to her plans to announce the assault story, suggesting it was politically timed? We don't know that. We have no evidence of it. But it's interesting and of course, it's possible. It is notable that before Joe Biden started beating Bernie Sanders in the primary, Tara Reade wasn't attacking Joe Biden. Instead, she had effusively positive things to say about him. In 2017, Tara Reade repeatedly praised Joe Biden for his work against sexual assault. At one point, Reade wrote this: "My old boss speaks the truth." She was liking comments that Biden had made saying he opposed the sexual assault of women. In retrospect, knowing all that we know now about what Reade says happened, statements like that are baffling. They're hard to understand or to explain. Now as we learned so bitterly during the Brett Kavanaugh hearing, political imperative sometimes influence claims like this. That does not mean that Tara Reade is some kind of liar or is a devious partisan. We don't know that is true, and we are not saying it now. To be clear, we are not asserting that. But the timing does mean -- and this is our duty --  that we ought to keep our guard up as this story progresses. Those of us who cover it going forward should be very wary of being used. Again, this is a presidential year. Weigh everything against the facts. Take nothing for granted. The one thing you can be certain of this year is you're being lied to. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So, that's what we know so far about the Tara Reade story. Those are the facts. Decide for yourself what you make of them. We'll be updating it regularly. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 5, 2020 CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

FOX Business' Cheryl Casone says the coronavirus task force will begin to scale back and ultimately be dismantled over the next few weeks. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  For the first time in history, all 50 states, five territories and the District of Columbia are under a major disaster declaration at the same time. This is unprecedented, but the COVID-19 outbreak is in many ways an unprecedented emergency, and it calls for an unprecedented response. Under President Trump, the federal government is laser-focused on helping Americans fight and recover from this pandemic. One of the key problems that the Trump administration has faced during this crisis is that many overseas manufacturers and suppliers have shut down operations in order to comply with stay-at-home orders issued in their own countries. MCCARTHY ON PUSH TO BRING SUPPLY CHAIN BACK TO US: 'WHY WOULD WE EVER PUT OURSELVES IN THIS PLACE AGAIN?' Recognizing that the Strategic National Stockpile alone could not sustain all state, tribal and territorial requirements, President Trump has put the full weight of the federal government and the full weight of American industry into filling the gap. The president declared a national emergency, allowing for deregulation to seed innovation, and he has employed the Defense Production Act to ramp up manufacturing efforts in the U.S. and mitigate supply shortages from abroad. President Trump also formed the Supply Chain Task Force to increase the flow of medical supplies and equipment to health care workers on the front line. Through the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s National Response Coordination Center, the task force is finding critical resources to meet urgent demand, as well as increase the overall level of surge support to “hot spots” as they arise. The Supply Chain Task Force immediately began executing a strategy to maximize the availability of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other vital resources needed for our nation’s whole-of-America response. The team applied a four-pronged approach of preservation, acceleration, expansion and allocation to rapidly increase supply today and expand domestic production of critical resources to increase supply for tomorrow. Preservation Preservation focuses on providing federal guidance to first responders in public service energy distributors and the food industry, helping them learn how to safely preserve supplies when possible. We are following guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to help PPE last longer and are collaborating with our partners to help them get more out of the supplies they have on hand. Preservation reduces the impact on the medical supply chain and maximizes existing PPE to protect doctors, nurses and other health care workers. Acceleration Acceleration provides direct results to help meet the demand for PPE through the private sector to help health care workers and responders get supplies they need as quickly as possible. By working directly with some of the largest commercial distributors that already service the medical industry, we have helped them quickly move inventory through their normal distribution channels to resupply hospitals and other priority locations. There is no greater example of acceleration than Project Airbridge. We created Project Airbridge to reduce the amount of time it takes to get commercially sourced and procured supplies from the global market to places in the U.S. with the greatest needs. What normally takes up to 37 days in routine shipping was reduced to less than two days using airplanes chartered by FEMA. Expansion Through expansion efforts following President Trump’s invocation of the Defense Production Act, we are generating capacity with both traditional and non-traditional manufacturers by adding machinery or reconfiguring assembly lines to produce new products to increase the private sector’s production capacity. Under the Defense Production Act, companies like General Motors and Vantec will produce ventilators for distribution in the U.S. Through the nine contracts rated under the Defense Production Act the private sector is ramping up production and will deliver more than 180,000 ventilators by the end of this year. Allocation At the same time, the interagency Unified Coordination Group is using data to make informed decisions regarding allocation of supplies. Through our public-private partnership, we’ve managed to gather distribution data from the six major national PPE distributors. We have used that data with a visualization tool that shows us what is coming in and where it is going – down to the ZIP code.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The tool also gives us the ability to prioritize hospitals, nursing homes and other health care facilities with the most critical needs and highest COVID-19 rates. This is truly a historic effort. No one has ever before had this level of centralized visibility on an estimated 80 to 90 percent of the nation’s PPE supply chain. What was initially estimated to take anywhere from six to nine months has been accomplished in the span of about two weeks. The result is a data-informed process that helps us ensure the right supplies are getting to the right places at the right time. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We are continuing to partner with nations around the globe for supplies. This administration will keep bringing those supplies into the U.S. as quickly as possible, expanding the market for the future, and continuing to make data-driven decisions to get supplies to the areas that need them most. The challenge is unprecedented. But from the Trump administration’s task forces and agencies, to our nation’s hospitals, health care workers, manufacturers, shippers and grocers, we are meeting the challenge with an unprecedented response.

Michael Waltz explains his proposed legislation to stop U.S. retirement funds from investing $50 billion into China's stock exchange and state-owned companies Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The coronavirus pandemic is just the latest chapter in the story of Chinese dishonesty and propaganda – but there is a different disease silently creeping through American society: China’s mass infiltration and theft of American research at our colleges and universities. America’s higher education system has long been regarded as a beacon of learning, creativity and academic excellence. Our colleges and universities show the power that freedom of knowledge and information can harness in the fields of science, health care, our military operations and global development. But while our universities are home to some of the best and brightest scholars, they are also plagued by Chinese espionage and intellectual theft that puts America at risk. GORDON CHANG SAYS CHINA'S LEADERS FEAR 'CRIME OF THE CENTURY' WILL BE 'EXPOSED' BY GLOBAL CORONAVIRUS PROBE Two Chinese programs – the Thousand Talents Program and Confucius Institutes – have given mainland China’s Communist regime the freedom to take full advantage of our academic openness and steal it – all to be used for a New World Order where China calls the shots. The Thousand Talents Program was launched in 2008. It incentivizes Chinese students engaged in research and development in the United States to transmit the knowledge and research they gain here to China – in exchange for salaries, research funding, lab space and other benefits. China sends nearly 400,000 students to American universities every year – an enormous number and more than any other foreign country.  China’s Communist Party uses American professors and Chinese national students as “nontraditional collectors” of valuable information. Some are aware of this role and others are unaware. They convey American research and expertise to China for that nation’s own economic and military gain. These students are not all spies or bad people. But they have no choice but to provide the Chinese government with whatever information that government demands. And many of the U.S. professors, like many politicians, naively see sharing their taxpayer-funded research as no big deal. While China’s government is mainly to blame for these programs, our colleges and universities have also failed to safeguard themselves from Chinese infiltration. Our institutions of higher education need more accountability, improved best practices and tougher safeguards to prevent this from happening. In January, Harvard University Professor Charles Lieber was indicted and accused of lying about his participation in the Thousand Talents Program. Lieber wasn’t just any professor, though. As head of Harvard’s Chemistry and Chemical Biology Department, he was entrusted with millions of taxpayer dollars from the Department of Defense and National Institutes of Health. Lieber was allegedly seduced by the high price China’s Communist Party was willing to pay for American research. The state-sponsored Wuhan University of Technology reportedly paid him $50,000 per month and gave him $1.5 million to establish a nanoscience research lab in mainland China. The dollar amount is staggering – and it only illustrates the value of U.S. research and how China’s government will do anything and pay any cost to get it. There are other examples as well. Make no mistake: the Chinese government is stealing this information for later use against us. In February, James Patrick Lewis, a physics professor at West Virginia University, pleaded guilty to federal program fraud. Lewis claimed he needed to be released from his teaching duties to care for a child he and his wife were expecting – but instead of caring for his newborn baby, Lewis planned on working in China instead, as part of his agreement with the Thousand Talents Program. In addition, last year an unidentified 20-plus-year veteran chemistry professor at the University of Florida was also discovered to be working for a Chinese university, eventually rising to become vice president at that same Chinese school. At the University of Florida, this professor was reportedly able to tap into the nearly $190 million in grants the school receives from the National Institutes of Health each year. He was also allegedly able to double-dip in rewards from the Chinese Communist Party, receiving four grants from Chinese science foundations and even running his own lab in the country. This professor was also a participant in the Thousand Talents Program and never disclosed his involvement with mainland China to his employers at the University of Florida, according to authorities. When the professor was notified he was under investigation he resigned. A federal investigation is ongoing. The Chinese government deliberately fast-tracks information it gets through the Thousand Talents Program to develop military arms, pharmaceuticals, technology, energy and other important advancements. Make no mistake: the Chinese government is stealing this information for later use against us. Beyond taking our research and development, the Chinese government is also using our universities as sites to further its propaganda machine and subtly portray China’s rise as benign and peaceful. To do this, the Chinese Communist Party has strategically placed over 100 state-sponsored Confucius Institutes on college campuses. Universities with Confucius Institutes sign contracts requiring respect for Chinese law, which means they operate under Chinese rule. This enables the Chinese Communist Party to gloss over realities of global history and the mass atrocities it has committed against its own people over the last century. And it allows the Chinese regime to stifle the type of academic freedom America is known for. This wholesale theft is an attack on how America has maintained economic and military dominance through technological advancement. This information is ours and our researchers have worked tirelessly to develop it. China must not be allowed to skip ahead and steal its way to the top on the backs of American taxpayers. Research conducted on behalf of the Defense Department has no business occurring on the same campus where our biggest foreign adversary has a presence. To put an end to China’s wholesale theft, I’m proposing legislation to prohibit the Defense Department from funding programs with any university housing Confucius Institutes or with faculty participating in the Thousand Talent Program. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER I’m also proposing a measure requiring individuals in these research programs to disclose all financial assistance – foreign and domestic – that they or their employers receive. Our federal agencies need the tools to reject grant applications with known participants in these programs as well. America cannot stand idly by while our biggest foreign adversary takes advantage of us and the institutions that have made America strong. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The ideals of China’s Communist government run completely contrary to the virtues we hold dear. They cannot be allowed to permeate our schools of free thought. Our information is clearly precious. Right now, it is in grave danger of falling into the wrong hands. We must do all we can to protect it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY REP. MICHAEL WALTZ

Gen. Jack Keane discusses Chinese state media taking aim at Mike Pompeo after he said there was 'enormous evidence' the virus came from a Wuhan lab Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. In a world beset by the COVID-19 pandemic, we find ourselves engaged in a verbal arms race. Beijing kicked it off with an unprecedented — and completely outlandish — public relations campaign denying responsibility for the outbreak. They went so far as to suggest the U.S. brought the virus to Wuhan. That was in March. A few weeks later, after U.S. officials retaliated in the war of words, China backed off. NIKKI HALEY: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS – HELP THOSE TRULY IN NEED, BUT STOP WASTING BILLIONS ON OTHERS That was then. Now, Beijing is back, more aggressive than ever. Further, the U.S. intelligence community has found striking similarities between the disinformation operations of China, Iran and Russia. They are unquestionably working together. So, what is up with China’s cavalcade of coronavirus canards? There are several scenarios that might explain the regime’s behavior. You Can’t Always Get What You Want  There is no question of Chinese malfeasance. The damning facts are indisputable. China significantly delayed — by weeks and perhaps even months — reporting the virus, as required under international health regulations. That catastrophically slowed the world’s response effort and sped the spread. Even today Beijing has not fully disclosed necessary information. For example, it still hasn’t shared samples of the original virus — samples which are key to analyzing and developing effective countermeasures. Compounding this fatal lack of cooperation is the unconscionable fact that the regime let many tens of thousands leave the country, even though officials knew these travelers could be carrying the virus and that disease was extremely contagious and could be lethal to vulnerable populations. Obviously, China is at fault. Yet some in the West continue to pummel the administration for blaming Beijing for the outbreak. The Atlantic recently ran an Anne Applebaum commentary entitled “The Rest of the World Is Laughing at Trump.” The subhead added: “The president created a leadership vacuum. China intends to fill it.” Reading that in Beijing, Chinese Communist Party officials must take heart. You can almost hear them thinking, "Hey, if Trump’s critics are happy to peddle narratives favorable to us, why shouldn’t we double down?” What we know for sure is that the Chinese Communist Party is the most destabilizing force in the world today. It is a real threat to peace, prosperity and security around the globe. Applebaum leads her article with a faithful transcription and description of a propaganda video produced by Xinhua, the official Chinese news agency. The cartoon video argues that, in responding to the virus, China has been blameless and compassionate, while the U.S. has been feckless. It’s not like Beijing needs the American media’s help in spreading its message. China’s media reach is worldwide. Politico reports China’s “Global Times has 1.7 million followers on Twitter; China Xinhua News, 12.6 million; People’s Daily, 7.1 million; China Daily, 4.3 million; and China Global Television Network (CGTN), 14 million.” Yet no one in China is seeing this content. Twitter is blocked in China. These falsehoods are produced entirely for foreign consumption. Band on the Run  Another scenario holds that Beijing’s propaganda is an attempt to make the most of the pandemic. With the West and our Asian allies focused on responding to COVID-19, China is using this chance to pump up its international stature and pull more governments into its orbit. One theory, advanced by Sen. Tom Cotton, R-Ark., and others, holds that the Chinese Communist Party intentionally let the virus spread to take advantage of the economic chaos they knew would follow. The disinformation campaign seeks to present China as the White Knight come to save the day. Stayin’ Alive The third explanation is that Beijing isn’t being proactive and deliberate at all. Rather, the Chinese Communist Party is scrambling in the face of unprecedented backlash. Ironically, what sparked the backlash isn’t just Beijing’s denial of its obvious culpability for the global outbreak, but its subsequent attempt to stem criticism by heavy-handed bullying and lying. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations, a think tank affiliated with the Chinese Ministry of State Security, recently released a report concluding that anti-Chinese attitudes around the world are at an all-time high — the worst hit to China’s influence and reputation since the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. So perhaps the Chinese disinformation campaign is the desperate, geopolitical equivalent of “throwing spaghetti at the wall and hoping some of it sticks.” Who knows the real motivation driving the Chinese Communist Party? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP What we know for sure is that the Chinese Communist Party is the most destabilizing force in the world today. It is a real threat to peace, prosperity and security around the globe. We know, too, that the U.S. and the rest of the free world must stand up to this threat, or things will only get worse. While the verbal arms race continues, we must remember that actions speak louder than words. In the U.S., job one has to be to get America back in business. Then, we must help lead the free world to broader economic recovery. And, finally, we demonstrate the resolve and capacity to defend our interests against all-comers — China not the least. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

Ben Shapiro weighs in on Gavin Newsom's plan to ease coronavirus restrictions and reopen the state of California Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As Americans debate how to reopen our society in the wake of COVID-19, we seem to be breaking down into three groups: first, those who believe the virus isn't particularly serious and desperately want to reopen everything as soon as possible (a small minority of Americans, by polling data). Second, those who believe the virus is extraordinarily serious and want everything to remain closed as long as possible (a significant minority of Americans). Third, those who believe the virus is extraordinarily serious, that the economic damage brought about by COVID-19 is extraordinarily serious and that we will have to reopen in considered fashion (the vast majority of Americans). While politicians on either side of the debate hope to position their opponents as advocates of either group 1 or group 2, the reality is that the honest debate is happening within group 3. NIKKI HALEY: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS – HELP THOSE TRULY IN NEED, BUT STOP WASTING BILLIONS ON OTHERS So, what does a considered coronavirus reopening strategy look like? That question rests on a deeper question: What assumptions are we making? Obviously, we all want to reduce deaths to the lowest possible number. But what assumptions are baked into our policy recommendations? Are we assuming a vaccine will come along in three, six, 12 or 18 months? Are we assuming herd immunity conferred at 60 percent of the population or 80 percent? Are we assuming therapeutic measures that would reduce the infection fatality rates by 20, 30 or 100 percent, and within what period of time? We also want to reduce economic harm to the lowest possible level. Again, we must ask what assumptions are baked into our policy recommendations. Are we assuming that a 75 percent reduction in restaurant seating will save 50 percent of restaurants? Are we assuming that shoppers will continue to socially distance six months from now? Are we assuming that the government will be able to shoulder trillions more in debt despite an underlying decrease in international appetite for such debt? The question of assumptions is key to our policymaking. That's because if we assume the worst -- no therapeutics that seriously knock down the infection fatality rate, no vaccines for 18 months or more and an economy that simply cannot function at one-quarter or even half of normal capacity -- then we are forced to a simple conclusion: In the absence of any significant change to the status quo, we must pursue a strategy of so-called controlled avalanche. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That strategy has been coined by Israeli scientists, who suggest that the best strategy for reducing deaths while achieving herd immunity would be to tranche populations and then expose the least-vulnerable populations to COVID-19 in order to let them develop antibodies -- in essence, performing with public health the same function ski resorts perform when they create small avalanches in order to avoid a major avalanche. The simple fact is that 40 to 50 percent, at low estimate, of all deaths in the European Union from COVID-19 have occurred at nursing homes; the same is true in California. Had the authorities properly protected nursing homes, the infection fatality rate across the industrialized world could be half of the current rate. It is also true that the infection fatality rate for COVID-19 ranges widely by age: As of late April, of the 37,308 deaths recorded by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, just 1,036 were people under the age of 45, and just 51 were below the age of 25. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Even among younger populations, the vast majority of deaths were people with underlying conditions. Israeli scientists suggest that protecting the elderly and the vulnerable and then allowing herd immunity to develop among the least vulnerable would radically reduce overall mortality (by over 40 percent), reduce the maximum number of people in need for ICUs (by over 60 percent) and decrease the time required to allow freedom to low-risk populations by months. This is obviously not a foolproof strategy -- there is no foolproof strategy. But it may be a better strategy than simply hoping for the best while watching the world economy implode, even as we know that our deepest hopes for a deus ex machina may go unrewarded. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM BEN SHAPIRO

Coronavirus pandemic forces Supreme Court to livestream arguments; David Spunt reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The Little Sisters of the Poor will be back in a hearing before the Supreme Court Wednesday, and Lord have mercy. We Little Sisters are called to radically love the elderly poor, caring for them in their frailty as we would Christ Himself. It is with this zeal that we will return to the Supreme Court – after seven years of unwanted litigation – to ask the court to protect our ministry and end our legal battle once and for all. As Catholics, we believe in the inherent dignity of every life from the moment of conception to natural death. That’s why we spend every day accompanying some of the most vulnerable members of our society – holding their hands through the final years, days and moments on this Earth. SUPREME COURT JUSTICE RUTH BADER GINSBURG HOSPITALIZED WITH INFECTION, COURT ANNOUNCES Almost a decade ago, our ministry was threatened by the contraceptive mandate – a federal government regulation under the Affordable Care Act (ObamaCare) that ordered us to provide abortion-inducing drugs in our health plans or face tens of millions of dollars in fines. This would be a death sentence for our ministry. We cannot hold the hands of the dying elderly while at the same time facilitating the ending of pre-born life. Our faith will not allow it. HOW TO LISTEN TO SUPREME COURT'S ORAL ARGUMENTS AMID CORONAVIRUS Since we knew we could not comply with the mandate, we challenged it in court with the help of the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty. Our case has seen two unanimous wins at the Supreme Court, a government-issued religious exemption, more lawsuits challenging that exemption – and through it all, unceasing prayer. On Wednesday we will return to the Supreme Court as one of the ten historic cases chosen for the first telephonic arguments the court has ever held. Lawyers until now have appeared in person before the high court for oral arguments, but the court is hearing cases by phone due to the coronavirus pandemic, and will livestream the arguments for the first time. The federal government and our brilliant attorneys will ask the Supreme Court justices to end this needless battle and protect our ministry from the contraceptive mandate once and for all. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The government has already admitted that it has other ways to provide access to contraceptives without forcing religious sisters to participate. Not to mention that the states that have sued us to take away our hard-won victory haven’t taken issue with the broad exemptions to the contraceptive mandate for secular companies like Pepsi, Exxon, Visa and agencies of the government itself, like the U.S. military. This long, seemingly unending battle has hung over our ministry like a storm cloud – an unnecessarily divisive fight that seems even more frivolous as of late, when the lives of our elderly residents are threatened by the coronavirus pandemic. We are so grateful to the supporters who have lightened our load thus far and we hope this will be the final leg of this journey. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We Little Sisters have never before been in the public eye. We live quiet lives of service to the elderly poor. I hope that a positive decision in our case will be my final sign-off from years of public attention as a result of this lawsuit. My life belongs to God and the elderly poor, and to spend the rest of my days thinking of nothing other than their well-being is my sincere wish and my fervent prayer.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren backs Joe Biden amid sex assault allegation despite attacking Michael Bloomberg's non-disclosure agreements. Monday, Pocahontas defended former Vice President Joe Biden against accusations of sexual assault. How did Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., do it? She said this about his the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee’s recent one and only interview given last week about the accusation by a former staffer that he sexually assaulted the staffer in 1993. “The vice president’s answers were credible and convincing,” Warren said. “I support the vice president. I support his campaign and I’m proud to endorse him for president.” ELIZABETH WARREN: BIDEN'S RESPONSE TO TARA READE CLAIMS 'CREDIBLE AND CONVINCING' Well, that’s quite a change. After all, this is the same Liz who took a baton to former New York City mayor and presidential candidate Michael Bloomberg's legs for allegations that were far less sordid. Let’s walk down memory lane, shall we? During one of the debates for Democratic presidential candidates – when Warren and Bloomberg were still in the race, Warren said this about a derogatory comment Bloomberg supposedly made to a woman: “I hope you heard what his defense was: I’ve been nice to some women,” Warren said. “The mayor has to stand on his record. And what we need to know is exactly what’s lurking out there.” Bloomberg denied ever making the derogatory comment. Warren said: “Mr. Mayor, are you willing to release all of those women from those nondisclosure agreements, so we can hear their side of the story?” Bloomberg responded: “We have a very few nondisclosure agreements.” Warren cut him off and said: “How many is that?” “Let me finish,” Bloomberg said. “How many is that?” Warren interrupted again. And with that, nearly $1 billion Bloomberg has spent on his presidential campaign swirled down the toilet. The only thing left of Bloomberg after that was the bill. So what’s changed? Well, Pocahontas now wants to become chief running mate. And if there's one thing that can get Liz to sing a new tune, its political survival.                CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The fact is that the requirements for Joe's VP changed from being a woman to being a woman who looks the other way when it comes to an accusation of Joe looking at and touching other women. I mean, you could accept being his VP and still think he's a lech. Has anyone considered that? But that's not political. That's honest. And politicians don't do honest. Take Liz, who spent her professional life pretending to be Native American, with no reservations. So this is small potatoes. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But also: honesty destroys Joe's candidacy. Saying Joe is a handsy creeper ruins his claim as the moral alternative to Trump. So instead, just lie. And know that becoming VP is just a heartbeat away from becoming president. Just don't let Liz sneak up on Joe. One good scare could change history. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on May 5, 2020.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY GREG GUTFELD

Fallout continues from recently released FBI documents in the Michael Flynn case; reaction from John Yoo, former deputy assistant attorney general, and Harry Litman, former U.S. attorney. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. FBI Director Christopher Wray needs to go. He should resign or be fired. He was supposed to be the solution for the beleaguered bureau. Instead, he became the problem.  During his nearly three-year tenure at the helm of the FBI, Wray has consistently defied Congress by refusing to produce documents exposing the dishonest acts of his predecessor, James Comey, and his cadre of corrupt confederates. Even worse, Wray is to blame for suppressing evidence of innocence in the criminal case against former national security adviser Michael Flynn.    Under Wray, promises of transparency and reform proved to be nothing more than an illusion, replaced by a deliberate cover-up of FBI malfeasance in the Trump-Russia investigation.  SOL WISENBERG: MICHAEL FLYNN CASE — HOW FBI OFFICIALS, STEP BY STEP, ABUSED THEIR POWER Explosive new documents emerged last week showing how Comey, together with then-FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe and senior counterintelligence official Peter Strzok, conjured up a pretense to interview Flynn on Jan. 24, 2017, in a plot to invent a crime they knew he did not commit.  There was no legitimate reason for agents to talk with Flynn. He had done nothing wrong in speaking with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak during the presidential transition. Yet, armed with the conversations that had been secretly recorded, the FBI fabricated a reason to meet with Flynn, deceived him about their true intent, and set a trap to "get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” This was unconscionable and, quite likely, illegal. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Getting rid of Flynn would achieve a dual purpose. First, it would eliminate the threat of an experienced intelligence official in the White House who would surely uncover the FBI’s scheme to falsely implicate Trump in a nonexistent “collusion” conspiracy with Russia. Second, it would badly damage the president a mere four days into his nascent administration. The new documents show that Comey, McCabe and Strzok were desperate to neutralize Flynn. He had been investigated and surveilled by the FBI which, at one point, deployed a confidential human source (CHS) who was unable to dig up any dirt on the retired lieutenant general. Flynn was a patriot; not a Russian agent. "No derogatory information was identified,” stated one memorandum dated Jan. 4, 2017.  The bureau’s Washington field office decided to close their covert case against Flynn. But Strzok, at the behest of Comey and McCabe, put a stop to that. They resurrected an obscure and moribund 1799 law — the Logan Act — as a pretext to perpetuate their pursuit of Flynn even though they well knew that the act had no application or relevance. All of this information was contained in documents concealed for years by Wray’s FBI but made public only last week after a suspicious Attorney General William Barr ordered a review of the Flynn matter. Under the law, such exculpatory evidence is required to be turned over to the defendant.  A judicial order in the Flynn case also mandated it.    Instead, the material was hidden from Flynn and the American public. Both deserved the truth. The retired three-star general had been ruined financially and his reputation shattered. Under threat, he was coerced by special counsel Robert Mueller’s squad of partisan prosecutors into pleading guilty to a crime he did not commit — making a false statement. Mueller’s team knew all about the exculpatory documents, but they chose to bury them and persecute Flynn.  Records also show that the FBI agents who interviewed Flynn on Jan. 24 concluded that he did not lie, although Strzok and his lover, FBI lawyer Lisa Page, substantially rewrote the original report in violation of agency protocols.  U.S. Attorney for Connecticut John Durham is reportedly examining the Machiavellian machinations of Comey and his minions in their disgraceful endeavor to destroy Flynn. It seems obvious that his constitutional rights were violated and justice was obstructed. Whether criminal charges will be brought is now up to Barr and Durham.  But Director Wray bears direct responsibility for failing to produce long ago all of this evidence of egregious misconduct. If he did not know about it, as he implausibly claims, then he’s incompetent. More likely, he knew but refused to do what his duty demanded.  In either case, he is not the person who should be leading the FBI. The bureau’s reputation was left in tatters by Comey, and Wray has done little to give Americans any confidence that the FBI can be trusted. Americans are right to be fearful of the FBI. The agency’s chronic abuses of law and process, together with its thuggish tactics, present a frightening example of how power corrupts.    Wray's record on this and other related matters is beyond abysmal. More than two years ago, the House Intelligence Committee under then-Chairman Devin Nunes, R-Calif., requested these documents. So did Sen. Charles Grassley, R-Iowa, when he served as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee. They were told that the material did not exist. As Grassley recently noted, this was “obviously not true!”    At every turn, Wray has fought the release of innumerable classified documents that would reveal the plethora of shameless acts committed by the FBI during the Trump-Russia probe.  It was Wray who worked assiduously to prevent the release of the “Nunes Memo” that revealed rampant misdeeds, if not lawlessness, by the FBI. Wray opposed and delayed the damning FISA court opinion that criticized the FBI for deceiving judges in their unlawfully obtained warrants to spy on Trump campaign adviser Carter Page.  Wray also suppressed evidence that the FBI knew ex-British spy Christopher Steele was a charlatan who composed a phony “dossier” of Russian disinformation that served as the premise for the FBI’s investigation of Trump. He went to court to oppose the publication of incriminating records. He all but argued that the bureau is above the law and answerable to no one.  Importantly, where was Wray when the last of the FISA warrants was sought based on representations that he had to have known were untruthful? Wray has once again proved the adage that the cover-up is worse than the crime. It is clear that his only objective as director of the FBI is to hide evidence of wrongdoing while insisting that the bureau is incapable of lies and fraud. We now know better.  Americans are right to be fearful of the FBI. The agency’s chronic abuses of law and process, together with its thuggish tactics, present a frightening example of how power corrupts.  Director Wray had the opportunity to chart a new course for the FBI in the wake of the unscrupulous and unprincipled James Comey. The vast majority of the honest and honorable agents who populate the bureau deserved a new leader who cares about truth, fairness and justice. They got Christopher Wray instead.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP                       Former House Oversight Committee Chairman Trey Gowdy, R-S.C., was correct when he said on Sunday that America needs “an FBI that we can trust.” Sadly, that will never happen as long as the current director is in charge.  It is time for Wray to go —one way or another.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM GREGG JARRETT

The FBI is supposed to investigate crime not create it, says Fox News contributor Trey Gowdy, former chair of the House Oversight Committee. PROGRAMMING ALERT: Listen to "The Trey Gowdy Podcast" every week. Find it at FoxNewsPodcasts.com.  I hope you will give my podcast, "The Trey Gowdy Podcast," debuting Tuesday, May 5, a chance by listening on Tuesdays, beginning with my three-part series on fairness, and let me know what you think. It is important how we collectively define fairness, protect against the consequences of real or perceived unfairness, and have a long-overdue family discussion on who will assume the mantle of providing or arbitrating that fairness. Fairness. What is it? How do we define it? Is it foundational? What happens to victims of unfairness, externally and internally? What impact does unfairness have on the bystander, the interested observer? Who do we trust, individually and collectively, to judge whether something is fair and mete out the consequences for unfairness? SOL WISENBERG: MICHAEL FLYNN CASE — HOW FBI OFFICIALS, STEP BY STEP, ABUSED THEIR POWER I think “fairness” is a beautiful word, aesthetically and otherwise. It has a certain radiant symmetry to it. But like other beautiful things, it is challenging to define, it is challenging to apply, it is challenging to contrast, and it is supremely challenging to find the person or entity we trust enough to judge and administer it. Fairness can mean "equally," but then we would need to address which distinguishing facts or circumstances are significant enough to warrant disparate treatment because the word "equal" comes with its own challenges to define as well. Fairness can mean "accurate," but something can be accurate and not fully fair. Fairness seems more encompassing than simple accuracy. It is accurate to say: "I took the book away from you." It is incomplete, and therefore unfair, to not also and simultaneously include that the book belonged to me in the first place, was loaned to you, and you failed to return it despite multiple entreats to do so. Fairness can include some measure of "balance," but balance alone does not bring out a fair or just result. I would be a rich man if I had a nickel for every print reporter who defended a story by saying it was "balanced." Allowing someone to simply respond to an allegation, which has no merit, may be "balanced," but it is not fair. The fair thing is to investigate the allegation before you shift the burden of responding onto the person asked to defend the allegation. Likewise, having two opposing, albeit equally inaccurate positions included in a media piece may be "balanced," but society does not benefit from the balancing of two incorrect positions. Fairness can mean "evenhanded." Our criminal justice system strives to be fair, but it is decidedly not "even." One party gets to go first in an opening statement and oftentimes that same party goes last in a closing argument. One party has the burden of proof, while the other party has no burden to prove anything. One party has certain appellate rights and jury selection opportunities not afforded the other party. Regardless of how we define the word "fair" we can agree it is an indispensable foundation of a culture worth living in. We know it's the bedrock of our justice system. We miss it and notice its absence from our current political system. We recognize it when we see it, even if we may struggle to fully define it. When you do experience unfairness, even in something small, it has a profound impact on you. It impacts how you view yourself. It impacts how you view others. And it impacts how you think others view you.   Likewise, the reality or perception of unfairness, the absence of fairness either intentionally or unwittingly, would be correspondingly bad and noxious. What happens when there is unfairness? What effect does unfairness have? What happens when a group either is treated unfairly or perceives it is being treated unfairly? What happens on an individual level? What impact does it have on you when you believe you have been treated unfairly? History, literature and music are all littered with powerful examples of unfairness. Whether it is "Cinderella" or “Billy Budd.” Whether it is watching or reading accounts of innocent people charged, convicted and punished – it has a profound impact on us. Have you ever had a call go against your team in a game? Have you ever perceived your candidate was treated unfairly compared with a competing candidate? Have you ever received a poor ruling in a court case? Has a boss treated you unfairly; rewarded someone because of who he or she is rather than what he or she has accomplished? Have you let someone in line only to not have it reciprocated? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Sometimes, in life or in sports, the referee or judge is bad to both sides – like an umpire who can't decide what the strike zone is no matter which team is pitching. But what about when it seems all the calls go against just us? What happens when the referee calls holding against us, but never against the other team? What happens when a different standard is applied to us than to others? What happens when someone notices all of our flaws and faults but recognizes none of the flaws and faults present in a competitor? I have rarely been the victim of unfairness in my life. I am not an experiencer of unfairness so much as an observer. It's happened some but not nearly to the extent of what many of you and others have experienced. But when you do experience unfairness, even in something small, it has a profound impact on you. It impacts how you view yourself. It impacts how you view others. And it impacts how you think others view you. Unfairness even on a small, inconsequential level has an effect on the person who believes he or she is being treated unfairly. It eventually leads the person who is being mistreated to recalibrate "fairness" in his or her own mind. Rather than valuing evenhandedness and objectivity we begin to openly root for and minimize bad calls against our opponents. We reorder or restructure what is fair. We, in essence, redefine fairness. We minimize disparate treatment. We become relativists. The end justifies the means because the means is no longer evenhanded. When you experience unfairness, you begin to no longer see it as that aspirational virtue we should all long for; we see it as an illusion, a reality for some but not for us. We start looking for make-up calls, for things to go our way even if undeserved because the equilibrium needs to be restored.  Long term, systemic unfairness changes the way we view and define what is fair. When people are treated unfairly they may tend to view themselves as excluded from societal norms and they feel abandoned. It provokes anger. It provokes questions of self-worth and it challenges other conventions. Mainly, however, it leads to a restructuring of what is fair. If someone treats me unfairly what keeps me from evening the score in my own mind? How do we even the score? We can either treat others unfairly or we can begin to judge ourselves by a different, more lax, standard. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If fairness is good and unfairness has significant negative consequences on the individual and the broader culture, who are the referees? Who is the arbiter of what is fair and not in our country? Who calls the balls and strikes? Who calls the penalties? Who metes out the punishment for acts of unfairness? Do we have any referees left in America? Do we even want them anymore? Do we trust any individuals or entities to be the neutral, detached arbiter we need? Of all the important topics I could have begun a podcast with I chose fairness. I think the diminution of objective standards of fairness and the absence of a societal "referee" we can trust – even if we do not like – is among the most significant challenges our culture faces. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TREY GOWDY

Dr. Marc Siegel addresses the 20% add-on payment hospitals receive for treating coronavirus patients and if this may have led to fraud Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Americans cannot be blamed for feelings of suspicion and confusion surrounding publicized COVID-19 death counts. Disparities in the way our health care system counts and catalogs these fatalities shift attention away from important health risks and how to mitigate them. Dr. Deborah Birx, the response coordinator for the White House Coronavirus Task Force, inadvertently sparked controversy when she said suspected COVID-19 deaths were included in the overall reported death count. "The intent is ... if someone dies with COVID-19 we are counting that," she said. Death is more often from a variety of factors, but when Americans are tuned in watching our nation’s leaders reporting on daily coronavirus cases, uniformity and full transparency are crucial to instill public trust and minimize insurgency. NIKKI HALEY: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS – HELP THOSE TRULY IN NEED BUT STOP WASTING BILLIONS ON OTHERS Information from cause-of-death documentation is used for policy-making, resource allocation, determining the need for prevention programs, and monitoring overall public health trends. Therefore, uniformity in reporting causes of death is the most efficient mechanism to ensure the quality of the conveyed information. The International Classification of Diseases (ICD) provides codes to categorize illnesses and external causes of injury or disease and is the standard diagnostic tool for epidemiology, health management and most clinical purposes. The use of the ICD allows comparability of morbidity and mortality statistics across countries and contributes to a better understanding of the health of nations. The ICD includes coding rules for causes of death. These rules identify the single condition on the death certificate that is considered most informative from a public health point of view, called the “underlying cause of death.” The single underlying cause of death is defined as “the disease or injury which initiated the train of morbid events leading directly to death.” From a public health perspective, it is necessary to specify the sequence of events, distinguishing the precipitating or underlying cause from the consequences of the condition. For example, if someone who suffers from a heart attack and diabetes dies, the underlying cause of death is more often attributed to diabetes. The heart attack that caused the fatal event is usually listed as secondary given that diabetics are up to four times more likely to die from heart disease than adults without diabetes because the disease itself predisposed the individual to the subsequent heart attack. Regarding reporting of cases in the current pandemic, some states, like Minnesota and California, list only laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 diagnoses. Other states, such as New York and New Jersey, are reporting all presumed cases, which is allowed under guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as of mid-April and is why an overnight increase of cases spurred the comment from Birx. In addition to the need for more uniform reporting, greater transparency is required to maintain faith in the integrity of the data and the science behind it.  However, the lack of uniformity among the states is confusing and promulgates distrust in the system, particularly because reimbursement rates for COVID-19 patients are being publicly acknowledged as higher than for non-COVID-19 patients. In addition to the need for more uniform reporting, greater transparency is required to maintain faith in the integrity of the data and the science behind it. While state public health officials are reclassifying deaths to now include presumed deaths, they are also including “excess deaths.” Such cases were not obviously linked to the virus, but might not have occurred absent the pandemic, either from a chronic illness or because it overwhelmed the health care system. In order to divert resources to the patients in the greatest need, hospitals were told to postpone non-emergency care, canceling “elective” surgical procedures and halting the appointments that are necessary to keep hospitals and medical practices in business. A 2011 study highlighted the financial importance of surgical patients to hospitals: while only 29 percent of U.S. hospitalizations involved surgery, these cases accounted for 48 percent of hospital costs and, therefore, an even greater percentage of revenue. In order to prepare for the influx of COVID-19 patients, hospitals were forced to cancel procedures that provide nearly half of the revenue to keep them open. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act was intended to financially stabilize hospitals that faced short-term reduced income due to the ending of non-urgent procedures and increased costs for items like personal protective equipment and personnel. It did this by creating a 20 percent premium, or add-on, for COVID-19 Medicare patients. (The initial concern was that COVID-19 patients were being undercounted given the lack of access to testing, which is why presumed cases could be recorded in the numbers of deaths and hospitalizations.) There have been whisperings of abuse of this add-on reimbursement rate but no official public reports that hospitals are exaggerating COVID-19 numbers to receive higher Medicare payments. Rather, the higher number of cases is more likely due to the counting of excess deaths. However, there are sporadic reports that deaths are being reclassified as pertaining to COVID-19 despite physicians claiming they likely were not. For instance, a CBS4 Investigation found that the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment reclassified three deaths at a Centennial nursing home as COVID-19 deaths, even though attending physicians ruled all three were not directly related to coronavirus. It is uncommon for public health officials to intervene on a physician’s cause of death declaration so full transparency as to why this is occurring is essential. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It would behoove the scientific community to differentiate between those dying from direct consequences of the virus — for instance, acute respiratory distress syndrome and sepsis — or whether preexisting underlying conditions, exacerbated by COVID-19, are the true cause of death. Presenting Americans with the startling truth about how many of us live with chronic illnesses, which lead to higher death rates, may actually promote a healthier nation. Americans need to know that a healthier lifestyle can increase their ability to fight off a viral infection and perhaps lessen the need for government-ordered lockdowns in the future. Once we can spend less time reporting daily death counts, we can begin focusing on the larger issues at hand: abundant existing chronic illness, a health system functioning at near capacity and a nation on the brink of revolt if leadership does not provide a creative means to re-opening the economy. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. NICOLE SAPHIER Jason Chaffetz is a Fox News contributor who was the chairman of the U.S. House Oversight Committee when he served as a representative from Utah. He is the author of “Power Grab: The Liberal Scheme to Undermine Trump, the GOP, and Our Republic.”

Congressman Jim Jordan details the letter he wrote to FBI director Christopher Wray about his outrage over the Michael Flynn case Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Ever since Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn’s lawyers released documents revealing that the FBI had openly considered whether or not their “goal” in interviewing Flynn was to “get him to lie” so they could “prosecute him or get him fired,” the response has been largely divided along partisan lines. It shouldn’t be. Here’s the thing: I reject the idea that Flynn, President Trump's first national security adviser, did nothing wrong. At the same time, I also reject the idea that, because Flynn did something wrong, I must also be OK with how the FBI approached this interview. And I will never understand how anyone is using “But this happens all the time!” in defense of the FBI. The prevalence of such a process doesn’t make me feel better; it makes me feel worse. I’d love to see more Americans standing up for our rights – universally, and without any partisan spin. SOL WISENBERG: MICHAEL FLYNN CASE — HOW FBI OFFICIALS, STEP BY STEP, ABUSED THEIR POWER Unfortunately, I haven’t seen our discourse making room for much nuanced thinking. Ever since those controversial handwritten notes – which Fox News reports were penned by former FBI head of counterintelligence Bill Priestap after a meeting with then-FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe and then-FBI Director James Comey – became public last week, most of the responses have been predictably partisan, with each side sticking to whatever set of talking points make their side look better. The Republican response, for example, has been pretty much in line with that of the president, who said the revelations amount to an “exoneration” of Flynn. “He's in the process of being exonerated. If you look at those notes from yesterday, that was total exoneration,” Trump said on Thursday. “These were dirty, filthy cops at the top of the FBI.” “He is essentially exonerated,” Trump continued. “Now, that’s not official yet, but when you read the notes, how can you do anything else?” Trump’s base, of course, sees the news as a welcome confirmation of what they’ve been saying all along – the Russia investigation was little more than a partisan hack job, and Flynn one of its victims – and they’re singing it from the rooftops. The liberal side, of course, has a much different take on the story. Many have been quick to point out that none of the recent news changes the fact that Flynn admitted to lying. Others have argued that examining the full context of those FBI meeting notes and learning more about law enforcement practices in general effectively melts the controversy away. Government investigators should investigate crimes. They should not blatantly discuss potentially using an interview to create a crime. In The Washington Post, Aaron Blake argues that “the documents make clear … that the FBI believed it had strong evidence against Flynn going into the interview… so strong that either Flynn would admit to his wrongdoing or be forced to lie about it,” and that it is “not a terribly unusual approach to such situations when you have strong evidence.” This duality has been incredibly frustrating, and I doubt I'm the only one who feels this way. I don’t think the recent news “exonerates” Flynn. He admitted to lying, after all, and the lying had apparently started before the interview in question had even occurred. We should all acknowledge that – but it shouldn’t stop us from also acknowledging that the FBI’s treatment of him was outrageous. There are many excellent arguments to be made about politics playing a role in the Russia investigation, but more than a year after its conclusion, I’m far less interested in any debate about those particulars than I am in expressing my outrage over a system in which these sorts of law enforcement practices are acceptable. Government investigators should investigate crimes. They should not blatantly discuss potentially using an interview to create a crime. That kind of behavior should infuriate every American, regardless of the political implications of a particular case. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Too often, people get so wrapped up in partisan politics that larger points get lost. This is one of those times. It's OK to argue over politics (that's healthy and inevitable), but we must make sure those political passions don’t blind us from seeing what's at stake – in this case it's the abuse of power by law enforcement officials. The Flynn interview notes tell us that something in the system has to change. Not for the sake of Republicans and not for the sake of Democrats, but for the sake of protecting the inalienable rights of all Americans. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Fox Business host Charles Payne weighs in on the coronavirus business news of the day. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. The United States has overcome every challenge we have ever faced. The coronavirus pandemic will be no exception. Yet while the American people have risen to the needs of the moment, in some vital ways our political class has fallen short. They have done too much to help some who don’t need it, and too little to help some who need it most. During a national crisis, extraordinary measures are not only reasonable, but they are also required. In recent months, the federal government has boosted unemployment insurance to directly help those who suddenly and unexpectedly lost jobs, created a forgivable loan program for small businesses that were forced into lockdown, and pushed critical funds into the health care system – the front lines of the fight against the virus. These wise moves have saved lives and livelihoods. Unfortunately, they have been mixed with unwise ones. REP. WARREN DAVIDSON: CORONAVIRUS RELIEF — MAKE CONGRESS WORK AGAIN BEFORE MORE DEALS APPROVED Congress passed the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, the largest government stimulus measure in American history, at a cost of roughly $2 trillion. The biggest chunk of money was up to $500 billion that can be used for bailouts for large corporations, many of which have access to private capital, and their shareholders. This is the opposite of the broad-based relief to individuals and small businesses that’s most needed. The pandemic struck everyone. When government singles out industries, it injects political favoritism into a process that must avoid it. Moreover, these bailouts turn America’s economic system on its head. Large corporations are typically financed and governed by sophisticated investors. Those investors rightly benefit from corporate profits in prosperous times; they should bear the losses when times are tough. It is fundamentally unjust to pass that burden to ordinary taxpayers who are themselves struggling. We cannot have a system where corporate gains are private and losses are socialized. Beyond the bailouts, the CARES Act too often failed to tailor relief to the most urgent problems. It included multibillion-dollar handouts to states, hospitals and universities regardless of how the virus affected them. Hospitals with large COVID-19 caseloads at times got less per patient than facilities with few cases. Wealthy universities with multibillion-dollar endowments got funding. Even the sensible unemployment benefit expansion went too far, with many now being paid more than when they were working. Similarly, the well-intended small-business loan program ended up benefiting some 300 Wall Street-traded companies and many others that didn’t require help. That explains why the initial $349 billion in this program ran out in only 13 days, forcing Congress to refill it with an additional $310 billion. The billions that went to companies that didn’t need it left less for suffering small businesses and their workers. Like many states, Illinois has a pandemic of irresponsible government. That’s one disease Congress must not try to cure with a bailout.  Yet maybe the greatest lesson from Congress’ coronavirus response is that massive blunders are inevitable when government spends this much money this fast. It is impossible to wisely spend nearly $3 trillion in two months. There’s no question that this is an emergency situation that required huge spending. But it should not escape our attention that the federal deficit is now expected to reach nearly $4 trillion this year alone, pushing the national debt well over $25 trillion. This unprecedented burden will force painful decisions on future generations who will not have the comfort of knowing that it was all well spent. Some lawmakers are now calling for hundreds of billions, if not trillions, more. On what? They want bailouts for states that have mismanaged their finances for decades. While the pandemic has caused a short-term decline in state revenue that can legitimately be addressed, some states were already facing massive shortfalls well before the coronavirus. Illinois, for example, is asking for $10 billion to bail out a pension system that state politicians have chronically underfunded. Like many states, Illinois has a pandemic of irresponsible government. That’s one disease Congress must not try to cure with a bailout. Finally, a chorus of socialist voices is claiming this crisis shows the failures of capitalism and the need for a government takeover of huge sections of the economy. Really? The single best thing the Trump administration has done to address the crisis is clear away the regulatory hurdles for private research companies, scientists and the medical community to create the health care innovations that will bring America through this. As for the economy – bigger, bossier, more bloated government will only get in the way and make a much-needed recovery harder and slower. We’re already seeing the favoritism, waste and unintended consequences that come when Congress quickly spends $3 trillion. Imagine the damage the socialists’ $30 trillion would do. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Our biggest challenges are clear. They are mass unemployment, a shuttered economy that is crippling the small businesses that provide half of all jobs, and a virus that we still don’t fully have a medical handle on. We can address these challenges with direct payments to laid-off workers and struggling small businesses, and a massive infusion of private sector and scientific talent brought to bear on our urgent medical needs. The cost of such efforts is worth it. Much more, and the price will be more than present and future generations of Americans can bear. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

The report confirms much of what we suspected. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The coronavirus epidemic appears to be easing for just a moment in this country. Many are still sick, some of those will die. IN WAKE OF CORONAVIRUS CRISIS, 'TARGETED LOCKDOWN' COULD BE BETTER FOR PUBLIC HEALTH, ECONOMY: RESEARCH But overall, for this moment, anyway, there appears to be a lull. The death count on Sunday was the lowest it has been in weeks. And that could easily accelerate at some point, maybe soon, and some people are predicting it will. But the question remains for policymakers what to do next. Have mass quarantines successfully contained this virus? Growing scientific evidence suggests that they have not contained this virus very successfully. Now, there are some leaders in America who are closely following the science on this, and in the communities they run, restrictions are beginning to lift in response to this reality. Life is slowly returning to normal for them. But many other politicians seem gravely disappointed by this development. Seeing Americans live freely for the first time in months enrages them. It means their own power is dissipating; it is slipping away. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And so they stomp their feet in frustration as they watch it. They pour their venom onto social media and red-faced hits on cable news. They love this pandemic, this tragedy -- every sad minute of it. It makes them feel indispensable, omnipotent, like gods. They desperately don't want it to end. They're saying that out loud in effect. Now, you may find their attitude baffling because, of course, for the rest of us, a return to life is the greatest possible blessing. We have a lot to look forward to. And it's spring. But that doesn't mean we should forget what happened and how. We shouldn't forget; we should remember. And as we do remember, we ought to work to prevent it from ever happening again, and that means being very clear about how this began. We know a lot more about that than we did six weeks ago. This new information is not thanks to our press corps. Reporters are supposed to be open-minded and curious -- that was once their job description. But our media are no longer interested in learning what they don't know. They're not journalists anymore. They're gatekeepers. They're heavies for the professional class. They believe their job is to make sure that no prole in America, ever, has an unauthorized thought. Wherever free-thinking emerges, our media are there to slap it down and suppress it. So, for months, they demanded we not think about where this virus came from. "Stop thinking!" Any suggestion that it may have come from China, they told us, was dangerously racist. Jim Acosta, CNN chief White House correspondent: The president referred to the coronavirus as a" foreign virus." And I think it's going to smack -- it's going to come across to a lot of Americans as smacking of xenophobia. John Heilemann, MSNBC contributor: Xenophobic wartime Trump where he thinks the only path now is to basically declare the virus public enemy No. 1, paint it in somewhat racist terms. Karin Jeane-Pierre, MSNBC contributor: The xenophobia and the racism and outbreak is such a common thing, and it is incredibly dangerous. It is problematic and it is scary and I just really want to call that out. Cecilia Vega, ABC News reporter: Why you keep calling this the "Chinese virus"? Why do you keep using this? A lot of people say it is racist? President Donald Trump: It's not racist at all. No. Not at all. It comes from China, that's why. "Why do you keep calling this the Chinese virus?" Hilarious. It would be amusing to ask HR departments in network television why they exclusively hire morons with no self-awareness. Maybe they're cheaper. As China downplayed the epidemic internationally, the Chinese government was busy stockpiling medical supplies for itself, taking them from the rest of the world for itself. Tying this pandemic to China is not racist. It is true. It came from China. And as we're now learning, it could only have come from China in the way that it did. Over the weekend, "The Daily Telegraph," an Australian newspaper, ran an amazing story. It consisted of excerpts from a new 15-page Intelligence assessment on China's role in the disaster. This assessment was written by officials from the so-called "Five Eyes" -- the United States, Britain, Canada, Australia and New Zealand -- their combined Intelligence. It was a multinational effort. In effect, this new report confirms much of what we've suspected. No, the virus likely did not come from mammals, that, for some reason, were being sold in a seafood market in Wuhan. Not from bats, not from pangolins, whatever those are. No. Instead, it much more likely came from a research lab, as the Chinese all but admitted at the outset. As this assessment notes, the Wuhan Institute of Virology was performing extensive research on bat coronaviruses at the time of the outbreak. Here's the full timeline that the document lays out. It's fascinating. We've known some of this, some we didn't know. Here it is. By early December, authorities in China knew that this disease could spread from person-to-person. That's a very important thing to know about a coronavirus. Coronaviruses live in animals, but the ones that can spread to human beings, by definition, are dangerous to us. They lied about that. The government of Taiwan knew. They issued a warning about it in late December. Experts in Hong Kong knew, too; they did the same on January 4th. We're squabbling about lockdowns. The governor of Maine threatens to arrest people for having lunch in public. Police in New York tackle and assault citizens for going outside. That's the debate in this country. That's not the debate in China. Why? Because the Chinese government has bigger plans. By the time this pandemic has played out, China plans to rule the world. Yet, despite the overwhelming evidence, the Chinese Communist Party claimed, no, the virus could not be spread from person-to-person. And then China convinced the World Health Organization to repeat this deadly lie, which they did continuously until January 20th. On New Year's Eve, China began censoring online search engines in their country. Chinese authorities suppressed searches for terms like "Wuhan unknown pneumonia, SARS variation" and "Wuhan seafood market." On January 2nd, Hubei Province's health authority ordered genomics companies to stop testing for the new virus, ordered them to destroy -- not save -- destroy any samples of the virus they had already collected. One day later, China's National Health Commission banned the publication of any research on the virus. In the middle of an outbreak that became an epidemic that became a global pandemic, they banned research. Day by day this cover-up became crazier and more intense. From January 5th to January 18th, Wuhan officials refused to offer any updates on the spread of the virus. On January 14th, the chief of China's National Health Commission warned, in private, that the Wuhan coronavirus is very likely to become a "major public health event." In other words, a disaster in which many would die. But the Chinese government hid that news from the world. We didn't know because they hid it. Ten days later, authorities in China blocked the Wuhan Institute of Virology from sharing viral samples with colleagues around the world, including at the University of Texas. Meanwhile, Chinese doctors who tried to warn the public -- and there were several -- were arrested, punished and possibly murdered. On January 2nd, Chinese state media announced the arrest of eight people. Chinese police warned the public not to "fabricate rumors" -- not to spread rumors, not to believe rumors. So, why was China doing all of this? To save face, obviously, but there were other reasons. A new report by the Department of Homeland Security suggests one of those reasons. As China downplayed the epidemic internationally, the Chinese government was busy stockpiling medical supplies for itself, taking them from the rest of the world for itself. In January, China increased imports of surgical masks by 278 percent. They increased imports of surgical gowns by 72 percent, of surgical gloves by 32 percent. In February, meanwhile, Chinese medical supply exports dropped dramatically. But at first, the numbers didn't reflect that. People were confused. Why? Because China delayed the research of trade data to hide what they were doing. And then the Chinese government began emitting smokescreens in the media. They used Western race guilt as a defensive weapon against the West. While China imposed tough internal travel restrictions, for example, it attacked Western governments for any restrictions they thought about placing on China as racist. The result: Many thousands of people left Wuhan and came to Western countries where they started outbreaks in dozens of cities -- New York, Seattle, Milan. At the same time, Chinese diplomats began telling the world that the virus actually had come from America, maybe from the U.S. military, maybe from a lab. They denounced any claims to the contrary as -- I'll give you three guesses -- racist, and it worked. Of course, it worked. That's why they did it. As the European Union prepared a report on the coronavirus, Chinese diplomats pressured the EU successfully to remove language on China's lying, its rampant misinformation about it. Western media, needless to say, played along with all of this. Why? Because instinctively they know, at a gut level, that any criticism of Western civilization must be true, of course. So, it was easy for them to wind up as willing pawns of Chinese government propaganda -- and pawns they were. So, that's how it all began, according to this multinational intel report. The question for us is, what happens next? And of course, that chapter has not yet been written. We're squabbling about lockdowns. The governor of Maine threatens to arrest people for having lunch in public. Police in New York tackle and assault citizens for going outside. That's the debate in this country. That's not the debate in China. Why? Because the Chinese government has bigger plans. By the time this pandemic has played out, China plans to rule the world. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So, for the West, the coronavirus has been a bewildering disaster that we will be recovering from for a long time. But for the Chinese government, which thinks long term, the whole thing has been a blessing. In fact, they believe it is the beginning of a new Chinese century. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on May 4, 2020 CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Power Players of the Week: Educators using tech and humor to reach students during coronavirus crisis. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. We shouldn’t wait for Teacher Appreciation Day and Teacher Appreciation Week to celebrate the women and men who are changing the world by shaping the lives of America’s students – but here we are, and it would be impossible to laud them too highly. Loss has a way of magnifying what really matters, and the shuttering of schools and canceling of classes due to the coronavirus pandemic has caused many of us to realize once again how much we appreciate our kids’ teachers. A good teacher doesn’t just educate or edify, they open the world and encourage children to wonder what’s out there for them – and discover how they can do their part to contribute to the greater good. REP. WARREN DAVIDSON: CORONAVIRUS RELIEF — MAKE CONGRESS WORK AGAIN BEFORE MORE DEALS APPROVED My first teacher in kindergarten was the kind Mrs. Smith. I arrived reluctantly and with some resentment on that first day of school. I enjoyed my freedom and didn’t want to be cooped up in a classroom all day. But by the time the last bell rang, I was hooked. Mrs. Smith helped to lay a foundation in my heart to love school and learning. I’ll never forget Mr. Fried in the 6th grade. Nobody messed with him. He was a man’s man, a deputy reserve sheriff, a black belt karate instructor and a no-nonsense dude. I excitedly joined his karate class. He was Mr. Rules, no excuses put-your-sorries-in-a -sack kind of guy. One particular memory of him stands out above the rest. As it was, Mr. Fried was friends with Chuck Norris, who also taught karate at the time. Yes, the Chuck Norris. One day, our classes met in competition. Mr. Fried’s brown belt student beat Chuck Norris’ black belt protégé! My 9th grade history teach was Mr. Hawkings, who later became mayor of my hometown. I thought he was cool. There’s an old saying that the best stories are full of lies that tell the truth, but Mr. H's stories were not only the best – they were all true. He knew how to tell a story and make history come alive. In 10th grade there was Mr. Fields. He was a hippie and challenged everything. As a teenager, I was drawn to his independent streak and admired him for it, even though I didn’t agree with him on many issues. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But my most influential teacher was Mr. Paul Moro. He was my high school football coach and a man amongst men. His motto was simple: Work hard. Play hard. As tough as he was, he was compassionate, kind and connected with all the kids. He made you feel like the most important person in the world. Coach Moro was more than a great teacher and football coach to me. He changed the trajectory of my life by paying for me to go to a Fellowship of Christian Athletes Camp at Point Loma University one summer. I became a Christian at that event. Up until that point, every man in my life had failed me – chief among them, my father and stepfather. From Paul Moro I learned about character and the epitome of character, Jesus Christ. Even though children aren’t in physical classrooms these days, I’d like to encourage you to reach out to their teachers and express appreciation. They have a tough job. You might also want to reach back through the years and remember a teacher or two who made a big difference in your life. If they’re still living and you can track them down, do it. You can never overestimate the power of gratitude and appreciation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP When Coach Moro passed away last year, I had the privilege of eulogizing him at his memorial service. It was held on the football field, and the stands were full of former students and players – all of whom came out to pay their respects and pay tribute to a man who helped shaped their lives. Our teachers hold the key to tomorrow for many kids – let’s lift them up and let them know how much they mean to us. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JIM DALY

'It shocks me' so few media outlets are interested in Tara Reade's story,' says Ari Fleischer discussing how the press is covering sexual assault allegations against Joe Biden Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Even if the sexual assault allegations by former Joe Biden staff member Tara Reade turn out to be false there are still problems the former vice president faces. The first and most important of these is whether he can win his party’s nomination. I’m generally suspicious when it comes to politics. Why has Reade waited until now to come forward? Biden has run for president before and several times for senator. He was vetted before Barack Obama picked him as his running mate. The timing seems too convenient. JUSTIN HASKINS: JOE BIDEN'S POLL NUMBERS — HE'S IN TROUBLE WITH THIS KEY VOTING BLOC Are there forces within the Democratic Party – supporters of Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., for example – who don’t believe Biden has the mental capacity to endure what will be a brutal campaign? Are they undermining him by canceling or delaying party primaries? Will he show up at his party’s convention (if there is one) with an insufficient number of delegates to clinch the nomination, setting off a “trade war” among delegates won by Sanders, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., and others? Even The New York Times editorial board, no friend of President Trump, has called for a full investigation of Reade’s assertions. Then there’s the question of how Biden presents himself. In the controlled environment of his home, Biden has had difficulty stringing together coherent sentences during online interviews and often seems confused. Trump is no great orator either, but the president comes off as Daniel Webster to Biden’s Porky Pig. Biden’s positions on China have been especially uninformed. In a speech one year ago, Biden responded to fears expressed by some that Beijing was a major foreign threat: “China is going to eat our lunch? They’re not bad folks, folks…They’re not competition for us.” Early this year he criticized President Trump’s decision to halt air travel from China, calling it “hysterical xenophobic.” He later changed his position, as he has on so many other issues. Could this have had anything to do with son Hunter Biden’s lucrative business deals in China? Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., subtly raised the state of Biden’s mental health when he expressed doubts the former vice president could win the presidency without “fumbling.”  Republicans also have a file full of quotes from Biden’s fellow Democrats. Sanders may have been the most critical. During the debates, Sanders attacked Biden for supporting the invasion of Iraq, for his trade policies, which Sanders claimed cost the U.S. over four million jobs, and for Biden’s support of American trade relations with China. Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., also repeatedly attacked Biden. She said his criminal justice policies contributed to “mass incarceration,” that he opposed busing, and that he supported the status quo when it came to health care. Only two months ago, Warren accused Biden of favoring the re-election of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and that, despite his claim to the contrary, Biden was not instrumental in the creation of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER They weren’t done. On the campaign trail, former South Bend, Indiana Mayor Pete Buttigieg repeatedly criticized Biden, saying his support of the 1994 crime bill “did so much harm,” that he supported the invasion of Iraq, which Buttigieg called the worst foreign policy decision in his lifetime, and that Biden had the same Washington, D.C., mindset when we need to “bring new voices” to the capital. Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J., subtly raised the state of Biden’s mental health when he expressed doubts the former vice president could win the presidency without “fumbling.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Now they all have, or will likely soon, endorse Biden, claiming he would make a great president. Voters have a right to ask if Biden once made bad decisions, how will he suddenly make good ones as president? These and many more sound bites from Democrats critical of Biden now and in prior years will likely show up in Trump reelection ads. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

Co-founder of Inovio Pharmaceuticals Dr. David Weiner details the current status of a possible coronavirus vaccine, including efficacy trials which he says should start this summer. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. Americans are paying a fearsome price for the government’s strict lockdowns of American life and commerce, and now comes evidence that targeted lockdowns aimed at protecting those who are most vulnerable to the coronavirus would be better for public health and the economy. That conclusion comes in a new working paper from the National Bureau of Economic Research by MIT economists Daron Acemoglu, Victor Chernozhukov, Iván Werning and Michael Whinston. The authors compared relative risks of infection, hospitalization and death for the young, the middle-aged and those over age 65. They then compared strict lockdowns that treat all age groups the same with a more targeted strategy that protects the old. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER “Interestingly, we find that semi-targeted policies that simply apply a strict lockdown on the oldest group can achieve the majority of the gains from fully-targeted policies,” the authors write. “For example, a semi-targeted policy that involves the lockdown of those above 65 until a vaccine arrives can release the young and middle-aged groups back into the economy much more quickly, and still achieve a much lower fatality rate in the population (just above 1% of the population instead of 1.83% with the optimal uniform policy).” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Interesting is right. The universal lockdowns of March and April have been aimed specifically at preventing hospitals from being overrun with Covid-19 patients and thus reducing the death rate. But the paper says a targeted lockdown aimed at seniors combined with other policies like social distancing will reduce the death rate by more. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING THIS EDITORIAL IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

Mattie Duppler, senior fellow at the National Taxpayers Union, calls the comments 'tone deaf.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Last month, Congress made history by passing the CARES Act — the $2 trillion coronavirus pandemic relief package — by voice vote. Last week, the House safely, albeit briefly, returned to extend several programs. Otherwise, however, Congress has been eerily silent. No doubt individual members have been busy working via Zoom and conference call — I certainly have. But Congress needs to lead by example and return to full session, following the House rules for amendment and debate. The House was expected back in D.C. on May 4, but now Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., has a new plan. Even before we passed “Phase 3.5” of Congress’ coronavirus response package, Pelosi started working on “Phase 4.” This interminable “recess” period enables a select cadre of leadership to hammer out the next coronavirus deal with minimal input from most of the country’s elected representatives. BERNIE MARCUS: CORONAVIRUS DEVASTATION – HOLD CHINA ACCOUNTABLE, THIS STATE'S ACTION A GOOD START Every representative should provide input and be able to offer amendments, but Pelosi would rather bypass the legislative process and continue shunning regular order. Keeping the House from convening takes the heat off the negotiations and relegates most of Congress to an open checkbook for whatever emerges from behind closed doors. Without returning to full legislative session, members of Congress don’t have as much of a voice in the hastily written trillion-dollar bills with flaws that amount to legislative malpractice. Rapid stimulus funding has overtaken deliberating the substance of these bills; that must change. Given the cracks we’re starting to see in the CARES Act, it’s only responsible for Congress to deliberate more carefully before approving another wave of spending. For example, states have asked the federal government for more money. But the reality is Congress already funded state and local governments to the tune of $765 billion. That includes $260 billion for unemployment insurance, $150 billion for coronavirus relief, $175 billion for hospitals and health care providers, $50 billion in increased Medicaid funding, and hundreds of billions of dollars in K-12 and higher education funding, mass transit funding, programs for children and families, public housing, economic development grants, Justice Department grants, and election security grants. In my home state of Ohio, that has translated to roughly $4.5-billion, with more on the way. These budget-busting relief packages have been implemented with no process for debate and amendment and that needs to change before Congress creates even greater distortions to the federal budget.  More than additional funds, states need flexibility to use money already appropriated. It seems that governors and legislatures know their needs better than D.C. central planners. Ohio, for example, has reformed pension obligations, funded them, and created a rainy-day fund. Other states effectively commit fraud by promising defined benefits and failing to fund them. States not only know their own needs better than D.C., they already have access to bond markets to fund additional needs and can pay risk-appropriate rates on the debt rather than socialize decades of poor decisions across all other states and taxpayers. These budget-busting relief packages have been implemented with no process for debate and amendment and that needs to change before Congress creates even greater distortions to the federal budget. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The country’s relationship with Congress has been purely transactional for a long time. Over the years, a faltering Congress has delegated away many of its powers — except the power of the purse. This pandemic further highlights the extent to which Congress has disempowered itself. House leadership enjoys greater influence at the expense of the institution itself while diminishing the role of individual members. The Capitol Hill campus in Washington, D.C. is probably a far safer place to work than many of the businesses open continually in Ohio and across the nation. During the pandemic, the Capitol grounds and buildings have been closed to all unescorted visitors, and that probably won’t change for many weeks to come. Only members of Congress, staff, Capitol police, and essential personnel move about freely. As we saw last week, social distancing in voting is possible, and it can also work for committee hearings. Congress can and must work safely, but soon. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As the Senate returns to work, Pelosi is keeping House members home — and out of the negotiations. The American people, and every member of the House, should insist on fully functional representation. Make Congress work again! CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM REP. WARREN DAVIDSON

Fox News contributor Ari Fleischer on voter reaction to sexual assault allegations against Biden. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. Joe Biden has never been a good presidential candidate. With his personal problems mounting, the plain truth remains that Joe Biden is not able to unify the Democrat Party. The disclosure of his Senate papers housed at the University of Delaware could well be the final straw in breaking his candidacy and Biden knows it. Last April, Biden was the presumptive nominee of the Democrats – or so the left-of-center media told us. Once again, Biden looked like a good candidate before he got into the race. As I said in my April 1, 2019, column, Biden “is a good potential candidate but a bad actual candidate.” Twice before Biden ran for president and both times he failed badly, despite media claims he was an ideal candidate. This third time hasn’t been the charm either. JUSTIN HASKINS: JOE BIDEN'S POLL NUMBERS — HE'S IN TROUBLE WITH THIS KEY VOTING BLOC Biden dropped from the top perch as soon as he started campaigning in 2019. By the fall, Democrats were flirting with candidate after candidate to replace the weak Joe Biden. First, it was Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass. Then former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg was supposed to come to the rescue. After the first of the year, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., was poised to win the nomination. To save themselves from a socialist defeat in November, the Democrats “brokered” their nomination in broad daylight leading up to Super Tuesday. Former South Bend Mayor Pete Buttigieg and Sen. Amy Klobuchar, D-Minn., were induced to drop out of the race so fourth-place Biden could win primaries over Sanders. With just two candidates in the race, Democrats lined up behind Biden, to the point that Sanders conceded. Even so, the Democrat Party remained divided. Despite mounting endorsements, Biden scored the worst every enthusiasm rating for a party nominee in a Washington Post/ABC poll. Part of that stemmed from Sanders followers who were upset once again about the treatment of their candidate and the direction of the Democratic Party. Normally, a presumptive nominee moves toward the middle once a nomination is secured. But Biden’s nomination, as a technical matter, is not secured. He still does not have the necessary delegates. To quell doubts within his party, Biden has had to move left to gain the support of the far left among Democrats. Biden has spoken out more about environmental issues – even saying the COVID-19 crisis was an opportunity to enact Green New Deal policies not favored by most Americans. Biden has adopted part of the free college mantra of Warren and Sanders, as well as Warren’s position on bankruptcies. Biden also has walked away from the Obama administration’s record on deportations. Unfortunately, that still has not convinced the left side of his party that he is good enough. For example, 25 percent of Bernie voters are still not sold on Biden and only 50 percent of Latinos expressed a willingness to vote for him in a recent poll. All of which brings us to Delaware. In a recent interview in which he denied sexual assault allegations made by his former Senate staffer Tara Reade, Biden made this extraordinary comment:   The reason Biden wants his records kept under wraps is that he knows they will prevent him from unifying Democrats. His positions will further divide his party and divided parties cannot win national elections. “There’s a lot of things — of speeches I’ve made, positions I’ve taken, interviews that I did overseas with people — all of those things related to my job. And the idea that they would all be made public … while I was running for public office, they can be really taken out of context ... For example, when I go, when I met with Putin or when I met with whomever.” That is a mind-boggling position for a candidate for the highest office in the land to take. Biden literally is saying that he does not want Americans to know the positions he has taken prior to voting for him. Better yet, despite D.C. Democrats impeaching President Trump – with Joe Biden's support – over what he said to a foreign leader, Biden tells us that what he said to foreign leaders is off-limits. The reason for all that is the plain truth encapsulated in this headline from the liberal LA Times in March 2019: "The burden of a 40-year career: Some of Joe Biden’s record doesn’t age well." CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That is why Biden doesn’t want files about his public speeches disgorged. We can’t forget that the moment in the sun for Sen. Kamala Harris, D-Calif., was when she attacked Biden on his busing record. He also knows his prior position on gay marriage, i.e. voting to outlaw it, is out of step with today’s Democrats, as well as his stance on reforming Social Security and Medicare. The reason Biden wants his records kept under wraps is that he knows they will prevent him from unifying Democrats. His positions will further divide his party and divided parties cannot win national elections. Look no further than the Democrat Party of 1968 that split over Vietnam and lost to Richard Nixon. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In sum, Biden’s papers are an inconvenient truth about his record that he doesn’t want to be rehashed at this moment in time. He literally doesn’t want American’s to know what he has said and done in an era when his party has attempted to investigate every aspect of Donald Trump imaginable. Fortunately, enough Americans are wise enough to see through Joe’s smokescreen. The lack of enthusiasm for his candidacy, while ignored by some pollsters, speaks volumes – perhaps even more than the volumes of papers Biden is seeking to hide. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TOM DEL BECCARO

President Trump says he's been treated worse by the media than any president. At Sunday night’s town hall on Fox News Channel President Donald Trump was asked about the media. I bet he liked that question.  Now, I'm not sure, but I think he liked that question! PRESIDENT TRUMP: I think I like that question. I'm not sure, but I think I like that question. I appreciate it and I appreciate the prayers, too, very much.  TRUMP SAYS HE WANTED TO TAKE SWIFT ACTION AGAINST CORONAVIRUS Look, I am greeted with a hostile press, the likes of which no president has ever seen. The closest would be that gentleman right up there. They always said Lincoln. Nobody got treated worse than Lincoln. I believe I am treated worse.  And I feel that if I was kind to them, I'd be, I'd be walked off the stage. I mean, they come at you with the most horrible, horrendous, biased questions. And you see it, 94 or 95 percent of the press is hostile. I know, I know -- Lincoln's run didn’t end well. But Trump was referring to assaults by the media, not by disgruntled actors (although they’re easily confused). The danger with asking Trump about the press is that it creates that never-ending media spiral. The media attacks Trump, Trump fights back. The media responds angrily since fighting back is breaking the rules -- So Trump rips them again -- which they cover again, like its D-Day. Meanwhile, we all remember who helped elect Trump. The media. And, some of today’s loudest Trump haters fawned all over him during election season. But I'd rather have a president who is generous with insults but stingy with blood and treasure. Does a selfish media agree? In the Hollywood Reporter, the press laments how exhausted they are covering Trump.... It’s the hectic pace they say. So, would they have preferred someone slow and sleepy who just bombs crap? Then they also complained about covering impeachment -- which was their own obsession,  that let a virus sneak up on us. Extend that cluelessness over decades -- you wonder how much stuff they really missed. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So now they pine for normalcy -- when they can slow down. And take selfies again. Which leaves them with Joe. He's perfect. Old. Slow. Loves a good nap. You won’t break a sweat covering him. Plus, he just promised today, that as president, there'll be "no bullying of the media." What a telling deal, now, given that he's being dogged by a sex scandal. So media, what do you think? Joe just said, if you elect him, it all goes back to sleep. A return to magnificent hibernation! CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Joe will be the lapdog that won't bite. He'll just sniff. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld's monologue on "The Five"  on May 4, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

Dr. Mark Siegel explains why he is hopeful that a coronavirus vaccine will be discovered by the end of the year Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In February 1976 at Fort Dix, N.J., a military recruit died within 24 hours of a new kind of “swine” flu. When 500 more people acquired it and four got sick, a public panic ensued (fueled by fears of another pandemic like the 1918 Spanish flu, which killed over 50 million worldwide) and a rush to a vaccine began. The federal government agreed to accept liability for adverse events. By October the vaccine was ready, and by November, more than 6 million doses had been given. In December, serious side effects emerged, and by January, more than 500 cases of Guillain-Barre Syndrome had been reported (linked to the vaccine) with 25 deaths, and the pandemic never came. What happened instead was millions of dollars of lawsuits. BERNIE MARCUS: CORONAVIRUS DEVASTATION – HOLD CHINA ACCOUNTABLE, THIS STATE'S ACTION A GOOD START Ever since then, the federal government has been reluctant to take complete responsibility for emergency vaccine production. But the Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act signed into law by President Bush in 2005, protects vaccine manufacturers from financial risk during a declared public health emergency. It was utilized during the rush for an H1N1 swine flu vaccine during the pandemic of 2009. And now, when the ferocious and wildly contagious new coronavirus has convinced the Trump administration to step up and throw caution to the wind. This is an inspiring development and a proactive use of government authority (a joint program chaired by Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar and Department of Defense Secretary Mark Esper) that should be lauded no matter which side of the political aisle you are on. Operation Warp Speed is an unprecedented, no-holds-barred program to speed discovery, production and large-scale manufacturing of a vaccine against COVID 19. It is not just ambitious and unprecedented science, it is also courageous, government at its best. Billions of dollars in health care costs and many thousands if not millions of lives stand to be saved if this project succeeds, with the government financially backing massive production and assuming all liability. This vaccine project is so ambitious that it is being compared to the Manhattan Project from WWII, where we won the race against the Germans to develop the atomic bomb. I spoke with Azar about Operation Warp Speed on SiriusXm Doctor Radio this week. He was more excited than I’ve ever seen him. He talked about changing the paradigm, assuming the risk and matching manufacturing with the emerging science so that by the time a vaccine candidate makes it through trials, production will have already ramped up to match it. The goal, as the president announced on Sunday night, will be to produce a viable vaccine by the end of the year. As opposed to the 1976 swine flu fiasco, in 2020 we have a real pandemic that has already killed more than 60,000 Americans and is, unfortunately, not going to stop there. “We have to put the full weight of all of government, all of industry, behind this,” Azar said to me. “Vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics. Money is not the question here. The question is the ability and willingness to challenge the traditional development of timelines and paradigms. You know, the normal way that vaccine or drug development works is you develop it, you do a little trial, then you do a second trial, then you do a third trial, then if it hits you decide OK, now I’ll start doing commercial scale of manufacturing, and then that’s just months and months and years  ... CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER "We, the U.S. government, can actually take on that risk. So… we have assembled a portfolio of potential vaccines. We have assessed each of them based on the manufacturer, the platform, the manufacturing scalability, the precedent nature of the molecule … and vector so that we know if this is something that likely is going to work. And we invest in that. "What we are also going to do is invest in manufacturing at the same time. So that we can scale up. And that means we may end up with vaccine manufacturing capacity that we don’t need. And so be it. Because we are going to put those bets against molecules very early on. So that if we get a hit we are going to be able to scale production immediately also.” Some of the vaccine candidates utilize new techniques of biogenetic engineering while others rely on an older more tried-and-true inactivated viral vector. In all cases the technology is promising and safety in small trials has already been shown for several of the candidates. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As opposed to the 1976 swine flu fiasco, in 2020 we have a real pandemic that has already killed more than 60,000 Americans and is, unfortunately, not going to stop there. As with the Manhattan Project, my bet is, once again, the U.S. government will defy all the odds and win. This is what government is intended for; to make the bet and assume the risk and, if they win, to save many of our lives. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. MARC SIEGEL

'They were out to get the Trump administration,' says Judge Ken Starr discusses Jim Comey's handling of Michael Flynn's case Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, President Trump’s national security adviser in the early days of the administration, pled guilty on Dec. 1, 2017, to lying to FBI supervisory officials during a Jan. 24, 2017, White House interview. Under Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1001, it is a felony to lie about a matter within the jurisdiction of the executive, legislative or judicial branch. Flynn is now moving to: 1) withdraw his guilty plea based on his original attorneys’ alleged conflicts of interest; and 2) dismiss the case based on alleged egregious government misconduct. Documents were partially declassified and released last week and filed in federal district court by Flynn’s new attorneys. Additional documents are being declassified and will undoubtedly be filed as well. What do the documents released so far reveal? They tell us that, whether or not Flynn wins on his motions, the Jan. 24, 2017, interview was a corrupt set-up, conceived and orchestrated by then-FBI Director James Comey and then-Deputy Director Andrew McCabe. ANDREW McCARTHY: FBI SET UP MICHAEL FLYNN TO PURSUE TRUMP-RUSSIA INVESTIGATION It is important to consider the recent document releases in United States v. Michael Flynn in light of the overall Crossfire Hurricane investigation. Crossfire Hurricane, launched on July 31, 2016, was the name given to the FBI’s counterintelligence investigation into possible collusion, witting or unwitting, between members of Trump’s campaign team and Russians attempting to influence the 2016 election. Crossfire Hurricane was not begun based on any allegations related to Flynn. Instead, the Bureau authorized Crossfire Hurricane after it learned, third-hand, that Russia may have “suggested” assisting the Trump campaign by anonymously releasing dirt on Hillary Clinton. An FBI subfile was created on Flynn, not because of any allegations against him, but because of the general’s known contacts with Russia. Such contacts would hardly be surprising for a former director of the Defense Intelligence Agency who was a Trump adviser rumored to be Trump’s choice for national security adviser if he won the election. The subfile investigation of Flynn was known as Crossfire Razor, or Razor, for short. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The documents made public last week show that Flynn had already been completely cleared in the Crossfire Razor investigation by Jan. 4, 2017. A draft closing communication was prepared on that date by the Crossfire Razor team, but the decision to close the file had been made well before then. Such a draft closing communication would never have been commenced unless the case agents had received prior approval from their FBI supervisor. In fact, later that same day Peter Strzok, deputy assistant director of the FBI’s Counterintelligence Division, was surprised to discover that the file was still open. Strzok texted Lisa Page, legal counsel to Deputy Director McCabe, that “our utter incompetence actually helps us.” (Strzok was later removed from Special Counsel Robert Mueller’s investigative team, and ultimately fired, after Department of Justice Inspector General Michael Horowitz disclosed that Strzok and Page, who were lovers at the time, had exchanged text messages during the Crossfire Hurricane investigation exhibiting extreme bias against Trump and discussing an “insurance policy” should he win the election.) Strzok ordered that Razor be kept open. It was kept open under the guise of investigating Flynn for a possible Logan Act violation based on Flynn’s late December 2016 post-election phone calls to then Russian Ambassador to the United States Sergey Kislyak. These calls, which were approved by senior members of the Trump transition team, relayed the incoming administration’s requests regarding a pending United Nations resolution, and Russia’s anticipated response to the Obama administration’s sanctions against Russia for interfering in the 2016 elections. Those sanctions resulted in the expulsion of a large number of Russian diplomatic personnel from the United States. Keep in mind that Flynn was an official member of the Trump transition team at the time of these phone calls and had already been designated as Trump’s soon-to-be installed national security adviser. According to the statement of the offense in United States v. Michael Flynn, Flynn called Kislyak on Dec. 29, 2016, “and requested that Russia not escalate the situation and only respond to the U.S. sanctions in a reciprocal manner.” Why is all of this important? Because there was simply no way that Flynn was ever going to be prosecuted for a Logan Act violation. The Logan Act was passed in 1799. It prohibits citizens from carrying on correspondence, without the authority of the United States, with any foreign government with the intent to influence the measures or conduct of that foreign government in relation to disputes or controversies with the United States or with intent to defeat the measures of the United States. Only two people have ever been charged under it, the last one in the 1850s, and neither of them went to trial. By late 2016, the Logan Act had long been considered by the American political and legal establishment to be a constitutionally dubious dead letter. Even if it was not a dead letter, and even if it could be applied to Flynn’s calls, no federal prosecutor would dream of charging an incoming national security adviser under the Logan Act for making the kinds of phone calls Flynn made three weeks before the inauguration. In short, there was no law enforcement purpose for the Flynn interview. The purpose of the interview was to have Flynn lie and get him fired, which is reflected in notes taken by Bill Priestap, then-director of the FBI’s Counterintelligence Division and Strzok’s boss. According to news reports, Priestap’s notes were reportedly taken during or after a discussion with McCabe and/or Comey, the day Flynn was interviewed by the FBI. What happened next? The sequence of events is very important here. Flynn was cleared in Crossfire Razor by Jan. 4, 2017, but we now know that Strzok, McCabe and Comey kept the file open under the guise of a possible Logan Act violation. Somebody then illegally leaked the classified Flynn-Kislyak phone call transcripts to the Washington Post’s David Ignatius, suggesting to Ignatius that Flynn may have violated the Logan Act by discussing sanctions with the Russian ambassador. It was an abuse of power on par with the worst such abuses this country has ever seen. On Jan. 12, the Post obligingly published Ignatius’s story, making public the possible Logan Act violations. Between the 12th and 15th Flynn denied to certain transition team officials that he had discussed sanctions with Kislyak. We don’t know if he did so deliberately or simply forget the details of the Kislyak conversations. It would be odd if Flynn deliberately lied to these officials since he had obtained instructions from senior transition team officials on what he should say to Kislyak and had subsequently reported back to these same officials on his conversations. Plus, Flynn knew that the call was being monitored and that transcripts existed. Flynn’s denials were repeated to the press by certain transition team officials, including Vice President-Elect Pence. On Jan. 24, four days into the new Trump administration, McCabe, with Comey’s blessing, set up an interview with Flynn, in a misleading manner that violated the very DOJ-White House protocols Comey professes to hold sacred. The White House counsel was not informed of the interview. Instead, McCabe told Flynn that “in light of the recent media coverage” of the Kislyak conversations, “Director Comey and I felt that we needed to have two of our agents sit down with the general and hear from him the details of those conversations.” McCabe told Flynn that “the quickest way to get this done was to have a conversation between him and the agents only.” Comey later admitted that he wanted to catch Flynn off guard in the relaxed unorganized atmosphere of a days-old Trump administration. And that’s what happened. The officials who interviewed Flynn were none other than Strzok and Supervisory Special Agent Joe Pientka. They reported that Flynn treated them as colleagues and did not act in any way like he was lying about the Kislyak conversations. In other words, he may well have forgotten that he discussed the sanctions with Kislyak. The documents released last week prove beyond any doubt that Flynn was set up in something very similar to a perjury trap. A perjury trap occurs when the facts are known to prosecutors and investigators and the only purpose of the interview is to catch the subject in a lie. This was a false statement trap since Flynn was not under oath, but the principle is the same. In fact, this was worse than the classic perjury trap, because in a perjury trap a legitimate investigation is underway. That was not the case here. Flynn had already been cleared in Crossfire Razor and the case file was only kept open under the false pretense of conducting a Logan Act investigation. It was a fake investigation. It was sleazy and sickening and any government official who participated or acquiesced in it is utterly corrupt. Many of Flynn’s supporters maintain that he was entrapped. This is inaccurate. Entrapment is a defense to a crime. Entrapment assumes that you committed an offense but were entrapped into doing it. Flynn now maintains that he did not lie to the FBI. Besides, we do not want to confuse the gross impropriety of what was done to Flynn with the fact-intensive question of whether the charges against Flynn should or will be dismissed. Flynn has many legal hurdles yet to clear and stands before a judge who does not seem to like either him or his attorney. Flynn also admitted under oath on the day of his guilty plea that he deliberately lied to the FBI. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP No, entrapment is the wrong word. As I have detailed above, what the Comey-McCabe-Strzok-Page cabal did to Flynn was far worse than entrapment. It was an abuse of power on par with the worst such abuses this country has ever seen. The law enforcement elite of an incumbent administration used the very mechanisms established to protect our national security to attack a campaign of the opposing party and continue that attack as that campaign transitioned into power. President Trump is right about one thing. This should never happen again to any other president. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SOLOMON WISENBERG

The Trump administration ramps up attacks on China over its handling of the COVID-19 pandemic; Fox News contributor Byron York reacts. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) owes the world answers to some pressing questions. After becoming aware of the coronavirus outbreak, why did China continue to allow flights from Wuhan to other parts of the world? And why did China buy an estimated 2.2 billion masks between Jan. 24 and the end of February? A new lawsuit filed by Missouri Attorney General Eric Schmitt may help us learn more. The Missouri suit seeks to hold the CCP accountable for the mass sickness, death and devastating economic harm that it has wrought through its deception regarding the virus’ existence and severity, as well as its suppression of critical public health information. LIZ PEEK: CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA – 4 WAYS US CAN START TO AVENGE DEATHS OF HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS The Missouri lawsuit alleges that the CCP delayed in notifying the World Health Organization (WHO) last December of the outbreak in China, in violation of international health regulations. Missouri also claims that the CCP intentionally withheld from the WHO evidence of human-to-human transmission of the virus for several weeks — critical information about its severity. As part of its campaign to suppress critical information, the Missouri complaint states that the CCP arrested eight doctors who sought to raise awareness about the virus and educate the public about its dangers. It also claims that numerous Chinese citizen-journalists who reported on the outbreak have gone missing in recent weeks. The Missouri lawsuit further calls out the CCP for failing to take necessary steps to prevent the spread of the virus even though it was well aware of its gravity. The complaint alleges that the government allowed citizens to travel to celebrate the Lunar New Year, both to and from Wuhan (i.e., COVID-19 ground zero), as well as to and from other countries. Missouri claims the CCP did nothing to stop mass gatherings — including in Wuhan — that were hot spots for transmission. The sum of these allegations is that the CCP — through its campaign of deception and denial — allowed the virus to rage undetected, penetrating global borders and increasing at an exponential rate. Missouri should be applauded for recognizing the massive harm that Chinese Communist Party has inflicted. Others are joining the call for the CCP to account, as well. But that’s not all. Not only did the CCP contribute to the severity of the pandemic, but it also hurt other countries, including the United States, by hoarding personal protective equipment (PPE), such as masks. China is the largest producer of PPE in the world but the Missouri lawsuit alleges that the CCP “[took] over factories that make masks on behalf of American companies” such as 3M to keep output for itself. According to the complaint, the scant PPE that China has continued to export to the rest of the world has been found in many instances to be defective. As a consequence of this malicious behavior, American health care providers have struggled to provide care during the pandemic, and are themselves at an increased risk of contracting the virus. All of this so that the CCP can gouge the price of masks and other PPE in the face of unprecedented demand. The effects of the coronavirus have been devastating. More than 3 million people have contracted the virus worldwide. The number of U.S. cases now exceeds one million, and nearly 70,000 Americans have died from the virus to date. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The figures showing the economic impact are similarly jaw-dropping. Across the United States, businesses are closing because the economic strain caused by the virus has proven too much to bear. The Missouri attorney general estimates that the economic loss to his state alone could be in the “tens of billions” of dollars — and that’s just one state. Last week, reports showed that 26.5 million Americans have filed for unemployment during the pandemic. In the coming months, the national unemployment rate is likely to hit 16 percent — or even higher. There haven’t been this many people out of work in the United States since the Great Depression. Missouri should be applauded for recognizing the massive harm that CCP has inflicted. Others are joining the call for the CCP to account, as well. The attorney general of Mississippi, Lynn Fitch, has filed a similar suit to Missouri’s. And last week, former U.N. Ambassador Nikki Haley’s organization, Stand for America, launched a petition to “Stop Communist China,” urging Congress to “investigate China for its role in the COVID-19 crisis and take measures to halt China’s influence in America and around the world.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP American businesses — especially small businesses — are facing an economic crisis we haven’t seen in our lifetimes. The road to recovery will likely be long and rocky. As Missouri Attorney General Schmitt said last week about China, “They are responsible for this and the responsibility lies directly at their feet.” I couldn’t agree more. The CCP has caused world upheaval (and even its own people are victims). I hope other states and organizations take up the fight in seeking justice. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BERNIE MARCUS

Alyssa Milano, Nancy Pelosi defend presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden; reaction and analysis on 'The Greg Gutfeld Show.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Stop the presses, the left-wing media learned a lesson about how to cover sexual allegations against politicians. Unfortunately, they learned the wrong lesson. For weeks, Tara Reade’s charge that Joe Biden forcibly penetrated her in 1993 was too hot to handle. None of the #MeToo crusaders would go near it, lest they hurt Biden and help re-elect Donald Trump. JUSTIN HASKINS: JOE BIDEN'S POLL NUMBERS — HE'S IN TROUBLE WITH THIS KEY VOTING BLOC That’s not the behavior of journalists. That’s the behavior of a Praetorian Guard. Then suddenly, the media blackout collapsed and is being replaced by an intense hunt for the long-ago truth. What changed? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Two things. First, the Biden protection racket drew a chorus of criticism over the obvious double standard in the way the same media and their Democratic masters trumpeted wild charges against Brett Kavanaugh during his Supreme Court confirmation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Nearly all the charges dealt with his high school and college years, none were supported by clear evidence, yet it was enough for the left to declare Kavanaugh a rapist. Politics doesn’t get any nastier. The second cause for the turnabout was Biden’s Friday interview on MSNBC. It was the first time he personally addressed ­Reade’s charge and while he was strong in his absolute denial, he failed to put the issue to rest. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

Reaction and analysis from former Reagan Education Sec. Bill Bennett and former Obama Education Sec. Arne Duncan. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  H.G. Wells once said, “Human history becomes more and more a race between education and catastrophe.” Closing our schools, out of fear of COVID-19, was just such a catastrophe. As more and more fear of the coronavirus was spreading throughout March, schools started to close — indefinitely. And by the middle of March, half of America’s nearly 57 million elementary and secondary students had their daily and routine educational and social life turned upside down. Schools were closed, and, in short order, all of our nation’s children were furloughed. It was perhaps understandable that at the beginning of the outbreak, with predictions of millions dead, we quickly and immediately put a pause on our nation’s schools. But as the evidence became clearer that children were far more affected by other and worse problems for them than the coronavirus, the schools should have opened up. The closings have caused, and will cause, even more social damage for a great many of these children and their parents than the coronavirus ever would. All to protect children from a disease that will not directly affect them. MITCHELL BARD: WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION LIES ABOUT ISRAEL ON CORONAVIRUS AND OTHER HEALTH ISSUES As of right now, fewer than 20 children have died from COVID-19 nationwide. In New York City, that number is six, each with underlying conditions. By contrast over 80 children nationwide have died from influenza. Yes, children can be carriers and transmitters of the coronavirus, but that was and is true of the flu as well — and it is increasingly apparent that children not only are more severely affected by the flu than the coronavirus, but they can transmit it more easily as well. And we never closed the schools down because of the flu. As one study from the British Medical Journal put it, “children have not played a substantive role in the intra-household transmission [of coronavirus].” Or, as Daniel Koch, the chief of infectious disease prevention for Switzerland, put it even more directly, “Young children are not infected and do not transmit the virus.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Because of the scare, we have radically upended our children's educational and social lives. As former New York Times reporter Alex Berenson put it, “The idea that we are denying children an education and in some cases, we're sticking children at home with abusive or drug-using parents, and they can't be seen by any other adults right now … is disgusting to me because children are not at risk here.” It is unclear how much of our children’s educational lives have been disrupted, but a minimum of two months has just been taken from them and their parents. As schools are still debating when and if they can re-open, or re-open for summer school or the fall, it may be much more than that. The standard argument that social policy is often deployed or changed “to protect our children” has been turned on its head; adults have engaged in some of the most dramatic social policy change in our history for something that will not harm children, while their solutions will. Their educational deficits may be the least of it. Schools and after-school programs and sports, after all, are not just the center of our children’s educational and social lives, they are often the place — and sometimes the only place — where many children receive nutritional meals, have strong adult presences, and are safe from harmful drugs and adults. For those children who are in functional homes, parents — already taxed from work and other coronavirus policy stresses — are taking on added responsibilities and work. This radical decision to close schools will not end well for too many children and adults. Interestingly, during this odd period, some unexpected questions are getting answered as some great things and some not-so-great things about our education system are revealing themselves. We are seeing inspiring and exemplary stories of teachers, principals, and even superintendents stepping up and rolling up their sleeves to chip in and interact more with their charges. But we're also seeing not so encouraging positions being taken by teacher unions and organizations. They are making more and more demands, of course asking for much more money, but also seeking to limit teacher instructional time to three hours a day and not requiring teachers to conduct live classes using video and social media platforms. Some are stating schools should not re-open unless all students and staff are tested, and temperatures taken on a daily basis. Others are arguing that remote learning “may be the new normal.” These requirements are unreasonable and unrealistic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In light of the above, we should not expect help from an all-too-often primarily self-interested education establishment. We are learning that some parents are getting meager assistance and will not be able to count on much more than that. Certainly, others in these times have collaborated well and productively with eager teachers and school systems.  And yet a third group of committed and sensible parents and students have learned what homeschoolers have known for years: they can do very well on their own and with other parents and choices, thank you very much. But for all our children, whatever their circumstances, the race between education and catastrophe should not end for the 2020 school year with catastrophe winning. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BILL BENNETT  Seth Leibsohn is a senior fellow at the Claremont Institute and the host of "The Seth Leibsohn Show," heard daily on 960am/KKNT in Phoenix, Ariz. 

This is about national security, says former Energy Secretary Rick Perry. PROGRAMMING ALERT: Watch Peter Navarro discuss this topic and much more on Fox News Channel’s “America’s Newsroom” on Monday, May 4 at 10 a.m. EDT. The United States’ bulk-power system provides the electricity that supports our national defense, vital emergency services, critical infrastructure, economy and way of life. It is increasingly a target of foreign adversaries seeking to commit malicious acts, including malicious cyber activities. President Trump’s latest executive order, “Securing the United States Bulk-Power System,” is the fourth executive order he has signed consistent with his strong Buy American principles. It enables the Department of Energy to swiftly take steps to defend the United States bulk-power system against attacks – cyber and otherwise. The federal government operates a significant portion of America’s bulk-power system – about 20 percent. To equip this system, the Department of Energy, Power Marketing Administrations and other federal entities spend millions of dollars a year procuring a wide range of components – from control centers, large generators and generation turbines to high-voltage circuit breakers and substation voltage regulators. JUSTIN HASKINS: JOE BIDEN'S POLL NUMBERS — HE'S IN TROUBLE WITH THIS KEY VOTING BLOC Under current government procurement rules, companies subject to the influence of foreign adversaries (as defined within the context of the executive order) are allowed to compete for – and often win – government contracts to supply these components. The absence of adequate supply chain controls in our current procurement rules provide opportunities for adversaries to create vulnerabilities in our power system because each of these components may be vulnerable to foreign sabotage in its own way. With some components, the risk is hardware-based. For example, components may be purposefully made with inferior materials designed to fail prematurely, and possibly intentionally. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER With other components, the risk comes from exploitation of software vulnerabilities, such as intentionally designed back doors that would allow adversaries access to control systems or other equipment necessary for running the power system. For example, viruses and other malware could cause equipment to fail, or operate outside of parameters, thereby disrupting the reliable electricity that propels our economy and supports our national security. Local or wide-area intentional electromagnetic interference is also a concern. Of course, any successful attack on our bulk-power system could compromise America’s ability to defend itself, significantly harm our economy, and pose potentially catastrophic risks to human health and safety and national security. These risks are all the more significant because what happens in one part of the electric grid will likely have effects elsewhere. A failure in New England can ripple down to Florida. A problem in California can turn other states dark. In signing this latest executive order, President Trump has directed a set of strong actions to aggressively address the threats to America’s bulk-power system. These risks are particularly grave as a number of components in service on the system have already exceeded their life expectancy and will need to be upgraded or replaced. In issuing this executive order, the president once again demonstrates a key principle of his administration, namely, that economic security is national security. The new executive order prohibits federal agencies and United States persons from procuring goods, products and materials for the bulk-power system from companies situated within foreign adversaries and where the transaction poses an unacceptable risk to the national security of the United States or the security and safety of American citizens. The secretary of Energy will publish rules implementing the order and, in consultation with the heads of other agencies as appropriate, will also evaluate criteria for recognizing particular equipment and vendors as “pre-qualified,” with respect to the order. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP To increase the resilience of our bulk-power system, the secretary of Energy will further take the lead in identifying any now-prohibited equipment that is currently being used in America’s bulk-power systems. The goal here is to have owners identify, isolate, monitor and replace these items as appropriate. A presidential task force will also develop a consistent set of energy infrastructure procurement policies to ensure that national security considerations are fully integrated across the federal government. In issuing this executive order, the president once again demonstrates a key principle of his administration, namely, that economic security is national security. By protecting our bulk-power system against foreign attacks, President Trump is ensuring a better economic future for this country, a safer society and a more secure national defense. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PETER NAVARRO

White House launches renewed effort to pin the blame for the pandemic on China and combat Chinese claims that the virus originated in the U.S.; chief White House correspondent John Roberts reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. How do we avenge the deaths of hundreds of thousands of innocent people? That is the question facing President Trump as the world learns that China’s leaders lied about the coronavirus that originated in Wuhan. People everywhere will demand that Beijing pay a price for the enormous loss of life and the incalculable damage done to economies around the globe. An intelligence report from the “Five Eyes” alliance of Western nations reports that China intentionally misled the world about COVID-19. NEWT GINGRICH: CHINA BEHAVED HORRIBLY IN CORONAVIRUS COVER-UP AND IS RESPONSIBLE FOR DEATHS AROUND WORLD The dossier, leaked by a newspaper in Australia, indicates that Beijing suppressed evidence that COVID-19 was transmitted between humans, silenced whistleblower doctors alarmed at the spread of the disease, censored news about the outbreak on social media and perhaps worst of all, destroyed samples of the virus which could have helped develop an earlier therapy or vaccine. The report calls Beijing’s behavior an “assault on international transparency"; some might call it murder. We must retaliate by hitting Beijing where it hurts that despotic regime worst: by undermining its propaganda campaigns and by crushing its illicit pathways to growth. The good news is that the Trump administration has already paved the way on both those fronts. Unlike prior administrations, the Trump White House has not been afraid to call out China for its worst behavior. President Obama kowtowed to Beijing to get their support for the Paris Climate Accord, demanding almost no concessions from the worst polluter on earth just to get their signature on a deal that would have undermined U.S. growth. He also wanted their support for the flawed Iran nuke deal, which did zero to rein in Tehran’s terror blitz in the Middle East. Those ambitions took precedence; Obama was not about to rock the boat, even as Beijing lied to him about their military ambitions in the South China Sea, as they hacked into our Office of Personnel Management to steal the records of 22 million Americans, and so much more. Obama chose not to confront Beijing on unfair trade practices, even as millions of middle-class jobs in the U.S. evaporated. Through our new measures, we must demonstrate that the United States can be trusted, and China cannot. President Trump was elected in part to push back against China, and that he has done, at great risk to our economy and to his own reelection prospects. Against all odds, his team managed to ink a trade deal that would begin to right some of the wrongs, resetting uneven tariffs while also reducing the cheating by state-owned firms and the theft of American know-how. That effort opened the door to a more honest relationship with China. COVID-19 blew the door off its hinges. What now? Through our new measures, we must demonstrate that the United States can be trusted, and China cannot. That rules out defaulting on our debt, which some have suggested. It also rules out more tariffs. The White House has claimed those taxes on imports were necessary to reset the trade rules for U.S. producers; that’s how they should be used, not as punishment. Instead, we first need to bring critical manufacturing back to the U.S. We should, for instance, restore the tax benefits that helped create a major pharmaceutical hub in Puerto Rico. Rebuilding that industry would be good for struggling Puerto Rico and good for the U.S. It is unconscionable that we rely on China for a large portion of our drugs and medical supplies. But, using tax incentives or regulatory relief – whatever it takes -- other industries should also be encouraged to move out of China, to diversify their sourcing or, better yet, relocate to the U.S. We have learned recently that far too many critical supply chains wind through China; we need to investigate and protect against those vulnerabilities. Second, we need to strictly limit access to our universities and labs by Chinese students and scientists. In January, the Department of Justice arrested Charles Lieber, Chair of Harvard University’s Chemistry and Chemical Biology Department. DOJ alleges that Lieber lied about his longtime participation in China’s “Thousand Talents” program and failed to disclose millions of dollars he received from the Wuhan University of Technology. During the same period, Lieber received $15 million in grants from the Department of Defense and National Institutes of Health. Two Chinese nationals who worked with Lieber were also charged, one with acting as an agent for a foreign government and the other for attempting to smuggle vials of biological research out of the U.S. Lieber’s alleged duplicity is the tip of the iceberg. For years, American scientists and our intel organizations have warned that visiting Chinese students and scholars have penetrated the goodwill and secrets of U.S. universities, and then headed home with pockets full of secrets. This must stop. Third, we must close down Chinese acquisitions of U.S. properties and companies. The EU, normally squeamish about confronting Beijing, has recently taken steps to prohibit Chinese state firms from buying European companies. We must do the same. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Fourth, we need an aggressive public relations campaign that will penetrate Beijing’s suffocating lockdown of news and social media in the country and undermine President Xi Jinping’s authority. Voice of America must help, and all efforts should be made to broaden its reach within China. Lately, VOA has come under fire from the White House for broadcasting material viewed as helpful to Beijing; that must stop. The organization prides itself on being “independent” and not being a propaganda arm for the U.S. But if Beijing lies to its people, VOA’s role is to counter the official narrative and to represent American values. Otherwise, why should taxpayers pay their bills? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP None of this will be easy; the White House can count on Democrat resistance to every step. But the American people are on board; according to Pew Research Center, two-thirds of the country has a negative view of China, up from 38 percent five years ago. More impressive, 91 percent think it would be better “if the U.S. is the world’s leading power.” Common sense Americans believe in our leadership. In November, they will choose a president who believes in it too. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LIZ PEEK

The First and Second Lady participate in an emergency response program to prepare the children for national disasters. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  COVID-19 will undoubtedly change America as we know it, but it is also a defining moment for our first lady. For those closely watching, it seems as though she knows it and is rising to the occasion. The truly unprecedented devastation of COVID-19 has impacted the role of the first lady in ways not seen before. There is no past occupant Melania Trump can look to as a guide because how a first lady would normally react and interact with the American people doesn’t apply under the current circumstances. Trump can’t look to Laura Bush, who was seen comforting survivors of the attacks of Sept. 11, or visit a combat zone as Pat Nixon did during Vietnam – this enemy is unique and does not allow for the visible and customary scenes of a first lady.  ALEC KLEIN: CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWN — THESE INMATES ARE SAVING LIVES DURING CRISIS Prior to this war with an “invisible enemy,” Trump used her role to focus on children both domestically and internationally as part of her BE BEST campaign, which the mainstream media has largely ignored. Instead, they focus more on finding fault with the way she has continued traditions of those who came before her through her decorations and commenting on her superb sense of personal style. (Historically, Nancy Reagan faced similar harsh and unfair treatment in her first term.) As all Americans try to adhere to President Trump’s guidelines to slow the spread and are practicing social distancing, the first lady can’t be on the front lines as she was when she visited the Texas coast after Hurricane Harvey or Florida following Hurricane Michael.  For fear of spreading the disease, the first lady cannot be in hospitals visiting with patients as she did in El Paso and Dayton following the tragic shootings this past summer. This health environment is creating a most unique challenge. However, armed with a growing team of heavy hitters, including former White House press secretary Stephanie Grisham, as her chief of staff and spokesperson, and others like Marcia Lee Kelly and Emma Doyle, the first lady is using her platform to provide a reassuring voice to echo the messages from the Coronavirus Task Force and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Via social media, she has posted videos about the importance of social distancing, and information on how to cope with stress during this time. She has posted photos of herself wearing a mask, provided tips for parents on what to say to their children and even provided fun activities to do with them such as Be Best crossword puzzles. Aware of the global pandemic and how America is still leading in this fight, Melania Trump has been calling other first ladies across the globe, personally reassuring them that America is in the battle with them and proving the importance of soft diplomacy.   Trump has adhered to the social distancing guidelines as all mothers are, especially those with children now at home full time. The Annual White House Easter Egg roll was canceled out of an abundance of caution for public health. Using technology, however, she still read the book, “The Little Rabbit” and posted it online, reminding us that we can connect in other ways with loved ones over the holiday without seeing them in person – we don’t have to give up all of our traditions.  The first lady also had to reschedule their first royal state dinner in honor of the king and queen of Spain. She made it clear, however, that it was just postponed, reminding us all that there will be entertaining at the White House again and that we will also be able to have our own celebrations in our own homes. Aware of the global pandemic and how America is still leading in this fight, Trump has been calling other first ladies across the globe, personally reassuring them that America is in the battle with them and proving the importance of soft diplomacy. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Our first lady is using her voice, gently guiding our country and focusing on parents and children in this time of unique crisis. Trump’s legacy of demonstrative compassion, ofttimes with inadequate recognition, is both welcomed and needed. Her predecessors found ways to provide comfort in tragedy but none in such a complex and challenging time from physical, mental and economic health standpoints. Melania Trump is showing that she is more than able to handle this crisis and is charting her own course.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Alyssa Milano, Nancy Pelosi defend presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden; reaction and analysis on 'The Greg Gutfeld Show.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. Following his disastrous showings in the Iowa and Nevada caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, Joe Biden’s campaign appeared to be on the verge of collapse. But then, something remarkable happened: The Democratic Party’s establishment wing decided that despite Biden’s generally poor debate performances, incoherent ramblings and a troubling sexual assault allegation, his allegedly “moderate” policy proposals would be far more palatable to voters in key swing states than the radical policies offered by self-described socialist Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont — who, at the time, seemed poised to capture the party’s nomination. In the blink of an eye, Sen. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and former South Bend Mayor Pete Buttigieg dropped out of the race and as a result, Biden enjoyed a truly remarkable turnaround on Super Tuesday, winning far more delegates than Sanders. Comrade Bernie was never able to make up the ground he lost on Super Tuesday and eventually dropped out of the race as a result, effectively handing the nomination to Biden. DAN GAINOR: EVEN ANTI-TRUMP NY TIMES WANTS BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT ALLEGATION INVESTIGATED – BAD NEWS FOR DEMS Make no mistake about it: Biden was and is a terrible candidate. He is a gaffe-machine, a longtime establishment politician with his fair share of controversies and scandals and despite moving extremely far to the left over the course of the 2020 election cycle, he has yet to be adopted by the progressive or socialist wings of the party. Biden was ultimately chosen for one reason and one reason only: He was considered by many within the party to be the most electable candidate remaining. Unfortunately for Democrats, new evidence seems to suggest the Biden electability argument might be severely flawed. Not only is Biden facing immense pressure from an army of angry Bernie acolytes over a sexual assault claim made by former Senate aide Tara Reade, but recent polling also suggests support for Biden among young voters – a key demographic for Democrats – might be much weaker than anyone realized, even in head-to-head matchups with Donald Trump. According to an extensive survey by the Institute of Politics at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government released in late April, only 34 percent of Americans aged 18 to 29 say they have a favorable view of the former vice president, with just 8 percent saying they have a “very favorable” opinion of Biden. In the same survey, 47 percent of young people said they have an unfavorable view of Biden. Although the percentage of young people who said they have an unfavorable view of President Trump was much higher (63 percent), the percent who said they have a favorable opinion of Trump was only four percentage points lower (30 percent) than Biden’s. And, quite interestingly, more young people said they have a “very favorable” view of Trump, 14 percent. Even worse for Biden, when asked if they would rather vote for Trump, Biden or an independent candidate in 2020, only 39 percent said they would choose Biden. One-quarter chose Trump, and a whopping 16 percent said they would rather pick an independent. For perspective, only 3 percent of voters aged 18 to 29 voted for an independent in 2012. Even in the highly contentious 2016 election, just 8 percent of young people chose an independent candidate, with the overwhelming majority choosing Hillary Clinton. There are likely a number of reasons why younger voters find Biden unappealing, but the most obvious is the big, fat socialist elephants in the room: Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.  Although we’re still several months away from the November election and, admittedly, a lot can change from now until then in the minds of voters, one thing is abundantly clear: Biden has a massive voter enthusiasm problem, one that could prove to be fatal for his chances of winning the White House. There are likely a number of reasons why younger voters find Biden unappealing, but the most obvious is the big, fat socialist elephants in the room: Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. After years of America’s youth moving further and further to the left, politicians like Comrades Bernie and AOC have become incredibly popular by peddling anti-capitalist propaganda and decrying anyone who stands in their way as being shills for corrupt corporations, racists, sexists, homophobes, transphobes or a slew of other personal attacks meant to deflect people away from hard data and historical truths. In short, they have built a political “revolution” – not merely a coalition of political allies – and it is one that expects major structural changes to the nation’s economy and political structures, rather than incrementalism and political compromises. The same Harvard poll mentioned previously found that 41 percent of young likely voters agreed that the “government has problems, and in order for them to be solved, we need to replace and create new institutions to address those challenges.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Although it’s very likely a Biden presidency would move the country in a more extreme-left direction, the more socialistic policies America’s youth have come to believe are essential “rights” wouldn’t be put into place as quickly as they would under a Sanders presidency, a political reality many young leftists believe to be completely unacceptable. This has put liberals in an extremely difficult situation. On the one hand, the further to the left they move, the more difficult it will be for them to win in vital, more moderate swing states like Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, which is precisely why the Democratic Party establishment chose the mostly unappealing Biden to be its party’s nominee. However, the more “moderate” the party appears, the less enthusiastic and more disenfranchised young progressives and socialists have become, hurting their chances of winning in 2020 and beyond. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In transforming U.S. schools and colleges into socialist indoctrination centers, the Left has created a whole generation of uncompromising young voters who believe anything short of Bernie’s radicalism is intolerable and even corrupt. It’s a political monster that liberals can no longer control, and it could have a far-reaching impact on the 2020 race. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JUSTIN HASKINS

Sheriff warns of 'uncharted territory' after he releases thousands of inmates; insight from Bill Melugin, FOX LA investigative reporter. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  They are locked up behind bars. Some for decades. Others for life. Some without the possibility of parole. Many of the inmates are considered violent, dangerous, a menace to society. Only now, they are saving lives. Prisoners at Mabel Bassett Correctional Center, down a remote road outside of Oklahoma City, have lately been stitching thousands of face masks for doctors, nurses and first responders. DEROY MURDOCK: CORONAVIRUS AND CENSORSHIP — BIG TECH FIRMS HAVE TO MAKE A CHOICE The inmates are helping those who are helping others. Hobby Lobby, the Christian crafts chain, donated the cotton fabric; the inmates have done the rest. While COVID-19 spreads, so does something else. Inmates across the nation are doing the same thing as they are in Oklahoma, making cloth face masks — from Massachusetts to Florida, from Texas to California. The unfolding stories have received due coverage. But I think what is happening deserves a wider lens, especially in a nation with the highest incarceration rate in the world. For a decade, I’ve investigated cases across the country where prisoners were wrongfully convicted or excessively sentenced, and I’ve learned at least one thing: Inmates are largely forgotten. Yet some of those cast aside — there are more than 2 million people in U.S. prisons, rejected and reviled by society — are quietly hard at work, sowing masks at tables in the cavernous Mabel Bassett prison gym, now a makeshift textile operation. By accident, I learned about this remarkable mask project, while talking by phone from Chicago with an Oklahoma inmate whose case I have investigated over the past two years. Kelsey Dodson has been imprisoned for a decade for a crime she has always maintained she didn’t commit — child neglect — with another decade to go before she regains her freedom. The coronavirus has seeped into the cells of prisons across America, creating a din of news: Outbreaks have afflicted inmates. Riots have broken out. While we were talking, Kelsey mentioned in passing how she was making masks to help with the shortage. There was no boast in her voice. There was, however, something else residing there: a sense of purpose, of meaning in what she was doing. “It means a lot to me to be able to give back to the community and to make a difference and to show that we are more than just a number,” she said. Kelsey was referencing her six-digit DOC — Department of Corrections — number. What she was saying is, I think, a beautiful point. No one is to be thrown away. It’s a central story of the Bible, the revolutionary idea that Jesus preached — about love and forgiveness and redemption. Luke 12:6-7: “Are not five sparrows sold for two pennies? And not one of them is forgotten before God. Why, even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not; you are of more value than many sparrows.” Kelsey just so happens to be something of a crochet maven. That’s how she has whiled away much of her time apart from her family; now, here she is, applying her weaving skills to make face masks, four layers of cotton, hemmed together, creating a protective layer. Kelsey wears a face mask, too. So do the other prisoners at Mabel Bassett. Many are confined to their cells in a lockdown lasting nearly all day and all night. The coronavirus has seeped into the cells of prisons across America, creating a din of news: Outbreaks have afflicted inmates. Riots have broken out. Some prison officials have released thousands of inmates. Policymakers and others have debated the wisdom of competing choices. Not so long ago, lockdown was an unfamiliar term to many of us on the outside. But then came the tentacles of the coronavirus encompassing our lives, and now we have come to learn what it means to live in confinement: inside, away from others, in isolation. The pandemic has in some ways made prisoners of us all. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER But for the prisoners of Mabel Bassett, there is nothing new about the concept of lockdown. On any given day, it’s a way of life. But one that shouldn’t be forgotten. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

The leaked Facebook memo cites 'Lord of the Rings'; Kayleigh McEnany, national press secretary for the Trump 2020 re-election campaign, and Fox News contributor Jessica Tarlov, weigh in. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Big Tech companies should make up their minds. Are they public fora, open to one and all, that faithfully carry an infinite spectrum of messages — much as AT&T phone lines transmit liberal, moderate, and conservative robocalls during election season? Or are they private institutions, exclusively for those with whom they agree — much as Mother Jones peddles the Left and National Review promotes the Right? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Either approach is fine and honorable. But Facebook, Google, YouTube, and their ilk should not do both — especially while morphing into the private/exclusive model, and savoring government protection to boot. DEROY MURCOCK: DEMOCRATS ON CORONAVIRUS — CANDIDATES MUM ON COVID-19 DURING DEBATES Big Tech’s private-sector censorship has been on vivid display during the COVID-19 crisis. Opinions with which these companies differ simply disappear, as three examples show in just the last week. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Department of Homeland Security scientist William Bryan said at President Donald J. Trump’s April 23 press briefing that ultraviolet light seems to kill COVID-19. Trump wondered aloud, “supposing you brought the light inside the body.” That’s all it took for Hate Trump, Inc. to hammer the president for medical malpractice. (He also mused over the prospect of doctors using disinfectants to treat patients, which the Trump-loathing press wildly inflated into “reports” that he wanted physicians to inject COVID-19 patients with Lysol.) CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING DEROY MURDOCK'S COLUMN IN NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DEROY MURDOCK

Nomad CEO Alexi Nazem discusses how his company, which connects medical professionals with health care facilities in need, is fighting the coronavirus. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  In response to the coronavirus pandemic, New Jersey has begun issuing temporary emergency licenses to doctors licensed in other countries. Democratic Gov. Phil Murphy called the new policy "entirely fitting" for the state, which has the second-most cases of COVID-19 and the second-most deaths after New York. It's a smart move. The United States was suffering from a shortage of doctors long before the coronavirus landed on our shores. The pandemic has cast that shortage into even starker relief. Right now, we need every qualified doctor we can find – and that need will not go away after the pandemic ends. KATHY GIUSTI: WAR ON CORONAVIRUS CAN TEACH US HOW TO MORE EFFECTIVELY WAGE WAR ON CANCER State and federal regulations make it hard for physicians licensed in foreign countries to practice medicine in the United States. Doctors from other countries, with the exception of Canada, must pass the U.S. Medical Licensing Examination. Fair enough. But doctors from outside the U.S. must also complete a three- to seven-year residency – even if they've already trained and practiced in their home countries. Some states even make established doctors redo part of their graduate education before granting them a medical license. It can be next to impossible for these doctors to secure the medical residencies they need. This year, more than 40,000 applicants vied for just over 37,000 residency positions. The United States will need an additional 122,000 physicians to meet patient demand by 2032, These regulations force even the most qualified foreign physicians to essentially redo their medical training if they want to practice in the United States. That's time-consuming and expensive. So many of them take on other jobs for which they're supremely overqualified. The stories are astonishing. A Macedonian primary care doctor became a nurse in Boston. An accomplished Sri Lankan anesthesiologist taught medical test prep courses in New Jersey. Other doctors work as waiters or cab drivers while trying to gain a U.S. medical license. Our country can't afford to turn away talented physicians. The United States will need an additional 122,000 physicians to meet patient demand by 2032, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges. Public officials have taken some steps to address the shortage. The Interstate Medical Licensure Compact allows doctors to get licensed simultaneously in multiple states. In theory, the compact allows doctors to move freely to in-need areas. But the compact only applies in 26 states. Big states including California, New York and Texas are not among them. Given the six-figure shortage of doctors we're facing, we must do much more to increase the supply of physicians. Some may worry that foreign-trained doctors provide worse care than those educated in the United States. Sure, we need standards. But is a policy that makes it harder for doctors educated at the likes of Oxford or Cambridge to come to the United States really all that wise? Further, there's plenty of evidence that doctors educated abroad provide excellent care. For example, a 2017 study led by a Harvard researcher found that patients treated by international medical graduates posted lower mortality rates than those treated by U.S. medical graduates. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Besides, we already rely on foreign doctors to fill gaps in our nation's health care workforce. Half of all foreign-trained doctors work in areas where the annual per-capita income is less than $30,000 per year. These doctors also make up one-third of our country's primary care physicians. An influx of immigrant doctors could also lead to more experimentation in the provision of care – and ultimately spur competition throughout the health care system. Immigrants are more likely to start businesses than people born into the United States, according to the National Immigration Forum. Perhaps they'd be more willing to try out direct primary care, where patients pay a flat monthly fee for a suite of services. These models have the potential to yield lower costs and better care for patients. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Entrepreneurial foreign doctors may also be more interested in launching independent practices, which have been on the decline. Increasingly, doctors are working for big hospital systems with few competitors. That's one of the reasons health care costs have been on the rise. Many foreign-trained doctors are ready, willing and able to help the United States battle pandemics, doctor shortages and more. All we have to do is let them. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SALLY PIPES

China sows disinformation into American social media; State Department correspondent Rich Edson reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  China’s Communist dictatorship mismanaged the outbreak of the coronavirus and tried to cover it up, lying to the United States and the rest of the world. Indeed, the Chinese government is largely responsible for a local outbreak in the city of Wuhan becoming the global pandemic that has killed tens of thousands of Americans and puts tens of millions more out of work. But we still don’t know the exact origins of the virus. Did it come from a Chinese wet market or a laboratory? We also need to figure out what responsibility China should bear for the devastation the pandemic has caused and how to hold Beijing accountable. LEAKED ‘FIVE EYES’ DOSSIER ON ALLEGED CHINESE CORONAVIRUS COVERUP CONSISTENT WITH US FINDINGS, OFFICIALS SAY To examine these and other questions, I am devoting a three-part series on my podcast “Newt’s World” to looking at China and the spread of the coronavirus. On this week’s episode, I discuss the origins of the virus and the timeline of the pandemic’s spread from Wuhan to other areas of the world. And I also ask a critical question: What did the Chinese Communist Party know about the disease COVID-19 that is caused by the coronavirus, and when did China’s leaders know it? Of course, one of the biggest problems with probing the early stages of the outbreak is that the Chinese government isn’t cooperating with anyone. Every country in the world stands to benefit from Beijing being forthright about what it knows and providing a true timeline of events – not a timeline of lies and propaganda. Yet China remains unwilling to help save lives – not just in the U.S. or Europe, but also in China, which would benefit from a collaboration to combat the virus. Looking back at that early period in January and February, I am struck by how strange some of China’s behavior was. The Chinese government seems to have a hard time understanding that it would be much better off if it just told the truth. Remember, the Chinese Communist Party allowed the Lunar New Year banquet, which about 40,000 families attended, to be held Jan. 18. Chinese authorities must have known at that point that they were dealing with some kind of epidemic. Even if they didn’t know how deadly and contagious COVID-19 was, they demonstrated a remarkable level of irresponsibility. Just days later, however, the government implemented a barbaric quarantine, using methods so ferocious that China must have, at least by then, realized it was dealing with something worse than SARS. According to some reports, China also made the bizarre decision to cut off flights from Wuhan to the rest of China but not cut off flights from Wuhan to other countries. Add China’s efforts to silence its scientists who wanted to research the virus and its repeated refusals to give information to the U.S., and it becomes clear that China bears significant responsibility for the virus’ spread. Indeed, an analysis by the University of Southampton estimates that 95 percent of coronavirus infections would have been avoided if China aggressively intervened only three weeks earlier than it did. The Chinese government seems to have a hard time understanding that it would be much better off if it just told the truth. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER There are a number of steps that Washington can take to hold China accountable, from sanctions to supporting lawsuits against the Chinese government. My guest this week, Rebeccah Heinrichs, a senior fellow at Hudson Institute, offers several ideas for how to punish China. She also offers her expertise on the Chinese government’s actions regarding the coronavirus and what all of this means for the broader U.S.-China relationship. And here we get to the bigger picture: We’re going to need to have a very profound resetting of our entire approach to China. The coronavirus just magnifies this fact. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP After all, the Chinese Communist dictatorship is remarkably different today than the various American images of what we thought it would turn out to be – benign, non-ideological, and even democratic. But despite being brutal, this dictatorship is sophisticated and using every aspect of its society to compete with and overtake the U.S. I hope you will listen to this week’s episode as Americans continue to fight the coronavirus and navigate a contentious relationship with China. And please look out for the next parts in my series on China and the coronavirus. The Communist Party behaved horribly, and the world needs to know the details. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NEWT GINGRICH

Reverend Billy Cerveny on importance of staying positive and keeping faith during coronavirus outbreak. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Sexual addiction was destroying my friend’s life and if he didn’t get help he was going to end up in handcuffs. This was clear to both of us as he sat across the lunch table telling me about the secret world he had built to nurture and hide his addiction. In the end, this world was an incubator in which his addiction grew malicious and belligerent. It was – as all addictions are – out of control. So was he. After an hour he looked up and said, “I feel so hopeless.” There are no pastoral silver bullets for moments like this. Indiscriminately slinging Bible verses at someone dying in a pile might make you feel better, but it only deepens their sense of loneliness. All you can do is listen, ask gentle questions and tell the truth. MIKE KERRIGAN: CORONAVIRUS LESSON – WHAT I LEARNED ABOUT WORSHIP SERVICES WHILE SOCIAL ISOLATING I told my friend he needed help and while he had a long, painful road ahead of him, healing was possible. I also told him the desperation he was feeling in this moment was not the product of hopelessness. It was the product of hope. Hope is a mysterious thing. It is the brass ring of every human heart. We all long for it, but we have a hard time defining it. We know it matters, but we don’t know why. All we know is when we have hope, life is good. When we don’t ... well, there is a reason liquor stores are considered an essential service during the coronavirus lockdown. When we speak of hope on a purely human level, what we are really talking about is the probability of something we want to happen actually happening. If the probability of a desired outcome is high, hope is in strong supply. If not, hope disappears. In short: Desire + Probability = Hope. Sounds easy enough. Unfortunately, the variables to the left of the equal sign are fundamentally unstable. Our desires are fickle. My own have changed dramatically over the years, thank God (otherwise I would be playing keytar professionally in an 80’s band). That’s great when talking about benign things like our taste in music or clothes, but it becomes far more threatening when you get close enough to any human heart to see the war within. We live in a world that serves up double portions of chaos, unpredictability and loss. To paraphrase the Apostle Paul, so often we don’t even like the desires we have (Rom 7:15). This was the case with my friend struggling with his addiction. Like Paul, sincerity was not his issue. Sincerity couldn’t change a light bulb much less his heart (or any human heart); it also couldn’t bring his desires to heel. Probability is equally unstable. We all have plans for how we would like things to turn out: family or financial stability, healthy and happy children, friends, a strong marriage. These are all good things, but we live in a world that serves up double portions of chaos, unpredictability and loss. Yes, it is good to prepare, but we need to write our plans in pencil. If you don’t believe me, ask a local restaurant owner how she or he prepared for the current economic shutdown. If this were a poker game, this would be a good time to fold. Alas, we cannot. Hope is not something we are trying to win, it is something we cannot lose. And it demands we play every hand until we have beaten the house. What is it about hope? When God made man (meaning women and men), He made us in His image (Gen 1:26). This means a lot of things, but for the purposes of this conversation it means He created us as creatures who – like Him – are hardwired with inescapable longings. These longings define our sense of purpose and identity. While they express themselves differently in different people, these longings are fundamentally the same in all of us: We were created to be loved and to love just like God (John 13:34). We were created to be valued and to honor the value in others (Ps. 139:14, Phil 2:3). We were created to create (Gen 1:28), to be known by and to know God (Jn 17:3). These indelible longings intertwine with one another to form a divine cocktail we call hope. Hope is the unquenchable desire we all carry to see our God-given longings fulfilled. It is the tracks upon which all our lives run. The longing of hope steers us left, right and – in a perfect world – back to God. Where else could hope be satisfied than with the one who built it into us (Ps 34:10)? Sadly, we now reflexively remove God from our hope equation because our hearts have been broken by sin (Gen 3:8). Here’s the rub: We are still made in His image, still bear the indelible longings of hope, but now shoulder the burden of satisfying it on our own (Gen 3:22). We live lives in a futile and desperate attempt to be good enough, loved enough, seen enough and complete enough. At best, we become quietly disappointed. At worst, we hide this disappointment beneath addictions, accomplishments and anything else strong enough to anesthetize the pain of unrealized hope. In the end, the thing we call hopelessness is not an absence of hope at all. On the contrary. It is the product of inescapable hope. It will not shut up and only gets louder when it is hungry. Paul is speaking into the center of this when he writes: “Who will deliver me from this body of death? Thanks be to God through Jesus Christ our Lord!” (Rom 7:24-25). Jesus calls Himself a savior, not because He expects us to point our own hearts back to Him. If we could do that, we wouldn’t have this problem in the first place. Jesus calls Himself savior because He has directed His heart toward us. He takes the equation of hope and replaces our mercurial desires with the purity of His desire for us. He takes the thin probability of the world producing good outcomes and replaces it with the assurance of eternal outcomes. Jesus reconnects our hope with the ultimate object of our hope, Himself. He gives us a foretaste of the life, world and Kingdom for which we were made. Christ in us, the Hope of glory (Col 1:27) CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What does this mean when we experience crushing loss and disappointment? It gives us the space to grieve knowing God is not waiting impatiently for us to just get over it. Jesus sits with us in our frailty and disillusionment (Mt 28:20). He then – in time – invites us to risk hope once again. Risking hope means agreeing with your longing to be known and loved by stepping into new relationships after tasting the bitterness of betrayal. It means daring to trust He has and will give us everything we need even after suffering incalculable loss. Risking hope means being willing to sit across the table from a safe person and inviting them into your deepest shame when you have laid your life to waste with addiction. It also means being willing to see the ways He has moved in and around you in your most desperate moments so we will have eyes to see Him move in the moments to come. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP My friend risked hope. He sought help and began the long journey of sobriety. God led him into a community where he could tell his story to men who shared a similar one. He has healed and is healing. My friend has scars but it took the depths to break his grip and allow hope to do what it does: lead him into an encounter with a God who is good enough, not only to create the longings of his heart, but to meet him in them (Rom 8:38). CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BILLY CERVENY

They abused their trusted positions to commit criminal offenses against one of the most honorable men the country has ever seen, says Sidney Powell, attorney for Michael Flynn. Michael Flynn was not the objective. He was the obstacle. Once you grasp that fundamental fact, it becomes easier to understand the latest disclosures the Justice Department made in the Flynn case on Thursday. They are the most important revelations to date about the FBI’s Trump-Russia investigation, code-named Crossfire Hurricane. The new disclosures, in conjunction with all we have learned in the last week, answer the all-important why question: Why was Flynn set up? KT MCFARLAND: MICHAEL FLYNN DIDN’T COMMIT A CRIME – HE WAS SET UP BY DEEP STATE TO CRIPPLE TRUMP PRESIDENCY The answer to the what question has been clear for a long time: The FBI set a perjury trap for Flynn, hoping to lure him into misstatements that the bureau could portray as lies. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In the frenzied political climate of the time, that would have been enough to get Flynn removed from his new position as national security adviser, perhaps even to prosecute him. On that score, the new disclosures, startling as they are to read, just elucidate what was already obvious. But why did they do it? That has been the baffling question. Oh, there have been plenty of indications that the Obama administration could not abide Flynn. The White House and the intelligence agencies had their reasons, mostly vindictive. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But while that may explain their gleefulness over his fall from grace, it has never been a satisfying explanation for the extraordinary measures the FBI took to orchestrate that fall. To understand what happened here, you have to understand what the FBI’s objective was, first formed in collaboration with Obama-administration officials. That includes President Obama, Vice President Biden, and Flynn’s predecessor, National Security Adviser Susan Rice, with whom then-Acting Attorney General Sally Yates and then-FBI director James Comey met at the White House on January 5, 2017 – smack in the middle of the chain-of-events that led to Flynn’s ouster. CLICK HERE TO READ THE REST OF THIS COLUMN IN THE NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ANDREW MCCARTHY

Fox News' Trey Yingst speaks to doctors battling coronavirus at Israel's hospitals. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. President Trump renewed his criticism of the World Health Organization Thursday for the way the United Nations organization failed to challenge false information China initially provided minimizing the coronavirus outbreak in that country. He should also call out the WHO for its disgraceful role in spreading absurd lies and hatred about U.S. ally Israel for years. Trump recently suspended U.S. funding of the WHO. America is by far the largest donor to the agency and was scheduled to give it $894 million during the current two-year funding period. The president said Thursday that “the World Health Organization should be ashamed of themselves because they’re like the public relations agency for China.” He could have also added that the WHO has operated like a PR and propaganda agency for the enemies of Israel – the only democracy in the Middle East. GOP REP UNVEILS BILL TO PROBE WHO’S CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE, PAST ACTIONS A year ago, WHO member countries voted 96 to 11 – with the U.S. in opposition – for an annual resolution blaming Israel for “health conditions in the occupied Palestinian territory, including east Jerusalem, and in the occupied Syria Golan.” While one might expect the WHO to be apolitical, it – like nearly every other U.N.-associated organ – is used by Israel’s enemies as a platform for viciously attacking the Jewish state. What may be even more disturbing is that democracies that should know better – including France, Belgium and Sweden – joined in the unjustified condemnation of Israel. As U.N. Watch noted, out of 21 items on the WHO agenda, the only one focused on a specific country applied to Israel. This targeting of Israel has been going on since at least 2000. The truth is that Israel has done far more than both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas to care for the health of the Palestinian people. U.N. Watch Executive Director Hillel Neuer noted that “anyone who has ever walked into an Israeli hospital or clinic knows that they are providing world-class health care to thousands of Palestinian Arabs.” It will not be surprising if this year the WHO adopts the usual Israel-bashing resolution and falsely accuses Israel of preventing Palestinians from getting treatment for COVID-19 – the disease caused by the coronavirus.  In fact, Israel is doing a great deal to help the Palestinians contain the coronavirus outbreak that first apparently arrived in the West Bank in Bethlehem. Israel quickly provided 250 coronavirus test kits to the Palestinian Authority and began joint training sessions for Israeli and Palestinian medical personnel to study the coronavirus, the protection of medical personnel, and the testing of patients suspected of being coronavirus carriers. In Gaza, the Palestinian Health Ministry confirmed the receipt of test kits and medical equipment from Israel that were requested by Palestinian medical personnel. “Handling the coronavirus outbreak takes precedence over any political consideration, and without help from Israel, Gaza would be in a very difficult situation in the case of an outbreak,” a Palestinian Health Ministry official told the Israel Hayom newspaper. Prior to the outbreak of COVID-19, Israel permitted thousands of Palestinians to enter Israel for medical treatment. After Israel instituted a lockdown to prevent the spread of the virus, it continued to provide medical supplies to Gaza – 88 tons during one week in April alone. On March 20, Israel delivered hundreds of test kits and 1,000 protective medical gear kits to Gaza. Five days later, more than 3,000 test kits and 50,000 masks from the WHO were delivered to the Palestinian Authority. Israeli and Palestinian health and security officials are in frequent contact and have coordinated training sessions for Palestinian medical professionals. A training session was held, for example, for medical staff from Gaza at the Erez Border Crossing by a team from the Sheba Medical Center in Ramat Gan in Israel. The Palestinians benefit from the Israeli assistance, since Israel was just ranked the safest country in the world during the pandemic by the Deep Knowledge Group. But despite all this, it will be no surprise if the WHO has the chutzpah to condemn Israel this year once again. We don’t know if Western democracies will again go along. Last year’s WHO resolution attacking Israel ignored the impact of Palestinian terrorism on the health of the Palestinian people, as well as the mistreatment of Palestinians by the Hamas terrorist group that governs Gaza and by the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank. Just five months ago, the Palestinian Authority objected to an American plan to build a hospital in Gaza. And, of course, the same group has utterly rejected the peace plan advanced by President Trump to end hostilities between Israel and the Palestinians – and has even cut off contacts with the Trump administration. Hamas goes even further, refusing to even acknowledge Israel’s right to exist and harshly condemning the U.S. and the Trump administration. In 2017, reportedly under pressure from Syria, the WHO hid a positive report on Israel. This was especially galling given that four years earlier the Israel Defense Forces had begun treating hundreds of sick and wounded Syrians at field hospitals staffed by volunteers in the Golan Heights. In 2016, the Israel Defense Forces launched Operation Good Neighbor to expand its aid program and allow Syrians to be treated in Israeli hospitals. According to the IDF, more than 4,900 Syrians – including 1,300 children – were brought to Israeli hospitals during the five years of providing medical assistance. CLICK HERE FOR FULL CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE During that time, Israel transported into Syria 1,700 tons of food; 1.1 million liters of fuel; 26,000 cases of medical equipment and medication; 20 generators; 40 vehicles; 630 tents; 350 tons of clothing; 8,200 packages of diapers; and 49,000 cases of baby food. The operation was shut down in September 2018 after Syria’s brutal dictator Bashar Assad reestablished control over southern Syria in that country’s civil war. While the WHO condemns Israel for health conditions on the Golan Heights, it says nothing about Assad’s attacks on hundreds of Syrian medical facilities and the humanitarian disaster he has created in the war against his own people. The WHO simply refers to “attacks” as if no one is responsible. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Meanwhile, Israeli medical supplies have continued to flow into Gaza even as terrorists attack Israelis at the border and fire rockets into civilian areas. Tens of thousands of Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza are admitted to Israel every year for medical treatment. Even Palestinian leaders who call for Israel’s destruction send their family members to Israeli hospitals. For example, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh’s daughter was hospitalized in Ichilov Hospital in Tel Aviv. His brother-in-law, mother-in-law and one of his granddaughters were also treated in Israel. The sister of another senior Hamas leader, Mousa Abu Marzouk, was treated in Israel for cancer and an Israeli medical specialist went to Ramallah on the West Bank to help save the life of Palestinian Authority president Mahmoud Abbas. A year later, Abbas said Palestinians would be barred from treatment in Israel. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If the WHO had any integrity and honesty it would be praising Israel as a model of good neighborliness for the massive medical assistance is has provided to the Palestinians for years, including during the coronavirus pandemic. The truth is that Israel has done far more than both the Palestinian Authority and Hamas to care for the health of the Palestinian people. It’s long past time for the WHO to recognize this and end its dishonest Israel-bashing campaign once and for all.

Former President Barack Obama and former first lady Michelle Obama have purchased a massive piece of real estate on Martha’s Vineyard in Massachusetts for $11.75 million. The couple spent this past summer renting the 7,000-square-foot home before making an offer. The Hollywood Reporter recently broke a scoop about the latest Netflix documentary from the Obamas, designed to offer us an oasis of joy as we suffer through the coronavirus pandemic. The documentary is called "Becoming" and it will be available worldwide Wednesday. As the title suggests, it promotes Michelle Obama's memoir of the same name, which has sold more than 10 million copies. So let's get this straight. The Obamas were awarded a book deal worth an estimated $65 million for their memoirs, hers and then his. They also struck an estimated $50 million production deal with Netflix. (We don't have actual numbers. Could someone in the media ask for a tax return?) TRUMP TWEETS SATIRICAL VIDEO OF OBAMA SHRUGGING OFF AWKWARD BIDEN COMMENTS With this self-aggrandizing documentary, the second deal is being used to accentuate the profits of the first. The buck raking here is intense. President Trump surely must admire the self-promotional moxie of the Obamas that enabled them to quickly become superrich after President Obama’s term in office ended. Vanity Fair celebrated these "Obamoguls" and hailed Michelle Obama for her "saintly popularity." This so-called saint doesn't spurn the finer things. Last August, TMZ reported the Obamas were buying a $15 million mansion on the coast of Martha's Vineyard to match their $8 million Washington, D.C., mansion. How much network coverage did this get in the liberal media? Zero. In December, the Obamas actually bought said Martha's Vineyard mansion for $11.75 million. Liberal network coverage? Again, zero. There would be no denting halos by asking how much the Obamas are giving to charity. The new documentary celebrates Michelle Obama's "Becoming" book tour events at stadiums that charged Obama superfans $300 or more for a ticket, often with celebrities like Oprah Winfrey along for the ride. Liberal media outlets repeated Obama's self-puffery without rebuttal. "Those months I spent traveling – meeting and connecting with people in cities across the globe – drove home the idea that what we have in common is deep and real and can't be messed with," Michelle Obama said in a statement. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Mrs. Obama augmented her new status as a self-help guru with a workbook of sorts: "Becoming: A Guided Journal for Discovering Your Voice," complete with "an intimate and inspiring introduction by the former First Lady and more than 150 inspiring questions and quotes to help you discover – and rediscover – your story." Not everyone famous is praised for self-help books for women. The current president's daughter, Ivanka Trump, wrote one in 2017. The New York Times review was brutal. "It reads more like the scrambled Tumblr feed of a demented 12-year-old who just checked out a copy of Bartlett's Familiar Quotations from the library," according to the Times. There are never Republican critics of Obama in the "news" these days. In a Washington Post story on the documentary, writer Sonia Rao quoted Anita McBride, chief of staff to former first lady Laura Bush, who said Obama was "a reluctant first lady" but then formed lasting public connections through her "extraordinary use of media and pop culture and television." CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Is that Michelle's gift to the media? No, it's the media's gift to Michelle. The infatuated titans of "news" and entertainment media appear to have granted her every "extraordinary" wish in building this "billion-dollar brand." The cheers are always presumed to be unanimous. Dissent from this party line is ignored. And no one asks about the profits. For the Obamas, greed is cast as just another inspiring voyage of self-discovery. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TIM GRAHAM

Fox News contributor Lisa Boothe breaks down how the media covered Biden's comments. Former Vice President Joe Biden’s disastrous interview Friday on “Morning Joe” on MSNBC has caused more problems for the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee than it solved. Biden’s denial of an allegation by a former member of his Senate staff that he sexually assaulted her in 1993 was followed Saturday by a call from The New York Times for a further investigation. When the paper dedicated to seeing Donald Trump become a one-term president turns on his challenger, you know the Democrats are facing a serious problem This is the same New York Times that earlier published an article saying it “found no pattern of sexual misconduct by Mr. Biden” after examining the assault allegation made by former Biden staffer Tara Reade. She alleges that 27 years ago then-Sen. Biden pushed her against a wall in the empty hallway of a Senate office building, reached under her skirt and penetrated her with his fingers. NEW YORK TIMES CALLS FOR DNC INVESTIGATION INTO BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT CLAIMS The Times Editorial Board said in its editorial that that “the stakes are too high to let the matter fester – or leave it to be investigated by and adjudicated in the media.” This from the newspaper that attempted to do just that only a few weeks earlier. Biden’s MSNBC interview didn’t silence his critics – it emboldened them. “Morning Joe” co-host Mika Brzezinski hit Biden on his hypocrisy, pointedly noting to him that “you said that women should be believed.” Many Democrats made the same argument when they said in 2018 that Trump Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh should not be confirmed. Kavanaugh, who now serves on the high court, was accused of sexual misconduct while he was in high school – with no supporting evidence beyond the claim of his accuser. He vehemently denied the accusation. Biden’s answers about the alleged sexual assault against Reade were filled with enough stammers to make nice opposition commercials. What he might have assumed would be a softball interview by an anti-Trump cable news channel turned into hardball. And since we don’t have any sports to watch, a lot of people noticed. The very next day Biden got hit with criticism from The New York Times. The liberal newspaper went from covering up the allegations against Biden to suddenly wanting more detail. The Times editorial even called for an investigation into “the trove of records from Mr. Biden’s Senate career that he donated to the University of Delaware in 2012.” Biden rejected that idea during his ill-fated TV interview. The Times editorial was specific about the type of inquiry it wanted – but it’s not one voters could trust. “The Democratic National Committee should move to investigate the matter swiftly and thoroughly, with the full cooperation of the Biden campaign,” the Times editorial said. So the political party that is dominating the candidate it wants to defeat President Trump in November is also investigating the presumptive candidate? This is hardly convincing. In fact, it’s about as big a conflict of interest as anyone can imagine. Funny how the Times never called for the Republican National Committee to investigate allegations of Trump-Russia collusion in the 2016 election, but instead supported an inquiry by Special Counsel Robert Mueller. The Times also supported the House impeachment inquiry against Trump, rather than an RNC inquiry. The Times editorial was specific about the type of inquiry it wanted – but it’s not one voters could trust. Still, this pressure on Biden is a change from the way the Times usually treats the former vice president. It produced a whitewashed story headlined “Examining Tara Reade’s Sexual Assault Allegation Against Joe Biden” April 12. The paper had waited 19 days, by its own count, before running the story and then modified it to placate the Biden campaign. Times Executive Editor Dean Baquet said he wanted readers to “have all the information” – except the Times was embarrassed by a follow-up story from The Intercept. That piece mentioned a call Reade’s mother made anonymously to CNN’s “Larry King Live” program in 1993. In the call, Reade’s mother complained about problems her daughter had with a “prominent senator” without going into specifics. The Times left that fact out of its editorial even now. But there was more to this switch than just the call for an investigation. The Times buried its real reasoning at the end of the editorial. The editorial tied allegations against Biden to ones against President Trump. The editorial argued that “those claims also should be investigated, and the Republicans concerned about Mr. Biden’s behavior now should be at least equally focused on the questions about Mr. Trump’s.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER That’s always the goal for the left-wing media – get Trump. Many in politics and news considered Biden’s presidential campaign doomed even after he ran the table in the primaries. Following repeated gaffes, his campaign did all it could to hide him from any chance to make more mistakes. In addition, some in the anti-Trump media have been promoting Biden’s potential replacement as the Democratic presidential nominee almost daily – New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who by a remarkable coincidence just happens to be the brother of CNN anchor Chris Cuomo. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The call by the Times for a further investigation of Biden could be legitimate. The newspaper might well be willing to sacrifice the stumbling Biden candidacy to get a candidate with a better chance of defeating Trump. And, of course, if Biden ends his candidacy under pressure because of the sexual assault allegation the Times could then argue that Trump should withdraw as well from the presidential race because he has also been accused of sexual assault and other sexual misconduct by women. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAN GAINOR

The report is unconfirmed and no pictures of the event have been released. Although rumors and various reports have swirled over the last several weeks that North Korea's Kim Jong Un was dead, late Friday night we received the first visuals and video of North Korea's Chairman Kim — alive, walking and talking — touring a newly built fertilizer factory. While there were voices who tried to quash the rumors in April, namely the South Korean government of Moon Jae-in, who, citing their own intelligence sources, claimed Kim was ‘alive and well’, many people did not listen.  And yet, we shouldn’t be shocked, as we have traveled down this well-worn path many times before. Back in 2014, Kim disappeared for nearly 40 days. NORTH KOREA RELEASES PICTURES SHOWING KIM JONG UN'S FIRST PUBLIC APPEARANCE IN WEEKS He was rumored then, as he was just recently, to have ‘died’ or to have ‘slipped into a coma’ or even have been rendered "brain dead." And yet, walking with the help of a cane, Chairman Kim strutted back out in front of the camera six years ago with a smile on his face, having apparently undergone some sort of foot surgery. 
      In this Friday, May 1, 2020, photo provided by the North Korean government, North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, center, cuts a tape, watched by his sister Kim Yo Jong, during his visit to a fertilizer factory in Sunchon, South Pyongan province, near Pyongyang, North Korea. Kim made his first public appearance in 20 days as he celebrated the completion of the fertilizer factory, state media said Saturday, May 2, 2020, ending an absence that had triggered global rumors that he may be seriously ill. Independent journalists were not given access to cover the event depicted in this image distributed by the North Korean government. The content of this image is as provided and cannot be independently verified. Korean language watermark on image as provided by source reads: "KCNA" which is the abbreviation for Korean Central News Agency. (Korean Central News Agency/Korea News Service via AP)
       There are, of course, certain facts we can’t deny when it comes to Kim that surely fuel anxieties about him: he is clearly in poor health. He is reported to weigh about 300 pounds and at only 5’7” is morbidly obese. He is a heavy smoker, he is rumored to drink heavily, and according to multiple U.S. intelligence officials, works 12- to15-hour days. Kim was clearly wheezing when walking just a short distance with President Trump when they met last year along the Demilitarized Zone. Various observers have noted Kim seems to labor when walking short distances, losing his breath quite easily. All of that surely keeps top Trump national security officials up at night. Why? Because if Kim were to die, it is an open question about who would take over North Korea — and who would control Kim’s arsenal of nuclear weapons that could kill millions of people within just minutes. While the most likely candidate is Kim’s well connected and influential sister, Kim Yo-jong, it can’t be ruled out that a struggle for power could ensue. That could mean a North Korean civil war where different factions are armed with weapons of mass destruction—possibly meaning an intervention by the U.S. and/or China. While surely there will be time for reflection, the Trump administration must forge ahead, even during these difficult times when the whole world is battling the coronavirus pandemic, to craft at least a business-like relationship with Pyongyang. Trump’s diplomatic outreach to Pyongyang has clearly resulted in a much more stable relationship with the so-called ‘hermit' kingdom, achieving more in just three years than anyone thought possible. Kim, for example, has not tested a long-range missile or nuclear weapon since late 2017, something that limits his ability to have confidence in those key capabilities that could threaten the U.S. homeland. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But far more needs to be done to ensure we never go back to the dark days of nuclear threats or ‘fire and fury’. President Trump must now work towards ending decades-old hostility with North Korea, a nation that can do very little to harm U.S. interests short of a suicidal nuclear attack. First, Trump should make clear his goal is still the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula — but only after both sides have forged a working relationship and have a measure of trust to build on that can make that goal a reality and not just a talking point. To that end, Trump should offer once again to meet with Kim when possible and end the Korean War, something that was never formally done, only halted thanks to an armistice. While a treaty would likely be hard to get passed in the U.S. Senate, a political deceleration ending the war signed by both leaders as well as by China and South Korea, would go a long way towards building trust on all signs, giving everyone a clear win and political capital to take home and use later when compromise to achieve much more comprehensive agreements is needed. From there, both sides should open liaison offices in each other’s capitals, thus making diplomatic channels are open at all times and avoid any sort of miscommunications in the future. Lastly, Washington and Pyongyang must begin the process of arms control — just like Ronald Reagan did during the Cold War with the Soviet Union — as a pathway towards lessening the chance of nuclear war. While full North Korean unilateral nuclear disarmament would be ideal, it likely will never happen, as Pyongyang views it as its only ace card to deter any future thoughts of U.S. sponsored regime change. Instead, Trump should offer incentives for every verified step Pyongyang takes towards decreasing and then eliminating its nuclear weapons. President Trump has shown the world that thinking completely outside the box when it comes to North Korea can achieve results. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The rumors of the past few weeks should remind us all that Pyongyang has the potential to drive the headlines and spark a nuclear crisis like no other if North Korea were to suddenly become leaderless. Now is the time to forge ahead with diplomacy — the stakes are too great to simply sit on the sidelines. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM HARRY KAZIANIS

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Last week in the midst of the coronavirus crisis, Ukrainians commemorated the 34th anniversary of another catastrophe --- the explosion at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, the world’s worst nuclear accident. Wearing face masks to protect themselves against what the U.S. president calls the “invisible enemy,” the deadly coronavirus, workers at Chernobyl lit candles in memory of those killed at the plant 34 years ago by their own “invisible enemy” – the 100 radioactive elements that spewed into the air on that fateful night, April 26, 1986, when Reactor #4 melted down and contaminated over 58,000 square miles of Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia. 
      A 1986 file photo of an aerial view of the Chernobyl nuclear plant in Chernobyl, Ukraine showing damage from an explosion and fire in reactor four.
      (AP/File) The accident was the result of a flawed reactor design, Soviet cost-cutting, shoddy construction, corruption, and a culture of secrecy. When the Soviet Union collapsed and Ukraine became independent in 1991, its government banned visitors from two “exclusion” zones around the plant, the larger of which is roughly the size of Rhode Island. But in 2011, the government decided to encourage tourism to 75 percent of the zone deemed to be safe. LIMITED TIME OFFER, GET YOUR FIRST MONTH OF FOX NATION FOR $0.99 Last September, I visited Chernobyl with a small production team for Fox Nation soon after HBO aired a mini-series about the accident that was seen by millions of people throughout the world. What we saw at Chernobyl still haunts me, just as the accident itself continues to haunt Ukraine. Would the HBO docudrama spark renewed interest in, and visits to the devastated, dangerous site? As a journalist, I had already visited many Soviet-era nuclear and germ weapons facilities and our own still partly contaminated Nevada Test Site, just 65 miles north of Las Vegas where the U.S. tested over a thousand atomic bombs in the 1950s. But what we saw at Chernobyl still haunts me, just as the accident itself continues to haunt Ukraine. And now you can visit this “nuclear Pompei” along with me – virtually – by watching our documentary on "Destination Chernobyl" Fox Nation. You can meet Serhii Plokhy, the author of a groundbreaking book on the accident who worries about the lessons of Chernobyl and nuclear power that we’re not learning. You can see the nuclear ghost town of Pripyat, the Soviet “atomic city” 10 minutes from the plant where 50,000 workers and their families lived before the accident. You can walk on the now overgrown soccer field where children once played, see the faded algebra book, covered in radioactive dust on a decrepit school floor, the ragged, smiling doll on a tiny bed in an abandoned apartment building, the giant Ferris wheel in the town’s amusement park, frozen for eternity. 
      Chernobyl nuclear power station and Pripyat
       Almost 1,000 dogs, offspring of those abandoned when the Soviets evacuated the city – 36 hours after the accident – roam the town and its surroundings. They are not friendly. Scientists say they live an average of only four years. The forests seem green and lush, filled with deer, moose, wolves, eagles, and horses imported from Mongolia. But that, too, is deceptive, Plokhy says. There are no spider webs in these forests. The soil remains too contaminated. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER So in April, when wildfires – naturally or deliberately set is still uncertain – swept through over 8,600 acres of birch trees and approached the nuclear plant, scientists feared that dust from the radioactive soil might endanger the three-million people in the Ukrainian capital of Kyiv, 60 miles away. But the fires were contained, and only a few of the Soviet era-tourist attractions destroyed. 10 INTERESTING FACTS ABOUT THE CHERNOBYL NUCLEAR DISASTER On my tour, I took along a dosimeter to measure my exposure to various radioactive isotopes, a few of which can last 25,000 years. Having an official guide ensured that the crew and I would not linger too long in contaminated areas. But many young Ukrainians, unable or unwilling to pay the roughly $100-a-person fee that tour companies charge, delight in sneaking into the zone on their own. Many of these so-called “stalkers” also carry dosimeters. Watch one of them call being in the zone illegally a truly “psychedelic experience.” Because coronavirus prompted Ukraine to close its borders in mid-March, there are now no tourists here. But Sergii Mirnyi, the head of Chernobyl Tours, has ambitious plans once the zone reopens: kayaking on the Dnieper River along the disabled plant and it's giant “sarcophagus” – the world’s largest moveable steel structure that covers the tons of radioactive rubble from Reactor #4 – and a 5-day “spa” vacation. “Very restful,” he tells us. 
      A wild boar runs in the exclusion zone around the Chernobyl nuclear reactor near the village of Babchin, some 217 miles southeast of Minsk, January 9, 2009.
      (REUTERS/Vasily Fedosenko) The government, too, wants to encourage tourism here. In July, President Volodymyr Zelensky, 42, a former comedian, screenwriter, film producer and director who was elected in the spring of 2019 with over 73 percent of the vote, signed a decree encouraging Chernobyl tourism. Calling it a “unique” site, he said that he wants to give this desolate part of Ukraine “new life.” The Exclusion Zone Management Agency, responsible for protecting the plant’s critical infrastructure, has other ideas. One official tells us the agency intends to store nuclear waste here in the zone, and not just from Ukraine’s 15 nuclear reactors that continue to provide most of the country’s electricity, but waste from other European nuclear reactors as well. SEE MORE OF JUDITH MILLER'S WORK ON FOX NATION Plokhy calls this a terrible idea. Although it would seemingly make sense to store nuclear waste at a site already so contaminated, the area is composed not of stable, hard rock that can contain radioactive material for hundreds of years, he tells us, but unstable, highly-porous marshland. But even he thinks that people should visit Chernobyl if only to understand the potential danger of nuclear power in incompetent or malicious hands. The accident itself still weighs heavily on Ukraine, which continues to pay compensation to the families of at least 35,000 people who died of Chernobyl-related cancers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There are valuable lessons to be learned from what Adam Higginbotham, the author of “Midnight at Chernobyl,” another powerful book on the disaster, calls this “radioactive Eden.” But as my crew and I left Chernobyl, I wondered whether we would ever learn them. Watch Fox Nation's "Destination Chernobyl," and decide that for yourself. To watch all of "Destination Chernobyl," including Miller's interviews with Ukrainians, who lived through the disaster, go to Fox Nation and sign up today. LIMITED TIME OFFER, GET YOUR FIRST MONTH OF FOX NATION FOR $0.99 Fox Nation programs are viewable on-demand and from your mobile device app, but available only for Fox Nation subscribers. Go to Fox Nation to start a free trial and watch the extensive library from Tomi Lahren, Pete Hegseth, Abby Hornacek, Laura Ingraham, Greg Gutfeld, Judge Andrew Napolitano and many more of your favorite Fox News personalities. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JUDITH MILLER

Newt Gingrich discusses the pressure on Joe Biden to release archived documents at the University of Delaware and clear up sexual assault allegations As a student of history, it is painful to watch today’s so-called reporters and analysts pontificate about the Nov. 3, 2020 election outcome. We are currently six months away from that event. Yet analyst after analyst and TV host after TV host will claim if the election were held today Joe Biden would win – as if the Trump supporters should panic or collapse in despair. To some extent, this kind of presentism even infects the White House and Republican leaders and activists. VICTOR DAVIS HANSON: BIDEN VP SELECTION ECHOES DECISION DEMOCRATS AND FDR MADE IN 1944 Yet, presentism is incredibly misleading in a period of change. Remember: At this point in 2015, it was inconceivable that Donald Trump would become the Republican nominee. At this point in 2016, the same analysts and talking heads who are touting Joe Biden today were touting Hillary Clinton and predicting Trump would be a disastrous failure taking the Republicans down to defeat. But, of course, the elections are not held in early May. The greatest modern example of the absurdity of presentism is the Harry S. Truman re-election of 1948. This was the election that famously ended with a re-elected President Truman smilingly waving a copy of The Chicago Tribune with the banner headline “Dewey Wins.” Any current media-elite effort to project the election outcome is almost certainly too optimistic for Vice President Biden and pessimistic for President Trump.  Truman had a lot to smile about. He had beaten the national establishment against all odds. Let me first outline the sequence of that year’s polling data and then show how much the situation of President Trump parallels President Truman’s challenge in 1948. In late summer, Thomas E. Dewey held a 13-point lead over Truman (49-36). This was a four-way race with the leftwing candidate, former Vice President Henry Wallace at that point getting 5 percent and the Dixiecrat candidate Strom Thurmond polling at 3 percent. In the post-Labor Day poll, Gallup still had Dewey ahead by 8 points. Truman went on to win by 49.6 percent to 45.1 percent, with Wallace and Thurmond each getting 2.4 percent. The great lesson of the 1948 comeback by President Truman is that campaigns matter. Truman knew this because in 1940, when he was running for re-election to the Senate in Missouri, both the Kansas City and St, Louis Democratic machines set out to defeat him. With no big backers, then-Senator Truman got in a car with a driver and criss-crossed the state savagely attacking the big city machines. Truman won the Democratic primary narrowly, 40.91 percent to 39.67 percent with a third candidate getting the rest. Then, Truman went on to win the general election 51.2 percent to 48.7 percent over the Republican. The 1940 experience taught Truman that a hard-charging attack campaign could overcome huge odds. In 1948, he put that to good use with an all-out assault on the “Do Nothing” Republican Congress and a ruthless attack against Gov. Dewey and his allies. Coming just three years after World War II, some of President Truman’s language was shockingly hostile comparing Dewey and his team to the fascists we had just defeated. Like President Truman, President Trump has won tough uphill campaigns. His capture of the Republican nomination was an astonishing campaign against both the news media and the vast majority of Republican leadership at the time. His defeat of Secretary Clinton was a constant uphill fight against news media assaults, the Clinton campaign’s hostility, and the FBI making false accusations to influence the election. President Trump also has the advantage of endurance, which is captured in his book, The Art of the Comeback. He knows what it is like to be virtually bankrupt, exhausted, with no obvious way forward, and still force success through intelligence and hard work. Biden is in the Dewey spring and summer period of a soft lead, with no real campaign.  Furthermore, like all left-wingers, Biden has the enormous advantage that the news media will do everything it can to weaken President Trump and protect the presumptive Democratic nominee. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Despite all these advantages and various polls that reflect the intense anti-Trump news media hostility, there will be a point in August when there will be a real campaign. In the real campaign, Biden will melt like a snow cone in a Miami August. Why am I so certain Biden will melt? There are three things Biden will find insurmountable First, Biden has always been a terrible candidate, and he is getting worse. When the American people shift from the COVID-19 disaster, the Chinese Communist dictatorship’s horrible behavior, and the economic collapse brought about by the panic, they will suddenly encounter the real Biden. It will be painfully clear that he could never function as commander in chief. In fact, Biden’s personal weaknesses are so deep and so obvious that there is at least one chance in 10 the Democrats will dump him at the last moment out of desperation. Second, the Obama-Biden record will come into contrast with the Trump administration record. On the economy, the Trump unemployment rates – the best in over 50 years and for African Americans and Latinos the best in history – will be a devastating contrast to the Pelosi-Obama-Biden slow growth, high unemployment record. On protecting Americans, the hostile reaction of Pelosi, Biden, and others when President Trump cut off flights from China will look totally wrong in light of what has happened (69 percent currently support the president’s travel ban on China). On pandemic preparation, the Obama-Biden record of cutting such spending in 2014 and failing to replace the N95 masks after the H1N1 influenza virus will undercut Biden’s critique of the Trump approach. On defense and foreign policy, former Secretary of Defense Bob Gates’ critique (after serving both Bush and Obama) that Biden has been wrong on every major defense issue in his career will come back to haunt him. Defending the Biden record will endlessly keep him on the defensive after mid-August (when the campaign will really begin). Third, the Pelosi-Biden ideology is so far to the left that once the campaign focuses on it Biden will become less and less acceptable (as will House and Senate Democrats who will hit their high watermark of acceptability in midsummer). Consider just this handful of indefensible Pelosi-Biden positions: The list of radical leftwing positions unacceptable to the American people goes on and on. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I think Biden will lose on personal incompetence, past performance, and his association with Pelosi and the radical Democratic left. Any current media-elite effort to project the election outcome is almost certainly too optimistic for Vice President Biden and pessimistic for President Trump. The establishment and media are simply following the same wrong patterns they saw in 1948, 2015, and 2016. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Judge Justin Walker, a recently appointed federal district judge in Kentucky and the nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit, has a resume that marks him as among the most talented lawyers of his generation. Walker graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from Duke University and magna cum laude from Harvard Law School, where he served as an editor of the Harvard Law Review. After law school, he clerked on the D.C. Circuit for then-Judge Brett Kavanaugh and on the Supreme Court of the United States for Justice Anthony Kennedy. After his clerkships, Judge Walker worked at one of the premier law firms in the country before returning home to Kentucky to teach law at the University of Louisville. A law professor’s job entails not only teaching students but also writing articles — examining legal doctrines, reviewing historical sources and otherwise providing critical analysis to improve all aspects of the legal field. CARRIE SEVERINO: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS — VP CANDIDATES', DEMS' RESPONSE A MASTER CLASS IN HYPOCRISY In this way, working as a law professor has often been described as useful preparation for an appellate judgeship. Judge Jenny Rivera of the New York Court of Appeals, for example, has explained: “Being a law professor prepared me well for the job of appellate judging. I thought deeply about legal issues, researched, and wrote.” For precisely this reason, law professors are not infrequently appointed to the U.S. Courts of Appeals. Working as a law professor — on top of clerking for two of the nation’s leading jurists — has prepared Judge Walker well to serve on the D.C. Circuit. A review of his legal scholarship shows that he is someone who has thought deeply about the sort of hard constitutional-law issues that he may be called upon to decide — and reveals someone who pays careful attention to the Constitution’s design, especially its separation of powers. Consider the divide between the legislative and executive branches. Under the Constitution, the legislature is supposed to enact our laws while the executive is only supposed to execute those laws. Yet today, the legislative branch frequently delegates its authority to enact laws to executive branch agencies — and even sometimes insulates those agencies from presidential control. In his most recent law review article, Judge Walker discussed the challenges to democratic accountability — and our constitutional structure — posed by this state of affairs. 
      Judge Justin Walker, the nominee to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.
       What happens when Congress delegates its lawmaking authority to the executive branch? As he explained, the Constitution requires new laws to be enacted by both houses of Congress and signed by the president, “a difficult process designed to preclude laws that lack sufficient popular support.” But, he continued, that process is evaded when Congress punts to “unelected policymakers in administrative agencies.” Working as a law professor — on top of clerking for two of the nation’s leading jurists — has prepared Judge Walker well to serve on the D.C. Circuit. What happens when judges defer to legal interpretations offered by administrative agencies? Administrative agencies can achieve their preferred policies, he noted, “even when judges believe[ ] the best reading of the authorizing statute preclude[s]” those policies. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER What happens when Congress can insulate administrative agencies from presidential control? Then the laws that govern us, he wrote, “are passed not by the people, not by the people’s representatives, and not by an executive agency accountable to the people’s elected president, but by independent administrators who are accountable to no one — including and especially the people.” Or take the divide between the legislative and judicial branches. The Constitution endows judges with life tenure and salary protections so that they could decide cases impartially and without external influence, including congressional influence. As Alexander Hamilton put it in Federalist No. 78, the Constitution insulated judges so that they could serve as “the bulwarks of a limited Constitution against legislative encroachments.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In another recent law review article, Judge Walker identified an understudied potential threat to judicial independence — congressional control over the federal judiciary’s internal correspondence and employee hiring. In analyzing this potential problem, he examined at length the Constitution’s text, structure, history and practice before concluding that, in his view, if there is “an inherent executive power over selecting subordinates and protecting privileged communications,” as many scholars argue, “then similar text, structure, history and practice provide strong evidence of an inherent judicial power over selecting subordinates and protecting privileged communications.” If confirmed, Judge Walker would bring this sort of thoughtful and perceptive analysis to the constitutional and other issues he would face on the D.C. Circuit.  He is a stellar selection, and we urge his swift confirmation. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY MICHAEL DAVIS David Feder is co-author (with Justice Neil Gorsuch) of "A Republic, If You Can Keep It." Feder also previously clerked for Justice Gorsuch. He is an appellate attorney in Los Angeles. 

Dr. Mehmet Oz reacts on 'Fox &amp; Friends.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As we learn more about COVID 19, we have come to realize that certain groups of patients tend to develop more severe forms of the disease and have a much higher likelihood of death once infected. Those with chronic diseases such as diabetes, lung disease, cancer and heart disease — just to name a few — have been found to be at much higher risk for complications from COVID-19, including ICU stays, need for mechanical ventilation and even death. Specifically, the presence of heart disease has been shown to be highly correlated with death in COVID patients. In one study from China, it was found that nearly 10 percent of COVID patients who have preexisting heart disease died (as compared with 1 percent in the general population without underlying heart disease). GOLDFEDER AND BEDZOW: CORONAVIRUS NURSING HOME CRISIS – 4 THINGS THEY NEED RIGHT NOW There also have been reports from all over the world showing an association between COVID-19 and cardiovascular symptoms and dangerous heart-related conditions, including heart attacks, strokes and myocarditis (an inflammation of the heart muscle that can lead to congestive heart failure). In addition, COVID 19 infection has been associated with an increased prediction for our blood to form clots — these clots can cause heart attacks and strokes as well as other serious medical conditions. Coronary artery disease — the cause of heart attacks — is an inflammatory process and the most severe COVID-19 cases are associated with a hyper-inflammatory response from our own bodies as we attempt to fight off the infection. For example, when the lining of our blood vessels that supply our heart and brain become inflamed, the damage that occurs can promote the formation of blood clots that lead to strokes and heart attacks. It stands to reason that the inflammation created by COVID-19 can exacerbate underlying heart disease and unmask previously undiagnosed cardiac conditions. What can you do now? Know Your Numbers — Know Your Risk  It is vital that you understand what your risk for heart disease may be. Risk factors include diabetes, high blood pressure, high cholesterol, family history of heart disease and male gender. Some of these risk factors you can control and modify. Others, like gender and family history, you can’t. You are born with your own genetic code and that is part of what makes you who you are. Developing a relationship NOW with your primary care physician can allow you to improve your health and impact your ability to fight off a potential COVID infection in the future.   However, it is important that you assess YOUR own risk for heart disease and work with your doctor to lower your risk by lowering your body weight through diet and exercise and treating any underlying conditions such as high blood pressure and cholesterol. If you have diabetes, it is imperative that you control your blood sugar and, if you have type 2 diabetes, weight loss may reverse the course of the disease altogether. Developing a relationship NOW with your primary care physician can allow you to improve your health and impact your ability to fight off a potential COVID infection in the future. Exercise Daily  The impact of exercise on cardiovascular health cannot be understated. During the pandemic, many Americans have turned to homemade workouts while gyms are closed.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that we all get at least 150 minutes of aerobic exercise every single week. Exercise improves your cardiovascular capacity and your mood. In addition, exercise can boost your immune system — which is incredibly important in fighting off a COVID-19 infection. Sleep Well  Sleep has been shown to stimulate our immune system. Numerous studies have found that people who do not get adequate sleep are much more likely to become infected with a virus after exposure. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER While these studies were NOT done with COVID 19 in mind, they do lend credence to the idea that sleep is important for our overall health. Sleep helps you produce antibodies and also provides time for your cells to repair themselves — all of which make you more prepared to fight infection. In addition, sleep is important for maintaining cardiovascular health. Studies show that sleep deprivation increases inflammation and the likelihood of developing obesity, diabetes and high blood pressure — all of which are risk factors for heart attack and stroke. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The COVID-19 pandemic will pass in time. Let’s all use this time in lockdown wisely to improve our health and reduce our risk of cardiovascular disease. When and if the pandemic returns, we can then face it with healthier bodies and reduce our risk of contracting the disease in the first place. At the very least, by improving our baseline cardiovascular health, we can significantly reduce our risk of experiencing severe life-threatening complications of COVID-19 infection. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. KEVIN CAMPBELL

Republicans and Democrats spar over potential options amid coronavirus pandemic; Jacqui Heinrich reports from New York. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The secret ballot, the ability for you and only you to know who you choose to vote for, is one of the surest safeguards to our democracy. But if Democrats have their way, they will corrode our electoral sanctity by claiming it was necessary to combat the coronavirus. Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and her Democrat friends are uniformly calling for dramatic expansion of “vote by mail” opportunities in all federal and state elections. This past week, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo ordered postage-paid absentee ballots sent to each of the state’s registered voters. On the surface, these may seem legitimate, but these practices are ripe for exploitation by corrupt actors. The secret ballot, originally called the “Australian ballot,” came to the United States in the 1890s. There were four characteristics: VON SPAKOVSKY, ADAMS & MITCHELL: CORONAVIRUS AND ELECTIONS — CHANGES INCREASE RISK OF VOTER FRAUD The latter two safeguards have been consistently eroded for decades, yet few have been heard to object. This same issue tends to dominate union organizing efforts, which must be held within the guidelines of the Taft Hartley Act of 1947. Unions are eager to embrace “card check” provisions that enable them to personally lobby workers to cast their vote in the presence and under the influence of union organizers. Companies are finding it harder and harder to preserve and assert workers’ right to a secret ballot. The same is true of our federal and state elections. Decades ago, almost everyone who wanted to vote did so on Election Day and few could meet the stringent requirements for absentee ballots. Such elections were relatively easy to supervise because all ballots were rather easily accounted for.  But the use of the secret ballot cast in person is no longer the universal rule and recently has been allowed to slip further away – usually in the name of voting reform.  What’s most troubling is that the importance of the long-recognized principle of the secret ballot is rarely discussed when Democrats call for election reforms. But these reforms give rise to new concerns, such as who gets to see the ballot before it’s recorded and what types of pressure have been applied to the voter. Use of the secret ballot cast in person is no longer the universal rule, and recently has been allowed to slip further away – usually in the name of voting reform.    Consider these examples to illustrate the overwhelming allure of the secret ballot: An overbearing father, not particularly thrilled that his son is back living at home – and constantly berating him about political issues. Archie Bunker on steroids. Even under those circumstances, the son can accompany his folks to the polling place, hear all the political pitches while standing in line, and then go into the privacy of the voting booth and mark his ballot for whomever he chooses, with no one the wiser. All without having to sneakily complete a paper ballot at home or be “required” to discuss his actual choices with his father. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER A more troubling example might be an ardent “do-gooder” who decides to help facilitate voting by the infirm – in hospitals, nursing homes or other confined settings. What could be more patriotic than helping whole groups of people fill out their conveniently supplied absentee ballots?  But consider the downsides. The voter’s choice is immediately known to the do-gooder. Or if the elderly, hospitalized or homeless voters are unsure of their choices, they could be guided by the do-gooder's oral descriptions of the candidates or issues. If such “gentle persuasion” is not effective, true believers could simply misplace the ballots that weren’t completed in the desired manner.  Since no records are kept, no one would ever know. CLICK HERE FOR THE FOX NEWS APP There are polling locations in Philadelphia where virtually 100 percent of the vote is recorded as having been cast for Democrat candidates. In places dominated by one party, poll watchers complain at the risk of their personal safety – and that’s under the best of circumstances. Without a secret ballot, such mischief is more easily accomplished.   All of these situations – and many more – can best be addressed by emphasizing and adhering to the sanctity of the secret ballot. Americans, like employers, have the right to insist on the preservation of the secret ballot, but they had better speak up. Many may not be aware, but there is a movement to undermine the entire concept of free and fair elections. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM GEOFF SHEPARD

Julie Kaufman and Andrea Steponaitis from Blue Willow Farm joins ‘Fox and Friends.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  The Kentucky Derby was scheduled to be held Saturday – but like so many events in sports, entertainment and other aspects of our lives, it has been blocked by the coronavirus pandemic. As a result, the grandstand beneath the famed Twin Spires of Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky., will be empty on the first Saturday in May for first time since 1945, when it was delayed until June 9 because of World War II. The annual “Run for the Roses” has been postponed this year until Sept. 5. CHURCHILL DOWNS TO REOPEN STABLES, RACE WITHOUT SPECTATORS First held in 1875, the Kentucky Derby is the first leg of the Triple Crown and the capstone event of a two-week-long celebration in the Bluegrass State. In an area rich with tradition and charm, Derby festivities include the drinking of mint juleps (a mixture of bourbon, mint and sugar syrup), the singing of “My Old Kentucky Home,” and women wearing big hats – a custom started by the race’s founder, Meriwether Lewis Clark Jr. But if only in your mind, I’d like to take you on a journey from the famous track and travel 780 miles to the northeast, to my hometown of Baldwin on Long Island, just outside New York City. A brick house that sits on the corner of Central Avenue and Cottage Place in Baldwin – two houses from the home where I grew up – had a surprising connection to the Kentucky Derby. When I was a little boy in the 1970s, an old couple lived in the corner house. It was ringed by a chain-link fence that was covered with blooming roses each spring. Lots of roses. So many roses, in fact, that when I would walk to the bus stop for kindergarten, I would start smelling them one house away. Johnny and Marian McCabe, the owners of the home, seemed to always be tending to those flowers. Mrs. McCabe wore a big floppy hat and the diminutive Mr. McCabe smoked a long, green cigar. Somehow, when he talked, he never took the stogie out of his mouth. He was friendly and always had a smile on his face as he deftly shuffled between the rose bushes. The McCabes lived there long before I was born, so I’m not sure when I was told or when I fully appreciated their storied history. But as the years rolled on and I gained a greater appreciation for horse racing, I sure wish I knew then what I know now. As a young man, Johnny McCabe was a jockey – and a very successful one. The high point of his career was winning the Kentucky Derby by eight lengths in 1914 while riding Old Rosebud. The gelding set a race record at the time – completing the mile-and-a-quarter sprint in 2 minutes and 3 seconds. When Old Rosebud was euthanized in 1922, he was eulogized as “one of the greatest racehorses to ever sport silks on American turf.” Johnny McCabe would go on to enjoy a successful racing career but nothing would ever top winning the Derby on that first Saturday in May 106 years ago. I remember a black Cadillac limousine coming to the family’s home every Tuesday morning during racing season. Mr. and Mrs. McCabe would emerge from the house, dressed in their Sunday best. They would climb into the back seat for the chauffeured ride to Belmont Park or Aqueduct Racetrack, where they would watch and, hopefully, successfully wager and return home with their winnings. How I would have loved to have ridden in that car with the McCabes or sat with them during the races, asking about the past and inquiring what goes through the mind of someone who has been to the summit of his chosen career. As a kid, it never occurred to me that as Johnny McCabe toiled and tended lovingly to his roses that the act was no doubt bringing him back to the aroma of the lush blanket of 554 red roses that is placed atop each year’s winning horse at the Derby. My last memory of Johnny McCabe is a sad one. He fell as he stepped off his front brick stoop one morning – I assume on his way to tend to his beloved roses. There he laid, sprawled out on his path. I remember a gaggle of Baldwin Fire Department paramedics surrounding him and then whisking him away to the hospital. By then he was a very old man, and I don’t think he ever made it back home. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER His wife took up the task of tending to the roses – until she no longer could. She died several years after her beloved husband. I recently looked up a picture of the house online and was pleased to see that a few of the rose bushes remain – but it’s nothing like it was. It never is. From childhood, roses always intrigued me. Even back then, I knew they were valuable and fragile – but the sharp thorns on the branches scared me and kept me from getting too close. Roses are something of a metaphor for life – they take time to develop and then at the right moment, bloom in all their beauty. But the dazzle doesn’t last that long and the thorns can really poke – a reminder that you have to take chances and take the bad with the good. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I’m already looking forward to the Kentucky Derby in September – but I know we’re all especially eager this year for the blooms of spring because in the words of Lady Bird Johnson, “Where flowers bloom so does hope.” And as the coronavirus pandemic continues to take a deadly toll, we sure could all use some hope. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

Never in American history have politicians been more powerful than they are now. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Last week we interviewed a longtime partner at the consulting firm McKinsey & Company named Peter Walker. Like so many in finance and consulting, Walker spent an awful lot of his career doing business in China. We have no idea how much money he made doing that. We do know that along the way, Walker internalized a lot of the attitudes of China’s totalitarian government. During our interview, we asked Walker what he thought of China’s lockdown that was imposed in an effort to halt the spread of the coronavirus. I asked Walker: “Now credible reports suggest that Chinese authorities locked people in their apartments and left them to die. We know they snatched people off the streets and threw them into police vans – God knows where they went. That’s the quarantine that you think they deserve high praise for. Why?” REP. TED BUDD: CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWNS — ENSURE SAFETY BUT DON'T INFRINGE ON OUR CIVIL LIBERTIES Walker replied: “Well I think … if you just look at the results, I know there’s always going to be questions about exactly what the numbers are, but I think the harsh action that they took, given the scale of China and number of big cities in it, was exactly what they needed to do to prevent the outbreak from going any further. The reality is the outbreak hasn’t gone much beyond Wuhan.” The secret police kidnapping citizens off the street, authorities locking people in their apartments from the outside until they starve to death – just look at the results. All of that, Walker said, was “exactly what they needed to do.” This is the view of one of America’s most prominent business leaders. He didn’t seem ashamed to say it. Later in our interview, Walker suggested that American authorities could have done the same things in New York, if only they’d gotten an earlier start. Kind of a shame they didn’t. Your jaw dropped watching it. But here’s the striking thing: nobody seemed to notice that he said it. Walker didn’t find himself on the front page of The New York Times the next morning. No one in American business denounced him. He went home and went to bed. Totalitarianism doesn’t shock us anymore. Maybe that’s because, all of a sudden, it’s all around us. In a recent incident, two armed police officers arrived at a family’s home in Wisconsin. Someone had reported the mother to police for arranging a play date for her daughter. That’s now a crime. The first police officers asked the woman: “Are you aware that we’re in a stay at home order right now, by the government of Wisconsin? I don’t need to explain that to you?” The woman responded by asking: “Why are you here?” The police officer responded: “Because your daughter is going to play at other people’s home and you’re allowing it to happen…..  Stop having your kid go by other people’s home.” “Are we done here?” the woman asked. The other officer then asked the woman for her name. “I’m not giving it to you,” the woman said. “I haven’t done anything wrong.” The first officer then said he already had the woman’s name. “We got it,” the second officer told the woman. “And that’ll be documented too, that you’re uncooperative.” “You are uncooperative. That will be documented.” Notice the tone they strike with this mother. They’re standing on her property, uninvited, hectoring her about the so-called crime of allowing her daughter to play outside the house. The police officers aren’t apologizing for this. They don’t seem embarrassed to be carrying out an order that has no basis in science. They are utterly self-confident. They treat the woman with pure contempt, like a peasant. … They believe they have the right to do that. Where exactly do they get that right? That’s a good question – a question we are strongly discouraged from asking. The short answer is, governors told them they could. Never in American history have politicians been more powerful than they are now. Effectively, they are God. In the state of Maine, Gov. Janet Mills now has the power to suspend any law she doesn’t like. She can seize any state resource she feels like seizing. She can force any citizen or all citizens from their homes. The governor can do all of this for as long as she believes Maine is in a state of “emergency.” There is virtually nothing Janet Mills can’t do. Many governors now have these powers. J.B. Pritzker is the governor of Illinois. On Monday, Pritzker did his best to explain why his word is now law in the state. It has to be law, he explained. Otherwise, thousands would die: “The stay-at-home order has prevented tens of thousands of illnesses and thousands of deaths,” Pritzker said. “History will remember those who put politics aside to come together to keep people safe. It will also remember those who so blindly devoted to ideology and the pursuit of personal celebrity that they made an enemy of science and of reason.” In three sentences, Gov. Pritzker framed himself as a leader of historic stature. Those who doubt his decrees are “enemies” of science and reason – enemies of civilization itself. Enemies of the state. Two days later, on Wednesday, it emerged that Pritzker’s own wife, who has state employees of her own, was one of these people. She had apparently violated the lockdown herself. Pritzker was asked about this. “What is your response to people who say the stay at home order and non-essential travel bans aren’t being abided by your family?” a reporter asked Pritzker. “I believe there’s a report from Illinois Rising Action that says that she recently traveled to Florida.” The governor responded: “Well, first of all, I want to say that in politics it used to be that we kept our families out of it. My official duties have nothing to do with my family, so I’m just not going to answer that question. It’s inappropriate, and I find it reprehensible honestly that that reporter wrote a story about it.” Asking about whether or not J.B. Pritzker’s own family is obeying the order your family is morally obligated to follow is “inappropriate.” Indeed, the governor says it is “reprehensible.” How dare you? It would be very useful in moments like these to have an independent media. News organizations exist to hold the powerful to account. Here we have the powerful acting with no accountability at all. And our news media? They’re cheering it on, besotted fan girls. No abuse is too grotesque for them. No talking point is too stupid to repeat. Reporters will do whatever they are told. They’re all in. MSNBC recently sent a camera crew to document one of the latest and most Orwellian developments in America’s decent into Chinese-style social control: barking drones that harangue citizens from the air. MSNBC was were delighted by it: A voice coming from a drone said to people below: “|Please move away from each other and separate.” A reporter said: “Elizabeth, New Jersey is now using drones to spread the life-saving message.” The voice from the drone said: “You are not immune to this virus.” “Move away from each other!” commands the state of New Jersey. “Break it up! Your God-given right to free assembly has been suspended indefinitely! Back inside, or you will face the consequences!” MSNBC applauds this, as if it’s completely normal.  It is, they tell us, “a lifesaving message.” Handmaidens to the corona-security state. But to their credit, at least MSNBC put it on television. Most outlets don’t even bother to cover stories like this. The other day, prosecutors in New Jersey charged nine people for daring to participate in a Jewish wedding in their backyard. A few months ago, this would have been news. For 250 years, Americans have enjoyed the unfettered right to practice their faith as they choose. Now they don’t. It happened overnight. Last month, Christians across the country were legally prohibited from celebrating Easter in their own churches. The national media barely noted it. How exactly is this happening? It turns out, that’s not clear. Strangely, not very many people have asked. Politicians have no right to do any of this. They can’t make it illegal for people to go to religious services. The Constitution of the United States expressly prohibits that. The words couldn’t be clearer. The First Amendment explicitly prevents government from making any law that inhibits the exercise of religious faith. It’s a cornerstone of our history and our law. Millions of people have fled to America from around the world precisely because our Bill of Rights gives them this guarantee. It’s why this country was founded. Now it’s gone. Where did politicians get the authority to do all this? Because some elderly, power-drunk doctor told them to? That’s not how our system works – or can work. Occasionally, you’ll hear some lonely civil libertarian fret that we may be on a “slippery slope” toward losing our rights. If only. We’re already there. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER We’ve slid to the bottom of that slope. Our rights are gone. No one has explained how politicians are allowed to do this, to override the Constitution. No one seems to care. They’re too afraid. But if we think this is moment scary, consider what might come next. Now that we’ve ceded all authority in the country to our political leaders, what can’t they do? What are the limits to their power? That’s not a theoretical question. It’s not an argument over philosophy or political theory. It’s the most practical possible question. The answer will define where this country goes next. What can’t politicians do in the name of public health? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP As it stands, politicians won’t let people worship, or work, or go to school, or see their aging parents. They’ve placed the nation under house arrest. That’s happening today, right now. But let’s say we all get more afraid. What then? What couldn’t they start doing? Could they intern people? Seriously. You can dismiss the possibility if you like. But remember just a few months ago, most of us would have dismissed the idea of propaganda-spewing drones from above. Now we have them. So what’s next? What can’t they do? Let’s draw a line at some point. Adapted from Tucker Carlson’s monologue from “Tucker Carlson Tonight” on May 1, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Former ICE Acting Director Tom Homan reacts. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Far-left advocates of open borders – who think we should welcome everyone around the world who wants to come to the U.S., give them government assistance and simply ignore our immigration laws – are using the coronavirus pandemic as an excuse to try to end the detention of illegal immigrants. Two out-of-control liberal federal judges in California, one in Florida and one in Massachusetts recently issued dangerous and disturbing rulings that put public safety at risk and set impossible detention conditions for illegal immigrants – including convicted criminals who might commit new crimes and victimize people in our country if released. If decisions like the ones by these judges are upheld on appeal and become precedents, judges will have the ability to overturn immigration laws enacted by Congress and past presidents. FORMER ACTING ICE BOSS: JUDGE'S RULING ON TRUMP DETENTION POLICY WILL WORSEN IMMIGRATION CRISIS The most recent judicial action seeking to nullify our immigration laws came Friday by U.S. District Judge Vince Chhabria in San Francisco, when he issued an emergency order to establish a process to consider the release of some of the 400 illegal immigrants at two Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) detention facilities in California. In an earlier order Wednesday, Chhabria said ICE “has not come close to achieving social distancing” for over illegal immigrants at the two facilities. No detainees at the two California facilities – the Yuba County Jail in Marysville and the Mesa Verde ICE Processing Center in Bakersfield – have tested positive for the coronavirus. But Chhabria, who was appointed by President Barack Obama, wants the facilities to significantly cut their populations to enable detainees to stay at least six feet apart at all times to reduce the chances of the coronavirus infecting anyone should it enter the facilities.  Chhabria’s ruling follows another decision Thursday U.S. District Judge Marcia G. Cooke in Miami. She ordered the release of most detainees at three ICE facilities in Florida. The Miami Herald reported that Cooke found ICE failed in its “duty to protect the safety and general well-being” of detainees in facilities where social distancing was not possible in the face of the threat of coronavirus infection. And in a third case, U.S. District Judge Terry Hatter in Los Angeles, who was appointed by President Jimmy Carter, ordered a mass release of illegal immigrants – some with significant criminal convictions – last week. The detainees are being held in the Adelanto Detention Center northeast of Los Angeles in a supposed effort to halt the spread of the coronavirus. If these types of rulings take effect nationally, they will create a magnet for even more illegal immigrants to cross our borders But as is the case with the facilities covered by Judge Chhabria’s ruling, there have been no cases of COVID-19 – the disease caused by the coronavirus – at Adelanto. And while the Adelanto center has space for almost 2,000 detainees it now holds only about 1,300. So it is absurd to claim the center is overcrowded. In fact, it is underutilized. Hatter ordered that the Adelanto population must be reduced by several hundred people – without a specifying an exact size – “to such a level that would allow the remaining detainees to maintain a social distance of six feet from each other at all times and six feet from the detention officers.” The federal judges are demanding an unreasonable standard of spacing for any jail, prison or any other detention facility to meet. No facility that I know of can do so without mass releases of detainees – including some who pose serious public safety threats. Hatter ruled that criminals should not be prioritized for release. However, to get to the standard he and other judges have ordered this will have to happen. That’s because 89 percent of the people ICE arrests in the U.S. are either convicted criminals or face pending criminal charges. Adelanto is operated by a contractor for ICE. It is run in compliance with the highest detention standards in the industry. It is clean and safe, but it was not built to be a five-star luxury resort filled with spacious suites. No federal, state or local jail, prison or other detention facility meets such absurd standards. Yet another recent decision made by a federal judge in Massachusetts also ordered the release of illegal immigrants because of the COVID-19 danger. One of those released was convicted of rape. How can anyone reasonably argue that this rapist poses no danger to innocent victims after being prematurely released? The facilities affected by the rulings by the federal judges are just the first of many detention facilities that advocates of open borders are attacking and filing lawsuits against – using COVID-19 as the excuse to make it impossible to detain people who enter our country illegally. If these types of rulings take effect nationally, they will create a magnet for even more illegal immigrants to cross our borders. After all, how can immigration laws that are impossible to enforce act as a deterrent? Judge Hatter obviously didn’t consider that there are no COVID-19 cases in Adelanto. There never have been. He also didn’t take into consideration that the Adelanto facility has the highest detention standards in the industry – better than any other local, state or federal detention facility in the U.S. Hatter also clearly ignored the fact that Adelanto is one of the facilities that have adopted the highest detention standards in the industry, which are the Performance-Based National Detention Standards 2011 (PBNDS 2011). Please click on the link and take a look. The PBNDS 2011 standards were crafted under the Obama administration to improve medical and mental health services, increase access to legal services and religious opportunities, improve communication with detainees with limited English proficiency, improve the process for reporting and responding to complaints, reinforce protections against sexual abuse and assault, and increase recreation and visitation. Hatter also obviously didn’t take into account that since COVID-19 became known, ICE detention facilities – including Adelanto – have taken immediate steps to protect detainees. Guidance was issued that is in line with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization. Best practices have been put into place for the prevention, assessment, and management of the coronavirus. Employees and detainees at Adelanto have been given guidance on preventative measures to avoid the spread of the virus. There are additional measures now in place during the intake process to include screening specific indicators of COVID-19. Specialized sanitation teams have been put into place to sterilize high-contact areas of ICE detention facilities. The facilities continue to work to limit non-essential visitation just as most hospitals and nursing homes have – and they have developed emergency plans for managing the coronavirus. In addition, masks have been given to all staff and detainees at the Adelanto facility as a precautionary measure – despite having never had any cases of COVID-19. Health checks are made daily. The service providers who run ICE detention centers specialize in the management of secure facilities and have unparalleled experience with the implementation of best practices for the prevention, assessment and management of infectious diseases. They have been dealing with infectious diseases coming across the border for years. The ICE detention facilities give all detainees access to clean water and soap. The facilities also provide around-the-clock access to health care. In fact, nearly all of ICE’s large contractor-run detention facilities have twice the number of health care staff as compared to other federal, state and local facilities. ICE contract facilities also have negative pressure rooms in their medical wings, known as airborne infection isolation rooms. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Those are the facts. Of course, no one can guarantee that any one person will not be infected with the coronavirus, even in detention. But many detainees will be safer in ICE facilities where the population is controlled and there is ready access to doctors and medical care. No mass release is needed or practical. Let’s just call these lawsuits against ICE detention facilities what they are: an attack on President Trump’s immigration agenda. They are also an attack on the rule of law. Those on the left will continue to use every crisis they can to achieve what they always wanted – even if it means releasing criminals who could victimize members of the public. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We can all agree that the coronavirus pandemic is serious. But that doesn’t mean the rule of law doesn’t exist. It doesn’t mean that those that those who knowingly violate the law shouldn't face consequences. It doesn’t mean we stop being a nation of laws. I hope that the Justice Department is gearing up for a fight and will appeal the dangerous and irresponsible rulings by the judges described above. This is a battle we cannot lose. If we don’t fight hard against the tyranny of judges seeking open borders we will not only lose this battle, we will lose the entire war against the progressive agenda. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TOM HOMAN

Former Deputy National Security Adviser K.T. McFarland weighs in on new documents in Michael Flynn case. The last thing National Security Adviser Michael Flynn said to me when he left our West Wing office in the White House for the last time on February 13, 2017 was laced with irony: “You know, I joined the military to fight the Russians.”  It has taken nearly four years, but the truth is finally emerging about the FBI’s investigation of retired Army Lt. Gen. Flynn. The truth is that the Deep State and some senior Obama administration officials set up Flynn in hopes of using him and others to cripple the Trump presidency from the start. The move against Flynn was also a preemptive strike to remove the national security advisor before he could carry out President Trump’s plan to reform and streamline the sprawling intelligence community and its 16 different agencies. MCENANY CALLS OUT MEDIA FOR DOWNPLAYING FLYNN BOMBSHELL AT FIRST BRIEFING AS PRESS SECRETARY I know all this because I was at Flynn’s side during the Trump presidential transition and Flynn’s all-too-brief tenure in the White House. I was Flynn’s deputy, the “senior official” he talked to before and after he spoke to Russian Ambassador to the United States Sergey Kislyak in the closing days of December 2016. Although the Flynn-Kislyak phone call was perfectly legal and appropriate, senior officials in the outgoing Obama administration and the permanent intelligence bureaucracy seized on it to build their criminal case against Flynn that resulted in him pleading guilty to a crime he did not commit – making false statements to the FBI. Officials secretly recorded Flynn’s phone call and leaked selected sections of their transcript to Trump-hating journalists. The press used these leaks to spin out a series of stories accusing Flynn of conducting an illegal communication with the Russian ambassador – in violation of a dusty law called the Logan Act – and then lying about the contents of the call. There was nothing illegal about the president-elect’s incoming national security adviser speaking to the Russian ambassador. The Logan Act, which was enacted in 1799, has never been used to criminalize communications during a presidential transition. In fact, no one has ever been convicted of violating the Logan Act, which outlawed negotiations by unauthorized American citizens with foreign government. The constitutionality of the law has never been upheld. At the time of the Flynn-Kislyak call, President-elect Trump was speaking to foreign leaders nearly every day. This was no different from what incoming presidents have done for decades. FBI investigators took it from there – they took press stories, some Trump tweets and the false Steele dossier (funded by the Hillary Clinton presidential campaign) to craft unsubstantiated narratives of Trump’s alleged collusion with Russia to get elected and Flynn’s alleged wrongdoing. As I write in my new book “Revolution: Trump, Washington and ‘We the People,’’ when I talked to Flynn about these events at the time he was still national security adviser, he didn’t strike me as someone who had deliberately lied or tried to dissemble. He just seemed to be someone with an imperfect memory who couldn’t remember precisely what he said to Russian Ambassador Kislyak on what call or on exactly which day. On the advice of lawyers – both his and mine – I have not spoken with Flynn since he left the White House in February 2017. I don’t know what happened to him during the investigation by Special Counsel Robert Mueller. I can only speak to my own experiences. But according to press accounts, the FBI and Mueller investigators used the same approach with Flynn as they did with me. There was nothing illegal about the president-elect’s incoming national security adviser speaking to the Russian ambassador. In August 2017, FBI agents showed up at my house – unannounced. I thought they wanted to ask me questions for an FBI background check of some friend or former colleague. Instead, they wanted to ask about the Trump election campaign and Russia. I wasn’t very involved in the Trump campaign and certainly didn’t know anything about supposed “Russian collusion,” so I mistakenly went ahead and answered questions, without a lawyer. The FBI agents repeatedly reassured me that I was just a “fact witness.” Unbeknownst to me, the FBI had obtained all my government files, emails, text messages and phone logs, which I had turned over to the government as required by law when I left the White House. I didn’t keep copies of these records. The FBI agents asked me a series of gotcha questions, quizzing me on my recollection of telephone calls and meetings during the presidential transition, including the precise words that Flynn used when speaking with me about his calls with the Russian ambassador many months before.  I have a good memory, but not a perfect one, so my recollection of those events was not crystal clear. I hadn’t reviewed any documents to help me refresh my recollection. I had no lawyer with me to prepare me or to protect me. In retrospect, that was my mistake. When asked, I dutifully spoke to the FBI several more times, still with no lawyer and no access to my documents. I was too trusting of the FBI. A perjury trap is a “process crime.” It’s when no original crime has been committed, but can occur when a witness in an interview with a government investigator – such as someone from the  FBI – makes a mistake, mixes up dates or remembers only part of an event. Prosecutors then can claim someone’s faulty memory isn’t faulty at all, but a deliberate effort to evade or lie. They can threaten to charge you with lying without letting you know how they arrived at that conclusion, what evidence they had, or what documents led them to believe you lied.  After my FBI interviews, the office of Special Counsel Mueller subpoenaed me for another round of interviews. I finally got a lawyer, who learned that the Mueller team thought that I had not been fully truthful with the FBI. I then agreed to a day-long interview in Washington to try to clear my name. I finally obtained my records so I could refresh my recollection of my interactions with Flynn, President Trump and other senior officials. The Mueller prosecutors pressed me to see if I had information to implicate Flynn and even President Trump in some wrongdoing. The suggestion was that if I “cooperated” with the Mueller team and I told them what they wanted to hear, my problems would go away. I told the truth, but I didn’t have information to implicate Flynn or President Trump. Eventually, the Mueller team moved on from me, but it was the worst experience of my life. There were times when I thought I might be dragged before a jury in Washington with the full power of the U.S. government against me. I thought I would have to prove myself innocent, not the other way around. Prosecutors and the FBI have unlimited resources to pursue any case they want, while a person being investigated has to pay for his or her own legal costs. My own legal bills were in the hundreds of thousands of dollars; Flynn’s were almost certainly in the millions. When all else fails, government investigators know they can bankrupt someone just by the process alone. In Flynn’s case, the Mueller team apparently threatened to charge his son. Flynn sacrificed himself to save his son and pleaded guilty to crimes he did not commit. That fits with the Mike Flynn I know. He said as much in his plea agreement: “A decision I made in the best interests of my family and our country”. Take politics out of it for a moment and consider this: a cabal of senior leaders of the FBI – unelected and accountable to no one – plotted against a newly elected president of the United States. These permanent bureaucrats were so sure of themselves that they openly discussed how they would set up and blackmail the new president’s top advisors. Fired FBI Director James Comey even joked on national TV about how he did it. Now that their actions are coming to light, I hope they will be held accountable for what they did to Flynn, to me and to others. They knew exactly what they were doing when they targeted innocent people. They could rely on infinite government resources and subpoenas to wear their targets down, threaten family members, and push their targets into bankruptcy and ruin. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The officials concocted the story that the Trump campaign actively colluded with Russia and then set out to destroy a duly elected president of the United States and those who worked for him. It was abuse of power plain and simple, and they thought they could get away with it. If it weren’t for some doggedly determined lawyers, Attorney General William Barr and a few good guys at the Justice Department, the officials who acted improperly probably would have escaped any accountability. It’s not enough to fire a few low-level bureaucrats and call it a day. The only question that remains is how high up this Deep State conspiracy went. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Was this just the work of a handful of rogue FBI agents, or were they acting at the direction of or approval by their bosses? What was FBI Director Comey’s role?  What did officials in the Obama White House know and when did they know it? These are among the important questions that need to be answered. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY KT MCFARLAND

Peter Doocy reports on how Democrats are reacting to the allegations against the presumptive 2020 nominee. Hillary Clinton sent a powerful message to worried Democratic Party leaders last month when she endorsed Joe Biden. And that message was, “in case of emergency break glass.” The People’s Pantsuit all but offered herself up as an electoral fire extinguisher in a carefully crafted appearance aimed at assuring voters that she’s still here in case Joe’s not all there. Her timing could not have been better. More on that in a second. Now before you tell me I’m crazy, I ask you this: why else would a woman who’s spent her whole life pursuing the presidency with the hyperfocus of a dog chasing a tennis ball stop on a dime and pass the torch in something as unceremonious as a virtual Town Hall meeting? TAMMY BRUCE: WHY BIDEN'S TARA READE HYPOCRISY, REFUSAL TO SAY WHETHER HE REMEMBERS HER IS IMPORTANT Granted, the Democratic Party can’t hold massive rallies right now, partly because of coronavirus lockdowns and mostly because Joe doesn’t draw big crowds to begin with. But after all the time Hillary’s spent obsessing over the presidency, it was beyond anti-climactic to watch her give up her lifelong quest in a glorified Zoom cocktail party. Unless she didn’t. I know, I know, Hillary says she’s never running again, which is exactly what she said prior to 2016. Here’s the thing: Hillary will ALWAYS be running for president. Someday, the Ivanka Trump rallies are going to be chanting “HELP her up.” In the meantime, now might be Hillary’s chance to help the Democratic party up out of Biden’s basement, where the only thing more problematic than his memory is Tara Reade’s.  Reade, a former Senate Staffer, is accusing then-Senator Biden of sexually assaulting her in 1993. Four people are on record stating she told them contemporaneously about the incident and a video has surfaced of a woman she claims is her mother calling into “The Larry King Show” to discuss the allegations in 1993. The media’s reluctance to cover Reade’s story has sparked howls of protest online over what is rightfully being described as a double standard, given the wall to wall coverage devoted to the allegations against Brett Kavanaugh during his Supreme Court Confirmation hearing. Christine Blasey Ford was celebrated as a hero in every corner of the internet for having the guts to speak out against a powerful man. Reade came along and did the same thing, albeit with a lot more corroborating evidence, and in the past four weeks it's almost as if there have been more sightings of Kim Jong Un than Reade. But despite efforts to ignore her by Biden’s allies in the press and the “Believe All Women” crowd in his own Party, a steady drum beat on social media has sparked newfound interest in Reade’s story. Biden was finally forced to address the allegations Friday on “Morning Joe” and let’s just say that if Democrats aren’t calling the Chappaqua fire department yet, they’re at least staring at the phone. It’s never good when you start off an interview about your own self-control by coughing directly into your hand at the height of a global pandemic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER To his credit, Biden was more careful from there to deny Reade’s allegations in every manner they were presented to him by a visibly upset Mika Brzezinksi. Critics will focus on the fact that Biden repeatedly rebuffed her requests to unseal his Senate records at the University of Delaware, and yes, his about face from his stance in the Kavanaugh days of “believe all women” didn’t look good on him at all. Democrats are kidding themselves if they think it looks any better on them either. The good news for the Biden campaign is Donald Trump has no shortage of allegations against him, so there’s only so many rocks Republicans will throw out of their own glass houses on this one. The bad news is “Cornpop” and hundreds of other verbal oddities that have come out of Joe’s mouth on the campaign trail. You can deny his inability to complete a sentence is a byproduct of cognitive decline all you want. But there’s no denying the fact that Biden interviews are where the candidate goes to feel like he’s alert and on top of things. And when you tack on sexual assault allegations to the perception that a candidate is losing his marbles, it wouldn’t be any surprise to see him lose the nomination too. If that happens, there’s only one place for the Democratic Party to turn. Sorry Bernie Bros, but the Democrats would replace Joe Biden with Joe Exotic before they give it to Bernie. And as for the other candidates who ran this year, there isn’t one with Hillary Clinton’s fundraising ability and national organization who could step in immediately and fill the void. “Cornpop” may have been a bad dude, but Hillary Clinton is a “nasty woman.” She shoved Joe out of the way in 2016, and if we learned anything from the timing of her endorsement, it’s that she won’t think twice about doing it again. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP To which I say, “why not?” Every other blockbuster gets a sequel these days, so why not the biggest election of all time? Get your popcorn ready if Joe doesn’t turn it around soon.

Joe Biden defends himself for the first time on TV after releasing a statement denying the Tara Reade sexual assault allegation; Geraldo Rivera reacts. The MSNBC/”Morning Joe” interview with former Vice President and presumptive Democratic nominee for president Joe Biden about the Tara Reade sexual assault allegation was predictable up to a point, and then went off the rails. Biden reiterated what his campaign has repeatedly said—that the allegation us untrue. While he had hoped to burnish his image with Americans after pressure to personally address the situation, it was Mika Brzezinski emerging as the sole success in the interview. Despite her previously stated admiration and support for Biden, she did more than provide a perfunctory exercise allowing the candidate to deny the assault, then move on. Her questions were direct and pointed, with her focus highlighted by bringing up his previous statement during the Justice Kavanaugh travesty explaining why accusers should be believed. LESLIE MARSHALL: I BELIEVE JOE BIDEN He said at the time, “For a woman to come forward in the glaring lights of focus, nationally, you’ve got to start off with the presumption that at least the essence of what she’s talking about is real.” His attempt to avoid the ugliness of his obvious hypocrisy on the issue was embarrassing. At the start, when the questions were predictable, Mr. Biden delivered steady answers mirroring his campaign's statement of denial. But as the interview went on and the questions became more involved, at times he seemed confused. Revealed in this interview was his willingness to have the National Archives open up any records they have from the time of Ms. Reade’s employment, but that was overshadowed by his adamant refusal to open up his Senate archive papers being held at the University of Delaware. Lisa Desjardins, a correspondent at PBS Newshour, tweeted this about his reasoning: “BIDEN: Explaining why his U. Delaware papers are not public, says there are position papers and private notes about his meetings with international leaders, like Putin. Says they could be taken out of context, used against him during a presidential run.” Yes, he actually said that. As he is defending himself against a credible accusation of sexual assault, he explains he doesn’t want particular records opened because there might be something in there that could be used against him as he runs for president. And he is particularly concerned about conversations with the president of Russia for some reason. You can’t make this up, and it will not be going away. One thing that I contend was significant and not discussed much in the aftermath of the interview was a question Mr. Biden did not answer. Ms. Brzezinski asked: “Do you remember her? Do you remember any types of complaints she might have made?" His answer? "I don’t remember any type of complaint she may have made." CLICK HERE FOR THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Throughout the interview, she was dogged in following through with question and pressing him when he attempted to dodge. But for some reason, not here. His refusal to answer whether or not he remembers her is significant. If he doesn’t, then that creates a question of whether or not he can be taken seriously when he denies that the assault took place. How could he be sure about that if he doesn’t remember her even working for him? If he does remember her, then that opens up more questions about what he thought of her and their interactions. Some observers took his avoidance of answering that (and Mika’s choice to not pursue it), combined with his apparent cognitive issues on the campaign trail and in interviews, as an indication that he likely doesn’t remember her at all, which would indeed cast doubt on everything he says he recalls about that time. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Established was the crucial aspect of Mr. Biden’s (and the Democrats’ in general) rank hypocrisy on this allegation versus their bloodthirsty attempt to destroy Brett Kavanaugh. After this interview, we do know more than we did before: we know there are things in Mr. Biden’s Delaware archive he doesn’t want any of us to see which he believes could negatively impact his run for the presidency; we know women are to be used and are expendable in the Democrats fight for power; and due process and justice are quaint notions to be handed out only to Democrats and their defenders. It’s a shame, but it makes quite clear what is at stake in the 2020 election. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TAMMY BRUCE

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Over the past few months, our lives have changed dramatically due to COVID-19. We have seen the best of America emerge – our nation’s medical professionals, first responders, and supply chain workers have acted heroically, along with so many others. Unfortunately, criminals are using this unprecedented situation to exploit the most vulnerable among us. While we protect our families from the pandemic, we must be mindful of other dangers, including the increased risk of online child exploitation. There has been a staggering rise in online child exploitation in recent years, including the production and distribution of child sexual abuse material and enticement of children for sexual acts. The National Center for Missing & Exploited Children (NCMEC), which operates a centralized reporting system for online child exploitation, received 16.9 million reports of suspected abuse in 2019 alone. Those reports included over 69 million photos, videos, and other files related to child sexual exploitation, many of which involved children younger than 10-years-old. NEWT GINGRICH CORONAVIRUS AND CHINA — WHY LAWSUITS SHOULD BE ONE WAY TO MAKE COUNTRY PAY FOR PANDEMIC “Sextortion” cases  – where, for example, predators coerce minor victims into sharing explicit images, then blackmail the victims into paying money, producing more explicit content, or engaging in sexual acts – are also on the rise. From 2017 to 2018, the FBI experienced a 242 percent increase in extortion-related complaints and the majority involved sextortion. We should be particularly mindful about children’s use of apps and platforms that feature end-to-end encryption, direct messaging, video chats, file uploads, and user anonymity, which are often relied upon by predators to contact children and evade law enforcement. Regrettably, it is likely that the circumstances resulting from COVID-19 will contribute to a further increase in child exploitation. According to UNESCO, school closures related to COVID-19 are impacting over 90 percent of the world’s student population. As a result, more children are online, potentially exposing them to sexual predators who seek out victims on popular apps, websites, and social media platforms. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Many children are also now using webcams – some for the first time – to participate in remote learning and communicate with loved ones. This increased familiarity with sharing personal images online can lull kids into a false sense of comfort. At the same time, normal childcare has been disrupted – kids are less supervised because parents and guardians must leave for work or spend hours teleworking. And sexual predators have more time to log on, and often rely on anonymity and technology like end-to-end encryption to hide their nefarious activity.    While the specific connections between COVID-19 and child exploitation are difficult to assess, the initial indications are troubling. Law enforcement officials have discovered postings in online forums used by child predators welcoming the opportunity to abuse children who are vulnerable due to the pandemic. And reports of potential exploitation to NCMEC more than doubled from 983,734 in March 2019 to 2,027,520 in March 2020. Fighting child exploitation is a top priority of the federal government. In January, President Trump signed an Executive Order to coordinate the government’s efforts to prosecute individuals who sexually exploit children online, protect and support victims of child exploitation, and provide prevention education. The Department of Justice, under the leadership of Attorney General William Barr, stands with its law enforcement partners in the fight against child exploitation. We will continue to use all of the tools at our disposal to investigate and prosecute these horrific crimes. However, the fight to protect our children can only be won if everyone – including the government, industry, and private citizens – remains vigilant. The Department of Justice has called upon technology companies to help prevent child exploitation, including by cooperating in lawful investigations and adopting the Voluntary Principles to Counter Online Child Sexual Exploitation and Abuse, established in collaboration with allies from Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Parents and caregivers also have a vital role to play by discussing internet safety with kids, supervising their online presence, and using privacy settings and parental controls. We should be particularly mindful about children’s use of apps and platforms that feature end-to-end encryption, direct messaging, video chats, file uploads, and user anonymity, which are often relied upon by predators to contact children and evade law enforcement. And we must be alert to signs of abuse and report suspected sexual exploitation to the authorities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP For years, television stations aired a public service announcement that asked: “It’s 10 p.m., do you know where your children are?” These days, knowing where our children are in the physical world is not enough. We must be equally vigilant about their safety in the virtual world. If you suspect online child exploitation, call 911, contact the FBI at tips.fbi.gov, or file a report with NCMEC at 1-800-843-5678 or report.cybertip.org. Additional guidance can be found on a webpage and tip sheet created by the Department of Justice, Keeping Children Safe Online During COVID-19.

Joe Biden defends himself for the first time on TV after releasing a statement denying the Tara Reade sexual assault allegation; Geraldo Rivera reacts. Former Vice President and now presumptive Democratic 2020 Presidential nominee Joe Biden has been accused by Tara Reade, a former staff assistant who worked in the then Senator’s office 27 years ago, of sexual assault.  And in an interview Friday morning with MSNBC’s Mika Brzezinski, Biden says he is innocent, “No, it never happened, unequivocally.” I believe him and here's why. First, I know that because of the title of this op-ed that there will be those of you who assume that because I am a Democrat I simply wouldn’t believe any woman who has made an accusation against a Democratic political figure. That is just not true. UNANSWERED QUESTIONS? BIDEN'S RESPONSE TO TARA READE ACCUSATIONS LEAVES MANY WANTING MORE ANSWERS I have believed some of the accusations made against former Minnesota Democratic Senator Al Franken and former Democratic President Bill Clinton. I also know some of you might say I’m a hypocrite because I believed then-Judge Brett Kavanaugh's accuser Christine Blasey Ford. I know some readers will assume it’s because she was making her claims against a then soon-to-be conservative Supreme Court Justice.  But that simply isn’t true, because I did not believe the other Kavanaugh accusers. I am a woman, a feminist and the mother of a pre-teen girl, who knows that there are differences between rape, sexual assault and sexual harassment. Sadly, I have been the victim of all three. I, like the former Vice President, believe that when a woman comes forward with claims of sexual misconduct against anyone, you believe her; but then you investigate, you go through a vetting process to find the truth. The overwhelming majority of victim’s claims are true, according to OurResilience.org approximately 2-8 percent are not. Biden said his interview on Friday morning, "the truth matters." And that is what I also believe. So why did I believe Blasey Ford but not Reade? I will explain here in this article. But I will not be writing a comparison between the two cases. No two cases nor accusations are alike. And this situation is no exception. First, we must look at a few things aside from my opinion. In 2016, President Trump, who himself has a long list of accusations against him, brought in some of former President Clinton’s accusers to sit in on a debate when he was running against Hillary Clinton, the wife of the former president.  And certainly team Trump would be happy to have this claim by Reade as a distraction during this upcoming presidential campaign. But President Trump hasn’t harped on this. He has said that Joe Biden must answer this claim and now Joe Biden has done so on national television. CLICK HERE FOR THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But why didn’t Trump attack Biden with this like he did Hillary with her husband’s claims? Or weigh in on this topic more? When Blasey Ford made the claims against Brett Kavanaugh, Trump mocked her publicly. And why have all of the media been timid about this? I know why. It’s because Tara Reade is not a credible witness. The reasons Reade is not credible play into my lack of belief in her accusation. First, there are inconsistencies. A year ago Tara Reade told a reporter that when she was a staff assistant in 1993, she said that Biden touched her shoulder and neck in a way that made her feel uncomfortable. Last month that story changed to Biden sticking his hand under her skirt and forcibly penetrating her with his fingers. It takes a lot to come forward; so why would she then change her accusation a year later? Reade claims she made a complaint to the Senate personnel office at the time. No one has currently been able to find that complaint. And although Reade kept copies of her employment records from that time, she didn’t keep a copy of that complaint? Additionally, no former staffer can corroborate her claim. No one from the staff at that time is aware of any complaint including the three people she listed by name: Marianne Baker, Dennis Toner and Ted Kaufman. All three said she made no complaint to them as she claims. Her brother changed his story; adding after the fact details that Reade had also added after the fact. She claims to have told her therapist yet will not make those notes available to the Washington Post, which asked to see them, or the American public. But perhaps for me, the two biggest reasons I question the authenticity of this accusation are: Reade cannot remember the date, time or exact location of the incident. She has only said that she was delivering a gym bag to Biden somewhere in the Capitol area, according to the Washington Post. As I mentioned earlier in this piece; I have been the victim of rape, assault and harassment. Although I wish I could push these memories out of my mind, I cannot. I remember nearly every detail. I can understand someone not remembering the date or the day of the week or perhaps the exact time; but the location?  I am sorry. I, and most victims I know or have spoken with, remember the location vividly as that terrible nightmare replays in our minds over and over and over throughout the years. Reade praised her alleged assaulter. She publicly praised Biden for his work on the Violence Against Women Act. And she did this not just once but on multiple occasions.  She retweeted, liked, even praised him for his work combatting sexual assault; the very thing she now accuses him of. Of Biden, Reade said: “My old boss speaks truth, listen.” Praise?!?!?  As a victim, I would never praise my attackers.  What I would like to do to them is something straight out of a scene from "The Sopranos," but certainly not praise. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Former Vice President Biden has requested that the National Archives release any record they have of Reade’s claim, “put it out” he said. I agree, if the truth is truly what we’re after. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LESLIE MARSHALL

The Flynn story lays bare the architecture of control that's been present just beneath the surface of this country for a long time. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Like so much else that has happened recently in America, the Michael Flynn story lays bare the architecture of control that's been present just beneath the surface of this country for a long time. For reasons we still don't fully understand, Michael Flynn deeply offended permanent Washington somehow. So they decided to destroy him. They pretended to believe he was a secret Russian agent, and then they entrapped him on a completely bogus perjury charge. When he resisted, they threatened to hurt his son until he signed a confession. TRUMP SAYS HE WOULD 'CERTAINLY CONSIDER' BRINGING FLYNN BACK INTO HIS ADMINISTRATION It sounds like something that happens in China. It happened here in the middle of our capital city, Washington. We've known that for a long time. What we didn't know was that there is an extensive written record that proves all of this happened, and in fact, the truth is worse even than we guessed. According to newly released documents, on January 4, 2017, FBI agents decided to close their investigation of Michael Flynn and his ties to Russia. After much searching, they had found "no derogatory information about Flynn." So, it was over. He was in the clear. But it wasn't over. Corrupt FBI official Peter Strzok demanded that the investigation stay open until the Bureau could invent a crime and crush Michael Flynn. And in the end, that's what happened. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER There's nothing worse than this. It's how the secret police operate in third world dictatorships. And it's exactly how Peter Strzok operated, and then he lied about it extensively. Listen to Strzok's greasy self-righteousness in congressional testimony two years ago. Peter Strzok, former FBI official: Not once in my 26 years of defending our nation did my personal opinions impact any official action I took. This is true for the Clinton email investigation, for the investigation into Russian interference, and for every other investigation I've worked on. It is not who I am and it is not something I would ever do. Period. I understand that my sworn testimony will not be enough for some people. After all, Americans are skeptical of anything coming out of Washington. But the fact is, after months of investigations, there is simply no evidence of bias in my professional actions. What an oleaginous liar. He should be in prison, literally. And in fact, if the FBI treated its own officials the way it treats its political opponents, Peter Strzok would be serving a multiyear sentence for the statement you just saw. Pretty much everything he said in Congress was perjury. But that's not what happened. Instead, the FBI continued to let Peter Strzok meddle in American politics, in our democracy, the one they claim they're protecting. It was Strzok who decided that Hillary Clinton's secret email server was merely extremely careless instead of gross negligence. The distinction was between a crime and not a crime; he let her off the hook. This isn't about one man. It's about our country. You don't want to live in a society where the most powerful agency in government imprisons people it doesn't like. That is horrifying. People come to this country to escape it. It was Strzok who bragged to his mistress about building an "insurance policy" against Trump's election and promising to "stop him," meaning Trump. In January of 2017, it was Strzok who kept the bogus Russia investigation going. "Hey," he wrote to a colleague on January 4t, "don't close RAZOR" -- that was the internal name for the Michael Flynn investigation. That very same day, Strzok struck sent out a 14-page document about an obscure law called the Logan Act. The Logan Act has been around for 200 years. It bans private citizens from conducting diplomacy with foreign countries. No one in American history has ever been convicted of violating the Logan Act. In fact, the last indictment under the Logan Act was before the Civil War. In fact, the law may be unconstitutional. None of that mattered to Peter Strzok. The Logan Act was the weapon to bash Michael Flynn. That same day, Strzok texted his girlfriend, "RAZOR is still open. Serendipitously good, I guess. You want those chips and Oreos?" "Phew," she replied. "That's amazing that it is still open. Good, I guess." At this point, it was over from Michael Flynn though he didn't know it. The FBI arranged an interview with Flynn at the White House. He had no idea what was coming. According to handwritten notes, FBI officials plotted to "get him to lie so we can prosecute him or get him fired." It worked. Flynn misstated a fact about a meaningless phone call with the Russian ambassador. The FBI had spied on that phone call, so they knew. Flynn's life was over. His family was destroyed. In late 2018, after he had already cashed in on his book bragging about himself, former FBI Director Jim Comey laughed about how easy it was to set Flynn up. Nicolle Wallace, MSNBC anchor: Look at this White House now, and it's hard to imagine two FBI agents ending up in the same room. How did that happen? James Comey, former FBI director: I sent them. [Audience laughter] Comey: Something I probably wouldn't have done or maybe gotten away with in a more organized investigation, a more organized administration. I thought it's early enough. Let's just send a couple of guys over. And so, we placed a call to Flynn and said, "Hey, we're sending a couple of guys over. Hope you'll talk to them." He said, "Sure." Nobody else was there. They interviewed him in a conference room at the White House Situation Room, and he lied to them, and that's what he's now pled guilty to. Wallace: What did he think they were coming over there for? Comey: I don't think he knew. I know we didn't tell him. Oh, it's all pretty funny. Destroying someone's life and destroying his family because they're in the way of the power you seek. You would have to be a dark cold person to chuckle about something like that, and Jim Comey definitely is the darkest and the coldest. We want to be clear at this point that we're not personally close to Michael Flynn. He's not some secret friend of the show. This isn't about one man. It's about our country. You don't want to live in a society where the most powerful agency in government imprisons people it doesn't like. That is horrifying. People come to this country to escape it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP But it happened. And if it can happen to a three-star general serving as the national security adviser, it could definitely without question happen to you. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on April 30, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Wall Street Journal associate editor John Bussey breaks down the numbers and what they could mean for the presidential election. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  What are we to make of the dire predictions of President Trump's political doom – that he doesn't stand a chance for reelection in November? I've read numerous mainstream media reports gloating over polls that show presumed Democratic nominee Joe Biden surging and Trump plummeting. I'm not one to casually dismiss polls, but I view them skeptically, especially given their poor track record in more recent elections, and pollsters' brazen manipulation of them to sway public opinion.       Don't the wildly failed polls forecasting a Hillary Clinton victory in 2016 warrant our skepticism? Pre-election polling was uniformly wrong and so were Election Day exit polls. CARRIE SEVERINO: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS — VP CANDIDATES', DEMS' RESPONSE A MASTER CLASS IN HYPOCRISY I'm old enough to remember when exit polling was so accurate that if you got word at noon on Election Day that your favored candidate was losing, you could take it to the bank – or to your psychiatrist. You knew the pit in your stomach was based on something real and likely irreversible. At some point, however, that changed, and it's hard to know why. The accuracy of pre-election polling has also waned over the years, maybe because it's hard to get a random sampling with the advent of cellphones and deserved cynicism over politically motivated polling. In this era of political correctness, political shaming and cancel culture, surely many tell pollsters what they think the pollsters want to hear rather than what they truly believe. Let's also admit that polls vary widely. Just this week, as progressives were reporting that polling shows Trump is toast, a new Gallup poll shows his approval ratings at an all-time high. But let's consider another factor that requires us to take polls with bags of salt: the highly fluid nature of current events, including some that were unforeseeable and beyond our control. I remember an informed Trump supporter telling me way back in 2017 that, based on polls he was seeing, Trump's chances for reelection were slim. My reaction was that the likelihood of the 2020 election being determined by the state of affairs in 2017 was comparable to that of Joe Biden defeating Chuck Norris in an MMA contest. I told my friend that it was unlikely the factors driving the polls would be as relevant in 2020.       Haven't President Trump's approval ratings fluctuated considerably since then? Plus, how can anyone accurately predict the outcome of a contest when only one of the competitors has been identified?     Moreover, I've always doubted that polls could measure voter intensity, which many believe is enormously important. Most Trump supporters are passionate and loyal. I don't discount the anti-Trump passion out there, too, but I'd rather have passionate voters for a certain candidate than those indifferent to their own candidate but passionately against his opponent.       There's no evidence that anyone is passionately for Biden, except maybe his family. He never was inspiring, but in his present state, he couldn't get an illiterate pyromaniac to attend a book burning. The only reason Biden’s candidacy was resurrected is that, once again, Crazy Bernie leaped into the Democratic presidential punch bowl, and no one could flush him. That left to party honchos the task of jumping on the Biden moped and endorsing him with enough phony sincerity to take Sanders out with coup-like ferocity.       Many election influencers, such as the economy and foreign policy, can change rapidly. A president can preside over a growing economy for his entire presidency until a financial meltdown reframes the political landscape a month before the election. An act of war or the eruption of a bona fide presidential scandal can cause a dramatic uptick in or erosion of support. But nothing in modern times has so radically altered the status quo in this country as COVID-19.       If the election had occurred before the pandemic, it would have been a referendum mostly on Trump's economic record. If the election had been in April, it might have turned on his perceived response to the virus. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER If the election were today or sometime in the next few months, as our focus increasingly shifts from coronavirus fears to jobs anxiety, it would turn largely on Trump’s handling of the economic "reopening." Who knows where the economy will be in November? If the virus fiercely rebounds shortly before the election, or if the economy hasn't recovered, Trump could be blamed, fairly or not.   I have no intention of predicting the outcome of the November election now. We can rationally discuss the variables, but until we see how these monumental events play out, no one – I repeat, no one – knows whether President Trump will be reelected, or why or why not.       CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The message, then, to Trump supporters is that even reliably accurate polls represent at most a brief snapshot in time. So don't hyperventilate over polls released right now or the eventual political impact of rapidly unfolding events. We just have to pray the same prayer we would pray if the election were to not matter to the future of the country: that President Trump manages the ship of state with a steady hand and deftly navigates the nation through these turbulent waters, and that the coronavirus greatly subsides and the economy vigorously rebounds. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID LIMBAUGH

Gov. J.B. Pritzker's stay-at-home extension blocked by judge; insight from Illinois State Representative Darren Bailey. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Imagine a world where you could be arrested for playing T-ball in an empty park with your 6-year-old daughter. Would you feel like you were living in a place that cherishes individual freedom, or would you feel like you were a victim of an oppressive nanny state? Chances are the latter. This scenario happened to 33-year-old former police officer Matt Mooney in Brighton, Colo. On a casual Sunday afternoon, he took his wife and daughter to an empty field to practice softball and was soon arrested in front of his family for violating state social distancing guidelines. To make matters worse, officers got close enough to handcuff him without wearing face masks or gloves, putting everyone’s health at risk. Although Mooney was eventually released, it doesn't excuse the violation of his civil liberties and his arrest in front of his family for doing absolutely nothing wrong. RICHARD FOWLER: CORONAVIRUS STIMULUS — THIS WILL HELP MILLENNIALS THE MOST Draconian responses like this one during the coronavirus pandemic are all too common. In Philadelphia, police officers physically dragged a man off a bus for not wearing a face mask. According to the police, the man had violated a policy that all passengers must wear face coverings when riding transit. It wasn’t until the video of the incident went viral on social media that the Southeastern Pennsylvania Transit Authority decided to revoke the policy. In Michigan, the state’s stay-at-home order banned the sale of common home improvement items at stores like Lowe’s and Home Depot. A spokesman for the Michigan Attorney General's Office said, “you don't need to go out and buy paint to paint your rooms or mulch for your garden.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Beyond the absurdity of preventing people from doing home improvement while being forced to stay home, how is it the state’s job to tell private businesses and their shoppers what they are allowed to buy, especially when these stores are all abiding by social distancing guidelines? The answer is that it isn’t, and this is a blatant example of government overreach by state officials. We’ve also seen unconstitutionally harsh measures taken against churches. A few weeks ago, local officials in Greenville, Miss., singled out Temple Baptist Church for hosting drive-in religious services despite the state declaring churches as essential. It didn’t matter that churchgoers had their windows rolled up while listening to the sermon broadcast over the FM radio. Police officers began knocking on car windows demanding identification and issuing $500 citations. Cases of overreach like this have led Attorney General William Barr to release a memo ordering federal prosecutors across the country to take legal action against state and local directives that infringe upon individual liberties. In his memo, Barr explained that “if a state or local ordinance crosses the line from an appropriate exercise of authority to stop the spread of COVID-19 into an overbearing infringement of constitutional and statutory protections, the Department of Justice may have an obligation to address that overreach in federal court.” In fact, in the Temple Baptist Church case, it was pressure from the Justice Department that led the city of Greenville to revise its policy and allow drive-in church services to resume. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This is not to say that we should threaten states and local governments' ability to enact the policies they see fit during this pandemic. As long as actions taken do not infringe on the civil liberties of American citizens, those governments should be free to govern how they wish. However, history has repeatedly shown us that during times of fear, it’s common to see individuals in positions of power cross inappropriate and unconstitutional lines. It is our job to conduct the appropriate oversight and ensure that responses to this pandemic are measured and based on both medical expertise and the law. Our country has come too far to settle for anything less. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM REP. TED BUDD

Newt Gingrich says President Trump should pardon Michael Flynn today or tomorrow and AG Barr should look into criminal charges against FBI officials Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Whatever your thoughts are about Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, the slow unraveling of his case holds some deeper lessons than simply “he never should have been charged.” Notes belatedly turned over to Flynn’s aggressive attorney include some telling nuggets of how Jim Comey’s FBI conducted itself. “What is our goal,” the notes read, “Truth/Admission or to get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” How about an unstated goal of simply investigating and going where the evidence leads? How about a goal that does not reflect a heads-I-win, tails-you-lose outcome on prosecution? GREGG JARRETT: TARGETING MICHAEL FLYNN — HERE'S HOW THE FBI ENTRAPPED AND PROSECUTED AN INNOCENT MAN  Add in an unannounced ambush interview and even FBI shenanigans (at Flynn’s potential expense) in trying to engage him during a defensive briefing, and it becomes clear the general, innocent or not, never had a chance of avoiding prosecution under Comey’s watchful eye. The U.S. Code includes a crime, in Title 18 Section 1001, for knowingly making a false statement to a federal law enforcement officer. The code says nothing about how federal agents and prosecutors should use this particular law. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Context is important here, too. Former FBI Director Comey had publicly announced that his agency would not “waste its time with 1001 prosecutions” during the Hillary Clinton email probe. This, notwithstanding agents discussing the obviously false and material misstatements of one of Clinton’s IT minions and how his lies and eventual admission of lying would make an airtight case. However, with the Russia-Trump investigation, false statement prosecutions were literally the coin of the realm. While the FBI goal note will probably steal the headlines, there are other comments that damningly reflect the politicization of FBI investigations. Recall that Comey’s non-prosecution announcement of Clinton included his (unwarranted) legal assessment that the statute under which she could be prosecuted was simply a dusty old throwaway in the code –“nobody ever uses it,” he proclaimed in filling the vacuum formed by Attorney General Loretta Lynch’s non-recusing recusal. Yet in the disclosed Flynn interview preparation notes, the agent refers to the Logan Act as their basis of pursuing the general. Wikipedia, at least, says only two people have ever been charged under the Logan Act – in 1802 and 1852—and neither was convicted. “If we’re seen as playing games, the [White House] will be furious,” say these notes. No word on whether the anger would stem from maliciously targeting an innocent man or whether it’s purely the “seen as” component that worried the politicians. But what a telling thing to include in these preparation notes — discussing the perception of playing games all but acknowledges that this is exactly what the FBI agents were capable of doing in this investigation. Add in the well-publicized information about Comey, Deputy Director Andrew McCabe, Agent Peter Strzok and FBI attorney Lisa Page, and we see how lasting harm has come to an otherwise honorable institution, the FBI because people at the top decided that rules of fair play simply did not apply to them. They were so supremely confident in their judgment of Flynn, or at least the need to bring him down, that they never paused to think about how wrong it is to marry political outlook with investigative pursuits. My guess is that the FBI believed Flynn was a bad guy, and that even if they could not prove the most serious allegations, they would take an “Al Capone on tax evasion” approach – meaning, whatever works to get to him is fair. But what if they are wrong to think he’s Al Capone? They were so supremely confident in their judgment of Flynn, or at least the need to bring him down, that they never paused to think about how wrong it is to marry political outlook with investigative pursuits. Lying, usurping the role of prosecutors, texting over government-issued phones about “insurance plans” at Trump’s expense, and taking an ends-justify-the-means approach to law enforcement have hurt the FBI seriously, even though it was only a cabal of politicized narcissists who did the damage. In the short run, many things have happened and will happen in connection with these false statement prosecutions. Comey resigned in disgrace (although he alone apparently does not understand that fact). McCabe celebrated his dodging of an indictment for, well, 1001 violations. Strzok and Page were professionally sidelined. And perhaps Judge Emmet Sullivan will ultimately blow up Flynn’s guilty plea. The long run, however, is less clear. Hopefully, Director Chris Wray is charting a new course, where FBI leaders play by the same rules that an agent in Wichita follows.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The scary part of this story remains, however. If prosecutors and agents are to have prosecutorial discretion, we need them to be honorable and fair — one set of rules, pursued by people dedicated to truth, not looking for high-profile “skins” and not acting out of political animus. The alternative, as we seem to be seeing in Flynn’s case, reeks of unfairness toward individuals and it damages an important cornerstone of our civilization, the never-ending pursuit of fairness in our criminal justice system. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JIM TRUSTY

Fox News medical contributor Dr. Nicole Saphier reacts. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The calls keep coming. Patients are scared. Not just from the imminent threat of the coronavirus, but from its impact on their longer-term enemy – cancer. Some cancer patients are delaying stem cell transplants and now sit anxiously in a holding pattern. Others are newly diagnosed while their spouse listens in on FaceTime. A senior executive managing the coronavirus-caused disease COVID-19 while awaiting his CAR T-cell therapy trial prays nothing goes wrong. As he hangs up, his words will never leave me: “Kathy, if I get through this, will there be something else on the other side?” CANCER SCREENINGS PLUMMET IN US AMID CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC: REPORT The calls aren’t new. I have taken them for decades. What’s different is not knowing the answers. The war on cancer is on hold. Trials investigating novel drugs are stalled and new ones are even further delayed. If cancer patients can stay out of the hospital they must. If they can delay treatment, they should. If they can switch to oral therapy, they should do it now. But as I watch the 24-hour news cycle, I don’t feel fear and resignation. I see solutions. Because the urgency of the coronavirus pandemic is teaching us all what is truly needed to cure disease. It’s putting research on speed dial. It’s forcing collaborations never imagined. The urgency of the killer coronavirus tells us we are not invincible. It’s reminding every health care leader what can be done when the stats are staring you in the face and millions are losing jobs and loved ones. We have to figure this out – now. Yes, COVID-19 spreads faster and kills faster than cancer. But these diseases also share similarities: they kill the elderly, the economically disadvantaged, those with underlying conditions. The answer to preventing them involves drastic changes in human behavior. Changes that, with a shared sense of urgency, are suddenly within our reach. The good news is that COVID-19 is forcing significant changes in our health care system that can help us cure cancer. We need to leverage these changes against cancer, with the same level of urgency as soon as it is safe to do so. If we do, we can rebound from this crisis with a V-shaped curve on the path toward cures. In myeloma, in cancer, in many fatal diseases. Here are three critical ways COVID-19 can aid in finding cures for cancer. Testing and sharing data Data is king. The more we have, the better. But it also needs to be shareable. The coronavirus made it necessary to share localized data across counties, states and countries. Let’s use the same systems to build a national database for cancer, with biospecimens, clinical data, genomic data, immune data and longitudinal follow up, and sophisticated analytics. This database should be open to all researchers to learn who is truly at risk and who must be treated aggressively. And let’s create easy-to-access noninvasive testing, so people can be tested at scale without checking into a hospital. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Speeding clinical trials and expanding use of off-label drugs When you know a vaccine will take at least 12 to 18 months to develop, therapeutics are your greatest hope. We have now seen that is feasible to open a clinical trial in two weeks if bureaucracy is lifted and patients are willing and accessible. We now know we can incorporate telemedicine and alternate assessments into care. And regulators have now shown they can ease constraints when an off-label drug might be the only option. Changing human behavior Never before have we seen consumers listen and act on such a universal scale. They have done their best to prevent getting the disease and to protect others. Let’s make sure people have the information they need to fight cancer – the data, the risk factors, how to prevent them – and not just on websites, but in the news, through our schools, from our political leaders. While we know what reducing our weight, staying out of the sun, stopping smoking, and getting tested early will do to reduce cancer, people need to know and feel the urgency. Urgency drives people to do things they know are important faster. If cancer statistics were staring us in the eye 24/7, it might accelerate everything – collaboration, new business models, funding, consumers “stepping up” on a universal scale. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s not allow the changes of the coronavirus pandemic, which has caused more than 233,000 confirmed deaths around the world so far, to be forgotten. Let’s apply the lessons we have learned with the same sense of urgency to the millions of people who still die of cancer every year. When the war on COVID-19 is won, let’s be ready to reset the war on cancer with new tools and new urgency. And let’s win the war on cancer as we will win the war on COVID-19.

Top Democrats have remained silent about the recent sexual assault allegations made by former Biden staffer Tara Reade. Carrie Severino, founder of the Judicial Crisis Network, speaks with Fox News about the political hypocrisy. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. What a difference two years makes. When Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination to the Supreme Court was pending and sexual assault allegations against him surfaced, Democrats rushed to judgment in the blink of an eye. Just three days after the Washington Post reported on Christine Blasey Ford’s accusation against Kavanaugh, a group of Senate Democrats — Richard Blumenthal, Mazie Hirono, Kirsten Gillibrand and Patty Murray — held a joint press conference expressing their support for Ford.  No matter that little information was known about the alleged assault and that Ford’s account had zero corroboration at the time (in fact, it was never corroborated). Hirono bluntly said that the men in this country needed “to shut up and step up” and “do the right thing for a change.” DAN GAINOR: BIDEN COVERAGE BY NY TIMES, OTHERS – SUDDENLY #METOO NEWS NOT FIT TO PRINT Where is Sen. Hirono now? The pressure is mounting for the Left to take Tara Reade’s accusation against Joe Biden seriously in light of the new corroboration of her account, but Senate Democrats seem to have lost their taste for their former calls to “believe all women” now that the alleged assaulter happens to be the presumptive Democratic nominee for president. Some Democrats seem to have contracted a sudden case of laryngitis and are saying as little as they can about the matter. Sen. Kamala Harris lamented in 2018 that even a re-opened FBI investigation into the Kavanaugh allegation was not “a search for the truth” but an “abdication of responsibility and duty.” As recently as last year, Harris said that she believed numerous women who accused Biden of unwanted touching. Of course, that was when she was running against Biden for the nomination. Now that Harris is on the Biden VP shortlist, it’s nothing but crickets. In 2018, Sen. Amy Klobuchar said that she Ford “more credible” because Ford “had mentioned [the alleged Kavanaugh assault] before.” Now multiple corroborators have come forward in support of Reade’s allegations against Biden, yet Klobuchar has said nothing. Then again, Klobuchar is also on the Biden shortlist. These senators who were so vocal during the Kavanaugh confirmation suddenly have a deaf ear now that speaking up could cost them. The contrast between the Democrats’ outrage in 2018 and their silence in 2020 could not be starker.   An increasing number of Democrats, including Gillibrand and Stacey Abrams, are ready to dispose of the Reade allegations altogether. Abrams, the former Georgia gubernatorial candidate, said in an interview with CNN that while “women deserve to be seen and…listened to…The New York Times did a deep investigation and they found that the accusation was not credible.” This is a shift from 2018, when Abrams said about Ford, “I believe women, and I believe survivors of violence always deserve to be supported and have their voices heard.” But now that Abrams is on the Biden VP shortlist, she’s moved the due process goal post. Gillibrand also affirmed her support of Biden, notwithstanding the new corroboration of Reade’s allegation, and notwithstanding years of self-branding as a champion for women. She told reporters that Biden’s devotion of his life to “supporting women” and his “vehement[]” denial of the allegation were enough to convince her. Even #BelieveWomen champion, Alyssa Milano, discovered the virtues of due process in recent weeks, proclaiming on Twitter: “I believe, along with many others in this space, that accusations need to be investigated with due process for the accused.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER During the Kavanaugh confirmation circus, Senate Democrats threw due process out the window. People were hounding Kavanaugh’s friends, students, colleagues and classmates trying to dredge up information. No accusation against the nominee — however unsupported or far-fetched — was beyond investigation. Tara Reade’s accusation is an old one, and we don’t have enough information yet to know what actually happened. But there is infinitely more corroboration of Reade’s account than there was of Ford’s, and Reade has been much more specific about the time frame and location than Ford. Yet Democrats have to be dragged, kicking and screaming, to even acknowledge the allegations against Biden. While nobody might have guessed it at the time, the Kavanaugh allegation and how it was handled by the Left has turned out to be the perfect foil for the Biden allegation. The contrast between the Democrats’ outrage in 2018 and their silence in 2020 could not be starker. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Ultimately, this proves that Lindsey Graham was right in 2018. In his memorable remarks before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Graham yelled to his Democratic colleagues: “Boy, you guys want power.” Lindsey Graham was exactly right. The Democrats’ 2018 theatrics weren’t driven by principle or an actual search for the truth but rather political expediency and power. In 2020 it’s now Joe Biden who is accused. Gone is the Democrats’ outrage. Yet the truth from 2018 remained unchanged: for the Left, it’s all about politics and power. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY CARRIE SEVERINO

Gregg Jarrett weighs in on new unsealed court documents that show FBI officials and Mueller prosecutors hid exculpatory evidence Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. If there was ever any question about the dishonesty and corruption that poisoned the case against Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn, newly released documents erase all doubt.  For more than three years, the FBI and federal prosecutors concealed exculpatory evidence proving that the retired Army lieutenant general and former National Security Adviser committed no crimes. James Comey’s FBI knew it, and special counsel Robert Mueller’s prosecutors knew it. They didn’t care. An innocent man could be sacrificed.  In their zeal to damage President Trump, Comey and his confederates devised a devious scheme in January of 2017 to target and frame Flynn. After secretly recording his perfectly legal and appropriate telephone conversation with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak, it was leaked to the media. This gave FBI assistant director Andrew McCabe an excuse to contact Flynn to discuss what the press was reporting. It was a clever artifice. GREGG JARRETT: NEW EVIDENCE ON MICHAEL FLYNN — DROP ALL CHARGES AND LET HIM SUE HIS PERSECUTORS It is well established that McCabe deceived Flynn about the true purpose of the call, convincing him to allow two FBI agents to drop by the White House for an innocuous chat. The perjury trap was set. The documents made public on Wednesday exposed the underlying “goal" behind the visit with Flynn: “to get him to lie, so we can prosecute him or get him fired.” Let’s think about that for a moment. Since when is it the business of the FBI to get a person fired? Is it the job of the bureau to get people to lie so that they can be charged with the crime of lying? Can officials simply invent or create a crime extemporaneously? The answer to all these questions is a resounding “no!”  The unsealed smoking gun notes demonstrate how the FBI covertly weaponized their power for political reasons. It is obvious that they didn’t care about the Flynn-Kislyak discussion itself. They saw it as a golden opportunity — a vehicle to wound Trump a mere four days into his presidency. Comey later bragged to a televised audience about how they’d snookered the incoming administration and violated protocols when they set the trap. The new documents also expose how FBI lovers Peter Strzok and Lisa Page plotted a way to circumvent agency policy designed to protect Flynn’s constitutional rights. Shockingly, emails show that neither Strzok nor Page even understood the policy they were determined to break.  Despite all of their scheming and calculating, the perjury trap failed miserably. Flynn told the truth. As noted in my last column, the subsequent FBI report stated that Flynn gave no indication of deception  It concluded that “Strzok and (redacted FBI agent) both had the impression at the time that Flynn was not lying or did not think he was lying.”  Flynn’s only crime was going to work for President Trump. He became an unwitting pawn in the FBI’s quest to find evidence of a nonexistent “collusion” conspiracy with Russia to steal the 2016 election. But truth and honesty were alien concepts to special counsel Robert Mueller’s team of ruthless prosecutors. Utilizing the full force of the federal government and its unlimited resources, they intimidated and bullied Flynn into pleading guilty to a crime they knew he did not commit.  All of the exculpatory evidence of his innocence was suppressed and concealed. The Mueller team, according to Flynn, threatened to prosecute his son unless the father capitulated to their demands. That aspect of his coerced plea was also hidden from the court when Flynn finally threw in the towel. Destroyed financially, he was forced to sell his home. Flynn’s only crime was going to work for President Trump. He became an unwitting pawn in the FBI’s quest to find evidence of a nonexistent “collusion” conspiracy with Russia to steal the 2016 election. It turned out to be the greatest mass delusion in American political history.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER More documents are expected to be unsealed in the Flynn matter. But enough is known already that the federal judge presiding over the case should, in the interest of justice, vacate the forced guilty plea. It will then be incumbent on the Department of Justice to dismiss the case entirely. All of this exculpatory evidence would have remained buried were it not for the intrepid work of Flynn’s new attorney, Sidney Powell, as well as the decision by Attorney General William Barr to appoint U.S. Attorney Jeffrey Jensen to review the case. Only then did the material surface. Under the law, prosecutors were required to provide it to the defense.  The DOJ should now consider whether crimes were committed by those who obscured the truth.  Anyone who corruptly impedes the due administration of law and justice could face potential obstruction of justice charges. Obstruction is a crime against justice itself.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Current FBI Director Christopher Wray must also face scrutiny. He likely knew about the exculpatory evidence for the last two and a half years yet appears to have done nothing. This is consistent with his other actions dedicated to protecting, at all costs, the FBI’s reputation, which was sullied beyond repair by his predecessor, Comey. Wray should have been fired long ago, The treatment of Gen. Michael Flynn is a cautionary tale of the danger to all Americans. If the people we entrust to enforce and uphold the law are capable of persecuting an innocent three-star general while covering up their mendacious acts, imagine what they can do to any of us.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM GREGG JARRETT 

Wisconsin’s presidential primary is proceeding where most states have delayed theirs due to the current coronavirus pandemic. Here’s some information on the matter. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Candidly, I’m shocked that I even have to write this. And I’m horrified that the current administration and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., are putting American lives at risk by forcing them to vote in-person during a pandemic involving a highly communicable virus. But just this week, we learned from the Wisconsin Department of Health that 52 people who reported that they voted in, or worked, the April 7 primary election have subsequently tested positive for the coronavirus, a completely avoidable number that will no doubt continue to rise.  This because the Republican-controlled state legislature refused to permit Wisconsin’s Democratic governor from pushing back the state’s primary election date and to enable the state’s citizens to vote by mail, as other states are doing to protect the lives of American citizens from the coronavirus. So here we are, exactly 150 years after the 15th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibited the federal government and states from denying citizens the right to vote based on "race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” and exactly 100 years after the 19th Amendment granted women the right to vote, American citizens are being forced to choose between protecting their lives and exercising their constitutional right to vote. VICTOR DAVIS HANSON: BIDEN VP SELECTION ECHOES DECISION DEMOCRATS AND FDR MADE IN 1944 Needless to say, this is not a choice that American citizens, or any citizen living in a democracy, should have to make in 2020. That is why we must pass federal legislation that enables early in-person voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail in all 50 states. Sens. Amy Klobuchar. D-Minn., and Ron Wyden, D-Ore., are the lead sponsors of the “Natural Disaster and Emergency Ballot Act (NDEBA) of 2020,” which would ensure that early in-person voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail procedures are implemented safely and securely across our country. In fact, five states – Colorado, Hawaii, Oregon, Utah and Washington – already vote almost entirely by mail, and approximately a quarter of all American citizens already vote by mail. Notably, these five states have elected Democratic AND Republican statewide officials. So, despite what President Trump claims, vote-by-mail is NOT a partisan process that favors one party over another. And, if implemented with adequate funding NOW, to ensure a secure ballot tracking system, this process is no more susceptible to voter fraud than our current voting system, perhaps even less so, under the NDEBA’s cybersecurity guidelines. In fact, let’s take a look at how several states across the county – led by both Democrats and Republicans – have recently responded to the coronavirus pandemic by incorporating vote-by-mail into their state primaries, and how we can use these states as models to conduct nationwide vote-by-mail elections going forward. Just this Tuesday in Ohio, Republican Gov. Mike DeWine, who previously postponed the state’s primary from March 17 to April 28 because of the virus, led efforts to convert the state’s primary into an almost entirely vote-by-mail process. According to Ohio Secretary of State Frank LaRose, another Republican, 1.9 million Ohioans requested vote-by-mail ballots, and more than 1.4 million cast their vote before the primary. LaRose said, "In a matter of weeks, we've done something that's taken other states years to do — transform our state into one capable of voting entirely by mail.” It’s time for the federal government to step up and lead a nationwide effort to ensure that early in-person voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail procedures are implemented safely and securely across our country and not just state by state.   If Ohio, our seventh-largest state and a key presidential election battleground, can transform to vote-by-mail in a matter of weeks, why can’t our country, led by the federal government, do so in the six months before November? And it’s not just Ohio. In Kentucky, which postponed its primary from May 19 to June 23, a bipartisan effort by the Republican secretary of state and the Democratic governor has resulted in an agreement to allow all registered voters to mail in their ballots. This is Kentucky, people! If Republicans and Democrats can come together in Kentucky on vote-by-mail, can’t we do so at the federal level? And it’s not just at the presidential primary level where states are moving to vote-by-mail. In Maryland and Massachusetts, special elections for a congressional seat and for a state Senate seat are being conducted almost entirely by mail. So that’s four examples, from four different regions of our county, where states have quickly transitioned to vote-by-mail ballots in order to protect our democratic process and the lives of our citizens. These states are leading us, just as state governments are leading our response to, and recovery from, the coronavirus pandemic. Now it’s time for the federal government to step up and lead a nationwide effort to ensure that early in-person voting and no-excuse absentee vote-by-mail procedures are implemented safely and securely across our country and not just state by state. Some may ask, as our federal government doles out hundreds of billions of dollars during this pandemic, what’s the price tag for vote-by-mail? My friend and the Founder of Fair Fight, Stacey Abrams, estimates it to be $4 billion. Is $4 billion too much to ask to ensure that the 2020 elections and future elections are resilient to emergencies like this pandemic? Put another way, is $4 billion too much to ask to safeguard our democracy? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER There’s one final issue we must address: the security of vote-by-mail. It’s absolutely critical that, as proposed in the NDEBA, the funding for vote-by-mail includes a secure ballot tracking system with Intelligent Mail barcodes, to ensure that voters and boards of election can track mail-in ballots in the 2020 and future elections. This funding must also enable the U.S. Postal Service, along with relevant U.S. cybersecurity agencies and election commissions, to work seamlessly together to protect the security of these ballots. Critically, now is NOT the time to defund the Postal Service, as the administration recently threatened to do. But should we be at all surprised by this threat? Might it be because President Trump continues to rant against vote-by-mail, calling it “horrible” and “corrupt,” despite himself voting by mail in Florida from the comfort and safety of the White House? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Let’s be very clear here. Despite the president’s rant, there is no evidence that vote-by-mail favors one party over another. In fact, all evidence is to the contrary: vote-by-mail works for both Republicans and Democrats, and recent bipartisan efforts in Ohio and Kentucky confirm this. And a recent WSJ/NBC News poll found that a majority of voters (58 percent) support permanently changing election laws to permit vote-by-mail and that 67 percent of voters favor a vote-by-mail option this coming November. Now more than ever, it is imperative that we ensure all eligible American citizens are able to vote safely and securely — just like our president. In 2020, more than 230 years after the first U.S. presidential election, and at a time when our country and our democracy are facing unprecedented threats, no eligible American citizens should have to risk their lives to exercise their constitutional right to vote. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DONNA BRAZILE

‘Part of the Problem’ podcast host Dave Smith, Fox News contributor Marie Harf and comedian Joe Piscopo discuss the 2020 presidential election and the first Democrat debate to include former New York Mayor Mike Bloomberg. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. President Donald Trump’s critics pound the same drum daily: He waited too long to take COVID-19 seriously. He responded too slowly. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER “Many Americans are saying the exact same thing about you,” CBS News’ impertinent correspondent Weijia Jiang sassed the president Sunday. “You should have warned them the virus was spreading like wildfire through the month of February instead of holding rallies with thousands of people.” DEROY MURDOCK: TRUMP TEAM'S CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE — THEY INSPIRED, MOTIVATED AND TURNED THE TIDE In fact, Trump’s actions below confirm that he energetically fought the virus in January and February. But how much warning did Americans get from Democrats who want to unseat Trump? Across multiple televised showdowns, while the pandemic grew, those who crave his job stayed mum about COVID-19. Rather than focus public attention on this outbreak, they wallowed in debate-stage navel-gazing. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP CNN hosted a Democrat face-off at Iowa’s Drake University on Jan. 14. A week earlier, Trump’s Centers for Disease Control issued a travel notice on Wuhan, China, and launched its Coronavirus Incident Management System. Regardless, neither a warning about nor a mention of the coronavirus passed the lips of former Vice President Joe Biden or Sens. Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, Bernie Sanders of Vermont or Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. Instead, they discussed such matters as Iran, Iraq, fracking and whether a woman could get elected president. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING DEROY MURDOCK'S COLUMN IN NATIONAL REVIEW CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DEROY MURDOCK

There is nothing more corrupt than institutional feminism. During the Obama years, Joe Biden didn't spend all of his time attending the funerals of foreign dictators or acting as the administration's emissary to Ukraine, where his son was getting rich with a do-nothing job. UNIVERSITY OF DELAWARE BOARD MEMBERS, WHO ARE KEEPING BIDEN'S SENATE RECORDS SECRET, HAVE CLOSE TIES TO THE FORMER VP One of his other jobs was running the administration's Title 9 policy. Before the Obama administration, most colleges handled claims of sexual harassment and sexual assault the way you'd probably want them handled if you were accused of doing something awful. Offenses were narrowly defined as they are in court rather than broadly, and the allegations required had to meet a high burden of proof as they should. Under Biden's oversight though, the Obama administration changed everything. They sent a letter to every one of the country's more than 4,000 colleges and universities with a stern warning. They said that schools would lose all federal funding unless they completely altered the way they treated sexual assault allegations on campus. Under the Biden rule, the accused were judged on the lowest standard of evidence. They were subjected to kangaroo courts where they could not effectively use legal counsel or contest the accusations against them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Across the country, if you have kids in college, you know this is true. Young men found their lives and their careers totally destroyed, not to mention their reputations, by accusations that were sometimes not only untrue, but laughably untrue. In at least one case, a student was expelled from college over an assault, even as police were criminally charging his accuser for filing a false police report in the same case. That was the America that Joe Biden created. What would happen if Joe Biden had to play by the same rules he made now? Well, he'd been done. Tara Reade's allegations are not proven. We don't know if they are true. But far weaker claims destroyed many young men on college campuses. Institutional feminism, the so-called feminist movement, is fake. It was never about women or believing women. They don't believe women. They don't care about women. They care about power. And that's why Gillibrand was friends with Harvey Weinstein and Bill Clinton. That's why she's friends with Joe Biden now. But, of course, Biden isn't playing by those rules and never would. Why isn't he forced to? Because the American feminist movement may be the single most corrupt movement in the world. It's more corrupt than the government of Equatorial Guinea. It's more corrupt than the World Health Organization. There's nothing more corrupt than institutional feminism. And if you want proof, look no further than Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand of New York. Two years ago, Gillibrand wanted Brett Kavanaugh, his wife and family destroyed. He was guilty, she said -- she could feel it. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y.: Her account is credible and I believe her. We know that Judge Kavanaugh was not honest when he came to the Senate Judiciary Committee. She spoke her truth so bravely, so strongly, so honestly, and we believed her. Judge Kavanaugh has not asked to have the FBI review these claims. Is that the reaction of an innocent person? It is not. To refuse to treat this properly and try to confirm Judge Kavanaugh at any cost tells women that once again they are not important and they are not to be believed. I believe her because she is telling the truth. Has there ever been, in the last 235 years, a dumber person to serve the United States Senate? Probably not. Her argument was Brett Kavanaugh has not demanded that the FBI forensically go through his entire life. He doesn't appear to trust the FBI, therefore, he must be guilty. No trial needed. Well, on Tuesday, Gillibrand got her chance to respond to the allegations -- the credible allegations -- that Tara Reade has made against Joe Biden. Even if you haven't already seen this, we bet you can guess what her response was. Gillibrand: She has come forward. She has spoken. And they've done an investigation in several outlets. Those investigations, Vice President Biden has called for himself. Vice President Biden has vehemently denied these allegations, and I support Vice President Biden. Has Joe Biden begged the FBI to take a close look at his personal life over the past 50 years? Oh, he hasn't. He must be guilty. That's no longer Gillibrand's position. Why? Because political circumstances have changed. We want to be clear: We have no idea if Joe Biden actually did this. We hope not; it's awful. But the point is, in American politics, it doesn't matter. Here's your takeaway: Institutional feminism, the so-called feminist movement, is fake. It was never about women or believing women. They don't believe women. They don't care about women. They care about power. And that's why Gillibrand was friends with Harvey Weinstein and Bill Clinton. That's why she's friends with Joe Biden now. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP If you call yourself a male feminist and send enough checks to the Democratic Party, it doesn't matter how many actual women you hurt. That's true. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on April 29, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin, member of the president's coronavirus task force, joins Chris Wallace on 'Fox News Sunday.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Wall Street Journal, which is generally considered conservative when it comes to economic issues, published a front-page story last Monday with this headline: “Coronavirus Means the Era of Big Government Is Back.” Rahm Emanuel, former chief of staff for President Obama and a former mayor of Chicago, is quoted as saying: “The era of Ronald Reagan, that said basically the government is the enemy, is over.” He didn’t mention former President Clinton’s remarks after his party received an electoral drubbing in the 1995 off-year election. In his State of the Union address on Jan. 23, 1996, Clinton said, “The era of big government is over.” Clinton added: “We can’t go back to a time when our citizens were just left to fend for themselves.” That has always been a false choice. The issue is what is government’s responsibility and what is the responsibility of the individual? LT. GEN. RICHARD NEWTON: CORONAVIRUS SHOWS US NATIONAL SECURITY WILL DEPEND ON THIS The founders wanted government to be limited so the people would be unlimited in their pursuit of whatever made them happy. Today’s government thinks it can make people happy by dishing out gobs of cash with no end in sight. It is a form of vote-buying designed to keep politicians in office, enjoying benefits unique to them. Here’s the way it seems to work today: If you work hard, don’t take drugs, live within your means, get married before having children and stay married, and operate your business with integrity, you are penalized with regulations and ever-higher taxes to pay for those who live irresponsibly, or who embrace “victimhood.” No, we don’t want everyone to “fend for themselves,” but if government is to be involved in the lives of the poor, for example, the objective should be to help them become self-sustaining so they no longer need government. And if they continue to make wrong decisions harmful to themselves and to the country there should be consequences, not subsidies, to bring them to their senses. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The Wall Street Journal story reminds readers of previous crises, when government expanded to meet military and civilian needs, but only partially returned to its constitutional boundaries when the threats ended. When people become addicted to government and see it as a cash machine, they become hooked. Politicians then seek to outbid each other to prove their “compassion” and the debt grows with no endpoint. Massive debt has contributed to the collapse of great empires and superpowers in the past, and there is no guarantee the United States will escape a similar fate if we don’t change our ways and expectations. I have long argued, as former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich, R-Ga., once did, that we need a bipartisan commission to conduct a top-down audit of government and government programs. If Americans can be shown how unnecessary, overreaching, costly, and unconstitutional government will damage this and future generations, perhaps they will join those few politicians, like Sen. Rand Paul, Kentucky Republican, who regularly speak about the danger of national debt. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP There are so many outmoded, irrelevant and unnecessary government agencies and programs. The commission could start with the most extreme and laughable ones. Then, it could move onto entitlement programs that are desperately in need of reform. That’s what occurred with the Base Realignment and Closure Commission. In 2005 that bipartisan commission recommended the shutdown of military bases that were no longer needed, saving taxpayers millions of dollars. If we don’t do something to reverse the debt, other than raising taxes on the productive in order for Congress to continue its irresponsible spending, America as we know it may cease to exist. In fact, America, like great nations of the past, may expire. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

John Roberts reports from the White House after the president orders meat plants to remain open. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The federal government has adopted an integrated and comprehensive approach to addressing the unanticipated COVID-19 pandemic. Early on, President Trump tapped several emergency powers, expanding the authority of the federal government to respond rapidly and effectively. For example, the Stafford Act provided an immediate source of funding and other resources to equip state and local governments to respond to the surge of infections. Similarly, the National Emergencies Act (NEA) empowered the secretary of Health and Human Services to relax restrictions and licensing requirements that held back telemedicine and innovative public-private partnerships that could help produce a cure. Moreover, authorization of the Defense Production Act equipped the administration with a hammer to credibly encourage companies to work collaboratively for the benefit of the country. The president invoked the act this week to order meat-processing plants to remain open. GOLDFEDER AND BEDZOW: CORONAVIRUS NURSING HOME CRISIS – 4 THINGS THEY NEED RIGHT NOW As the severity of the pandemic begins to weaken, the Trump administration will need to think critically about how to phase out some of these emergency powers and begin reopening America. A recently released policy brief through the Mercatus Center provides some clues. The emergency powers were designed to expand federal authorities to quickly and effectively manage an emerging crisis, but no one intended them to last forever. Unfortunately, that’s exactly what has happened since the passage of the NEA in 1976. In fact, 35 of the 64 national emergencies declared since 1976 are still in effect today. This creates a precedent for the unnecessary expansion of federal powers and increasing irrelevance of Congress and its ability to hold in place checks and balances. Emergency powers still serve an important role, but if we are serious about revitalizing the American economy and putting people back to work, we need to begin damping down these powers. Recognizing that an emergency cannot continue forever, President Trump encouraged states to take more responsibility over planning their reopening in a way that recognizes both the costs and benefits of continued containment. In particular, the Trump administration wants to see states and local governments taking more ownership and they have begun transferring power back to the states by providing them with discretion about when and how to reopen their states for business. Emergency powers still serve an important role, but if we are serious about revitalizing the American economy and putting people back to work, we need to begin damping down these powers. This discretion is exactly as the Founders intended: since each state is different, governors should incorporate local information and preferences to make the decision that is optimal for them. The federal government only steps in if a state is undertaking actions that jeopardize themselves and the country at large. Ironically, some pundits have critiqued the president for not taking more of a uniform, federal stance. And yet, they called him a dictator after his announcement of the travel ban against China on Jan. 31 and have continued critiquing him this past week for sounding authoritarian when stating that the president has the ultimate say in times of crisis. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Given the ongoing flip-flopping, these critiques seem more political than substantive. For example, Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer has stopped elective surgeries (e.g., knee replacements), but she continues allowing abortions on grounds they are “life-sustaining.” (Not quite: abortions are actually “life-altering”—for the baby.) Democrats will need to weigh the costs associated with a prolonged extension of emergency powers with the increased autonomy that comes with transferring power back to the states. It’s hard to have it both ways, especially in an election season — Americans will see through it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Bradley A. Blakeman was a deputy assistant to President George W. Bush from 2001 to 2004. A principal of the 1600 Group, a strategic communications firm, he is an adjunct professor of public policy and international affairs at Georgetown University and a frequent guest on Fox News and Fox Business.

Wall Street Journal associate editor John Bussey breaks down the numbers and what they could mean for the presidential election. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Few Americans can remember past vice presidents such as Charles Curtis, Charles Dawes or Thomas Marshall. In more recent memory, almost no one can recall vice presidential nominees who lost such as William Miller, Sargent Shriver or Lloyd Bentsen. John Nance Garner served as Franklin D. Roosevelt’s vice president for two terms (1933-41), but he nonetheless described his eight years as “not worth a bucket of warm spit.” Except “spit” was a euphemism used in place of Garner’s profane slang for urine. Garner was edged out of the job when leftist Henry Wallace replaced him. LESLIE MARSHALL: HILLARY CLINTON ENDORSEMENT OF BIDEN IS BAD NEWS FOR TRUMP — DEMOCRATS UNITING TO DEFEAT HIM But later, as World War II raged in July 1944, the frail Roosevelt was visibly suffering from a host of ailments during his third term. Rumors swept Washington that FDR was increasingly unable to meet the demands of the presidency. 
      Henry Wallace and FDR
      (COURTESY: SCOTT WALLACE) After all, Roosevelt was 62, a paraplegic, smoker and social drinker who suffered from congestive heart failure. For nearly 12 years he had already endured the most stressful presidency in history, guiding the country through both the Great Depression and World War II. Still, Democrats were convinced that FDR was their only hope in November 1944. Party bosses were confident that he could win an unprecedented fourth term over staid Republican nominee Thomas Dewey. As a result, the Democratic vice presidential nominee that year was thought likely to be the next president — and far sooner than later. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Vice President Wallace had strong socialist sympathies. Southern Democrats and moderates were terrified that if Wallace remained in office, he would frighten away enough voters to ensure Roosevelt’s defeat. Or, worse still, Wallace might become America’s first de facto socialist president — right when Americans were starting to fear their wartime communist ally the Soviet Union. Wallace had fought hard to stay on the ticket. But his inner-party opponents pushed even harder for more moderate Missouri Sen. Harry Truman to take his place. Truman finally beat out Wallace at the July convention and was nominated vice president. Roosevelt, as expected, won the presidential election for a fourth time. But, as feared, he died less than three months into his new term. The relatively unknown Truman became an unlikely president. Yet Truman surprised the country with nearly eight years of responsible leadership. He finished the war, dropping the world’s first two atomic bombs to defeat Japan without an invasion, and then faced down the Soviet Union to launch the Cold War. A President Wallace might have done things quite differently — or far worse. The Democratic Party is facing some of the same melodramas over the nomination of its vice presidential candidate for 2020. As with FDR in 1944, the 77-year-old Biden seems frail at times. He also seems frequently confused. There is concern in some corners that if elected, he might not be able to fulfill his duties. As in 1944, the United States is facing an ongoing existential crisis, as the coronavirus threatens to kill thousands more Americans and do trillions of dollars more damage to the economy. In such an ordeal, the Democrats believe that their likely nominee, former Vice President Joe Biden, can win the November election. As with FDR in 1944, the 77-year-old Biden seems frail at times. He also seems frequently confused. There is concern in some corners that if elected, he might not be able to fulfill his duties. That unspoken fear has turned the selection of a Democratic running mate into a drama not seen in decades. Like Roosevelt, Biden is seen as a coalition builder, and not as left-wing as most of the failed Democratic primary candidates. Disheartened Bernie Sanders supporters are pushing for a progressive running mate. But the party establishment feels that Democrats already dodged the socialist bullet when Sanders’ campaign finally collapsed. 
      FILE - In this Aug. 14, 1945, file photo, President Harry S. Truman reads to newsmen his announcement of the Japanese surrender officially signaling the war's end during a White House, Washington. At the right of the President are Secretary of State James F. Byrnes and Admiral William D. Leahy, Presidential Chief of Staff. (AP Photo)
      (The Associated Press) To placate radical Democrats, Biden has promised that his running mate will be either a minority, a woman or both — and likely far more left-wing than he is. Moderates are worried that Biden has already moved hard left, and if he goes even further with a progressive vice presidential pick, the Democratic ticket may well lose to Donald Trump. Privately, they would probably prefer as either their presidential or vice-presidential nominee a known commodity such as New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo. The idea of a far-left politician such as former Georgia gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams as a potential president in the midst of the coronavirus panic might terrify some establishment Democrats, and perhaps many Americans as well. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Just as it was 76 years ago, when the presidential nominee’s health was failing and Henry Wallace was maneuvered off the ticket, we may well see a fight to ensure that a radical candidate is not selected as a Democratic running mate. This year, as in 1944, the VP job seems something more than a bucket of warm spit. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY VICTOR DAVIS HANSON

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo discusses how the U.S. and other countries can join together to hold the China’s Communist Party accountable for the coronavirus crisis. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Chinese Communist dictatorship has launched a worldwide campaign to hide its role in the spread of the coronavirus and smother any American effort to reveal the truth. Americans, including some in the American government, continue to underestimate the scale, intensity, and aggressiveness of the Chinese dictatorship’s approach to propaganda. Americans and our allies seem to forget that the heart of the rise of the Chinese Communist Party was a deep dedication to effective education and propaganda. They have had nearly a century of experience at waging intellectual and psychological warfare as the necessary foundation of winning and keeping power. LARRY ELDER: BELIEF THAT CORONAVIRUS CAME FROM A CHINESE LAB GAINS INCREASING CREDENCE As a result of its historic roots, the Chinese Communist dictatorship invests far more money, talent and energy into defining and winning propaganda campaigns. It knows that if it can define the truth, it can determine the outcome even against stronger opponents. It also knows that defining the terms of the debate often determines who will win the debate. As Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on "Fox & Friends" this week: "This is classic communist disinformation. This is what communists do. The Chinese people were harmed by this, too. The Chinese Communist Party – we know there were journalists kicked out and doctors who tried to tell this story and instead they were pushed aside, covered up, taken out of the news. Those are the kind of things that communist institutions do. We all know them from the Soviet days. We know things that communist parties do to try to manage information aside from their own country and around the world." Even in the middle of the pandemic, the Chinese Communist dictatorship continues to push its version of reality in the South China Sea. When an American warship enters those international waters, Beijing announces a protest on the grounds that we are entering Chinese territory. Their goal is to establish by repetition the concept that the South China Sea is China’s territory. As Claire Christensen and I wrote in "Trump vs. China," the Chinese Communist dictatorship wants to be able to control the South China Sea’s strategically valuable territory and resources. This has been a methodical plan steadily implemented for more than 80 years (going back to the pre-communist Kuomintang government). The pandemic has not slowed it down one bit. Similarly, when the European Union was on the verge of issuing a report clearly condemning China for running “a global disinformation campaign to deflect blame for the outbreak of the pandemic and improve its international image” – which has cost the world hundreds of thousands of lives and trillions of dollars – the dictatorship exerted enormous economic pressure and made direct threats to convince the Europeans to edit their document to portray China in a more positive light. If we are going to win the competition with the Chinese Communist dictatorship over the next half-century or more, we are going to have to invent a new series of institutions and create a new series of rules for winning the communication war. Communist Chinese propaganda has been picked up and repeated by the anti-Trump American news media. The economic power of Beijing has led American billionaires to either be quiet or to actually defend the dictatorship. Remember former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s assertion that General Secretary Xi Jinping isn’t really a dictator because he has to please the Chinese people to stay in power? Explain that to the dissidents in Hong Kong, who were recently arrested as the dictatorship took advantage of the pandemic to tighten its grip on pro-democracy movements. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER There has been a worldwide campaign by the Chinese Communist dictatorship to blame the United States for the spread of the virus, including one assertion by a foreign ministry spokesman that the virus may have been brought to China by an American military delegation during the Military World Games in October. The brazenness of the lies gives them a life of their own and erodes the American position. There has also been a major Chinese propaganda effort to take credit for helping countries with medical supplies, doctors and other medical personnel while promoting their “Health Silk Road” agenda (part of the larger Belt and Road Initiative). The United States has never invested in this scale of communications effort. It is one of the defining characteristics of the Chinese Communist system. We do not have the worldwide reporting that would let us know what they are doing in every country. We do not have a worldwide communications effort to counter and overmatch the Chinese Communist dictatorship’s lies. If we are going to win the competition with the Chinese Communist dictatorship over the next half-century or more (and it is likely to be longer and more sophisticated than the Cold War with the Soviet Union), we are going to have to invent a new series of institutions and create a new series of rules for winning the communication war. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Today, the American government’s bureaucracies are literally incapable of getting approval for messages inside the cycle of China’s lies. The result is a one-sided propaganda war. For the sake of American survival, we must do better. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

Todd Robinson, writer and director of 'The Last Full Measure,' previews the film on 'Fox &amp; Friends.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  President Trump has compared America’s response to the coronavirus pandemic to “a war” with “an invisible enemy.” Exactly 45 years ago – on April 30, 1975 – America lost a very different kind of war when South Vietnam fell to North Vietnamese forces. Americans and some South Vietnamese fled the capital of Saigon (now Ho Chi Minh City) in helicopters. And just as the coronavirus has brought dramatic changes and a wave of death to our country this year, the North Vietnamese conquest did the same in South Vietnam. South Vietnamese allied with the U.S. in the long war were prime targets of the North, and so were desperate to escape the invading forces, fleeing for their lives. South Vietnam was quite literally wiped off the map. The North and South were replaced by a united Vietnam under communist rule. ALVIN TOWNLEY: LESSONS ON ENDURING CORONAVIRUS CRISIS FROM THESE HEROES OF VIETNAM Many Americans fought heroically in the Vietnam War, and the fact that the U.S. lost the long conflict does nothing to diminish their valor and patriotism. The war claimed the lives of more than 58,000 brave Americans. One of the American heroes of the Vietnam War was Master Gunnery Sgt. Juan Valdez of Oceanside, Calif., who was one of the first U.S Marines to arrive in Vietnam. When he was pulled into a helicopter lifting off from the roof of the U.S. Embassy exactly 45 years ago, he was one of the last to leave. Valdez’s departure marked the end of U.S. involvement in Vietnam that began when President Dwight Eisenhower sent military advisers to train the South Vietnamese Army in 1955. The U.S. presence grew under President John F. Kennedy and then expanded dramatically under President Lyndon Johnson. In Vietnam and neighboring Southeast Asian nations, the Cold War turned into a hot war – a bloody struggle between the forces of communism and those who were committed to keeping the world free. At the height of our involvement in the Vietnam War in 1968, almost 544,000 U.S. troops were stationed in the country. Over the entire course of the war 3.4 million Americans served in the Southeast Asia theater that was involved in the war, including in Laos, Cambodia, the South China Sea and Thailand in addition to South Vietnam. LOUISE HARRIS: THEY SAID MY HUSBAND VANISHED IN VIETNAM — BUT I KNEW HE WAS ALIVE In early 1973, after years of dogged negotiations in Paris, President Richard Nixon secured an agreement with the North Vietnamese that called for a cease-fire between the North and the South, the withdrawal of American troops, and the return of American prisoners of war. However, despite Nixon’s assurances to the South Vietnamese that any further aggression from the North would be met with a “full force” response by the United States, the agreement was rife with ambiguities. As Nixon withdrew U.S. troops, he left the South Vietnamese well-armed and supplied. However, after Nixon’s August 1974 resignation as a result of the Watergate scandal – and an antiwar movement that staged massive protests in the U.S. – the government in Saigon was left helpless and without U.S. support. On March 10, 1975, the North Vietnamese Army marched south in a final assault on South Vietnam. Despite the heroic efforts of the South Vietnamese, cities such as Hue and Da Nang soon fell to North Vietnamese forces, leading to the capture and execution of thousands of civil servants, schoolteachers, and other members of the country’s middle class. As the South Vietnamese Army disintegrated, over a half-million refugees fled south towards Saigon where there were only about 6,000 Americans left. Over 200,000 South Vietnamese and their families who had worked with or supported U.S. forces were in the city. In an April 10 address to a joint session of Congress, President Gerald Ford made a desperate request for $722 million in emergency aid for South Vietnam. Congress refused any support. South Vietnam’s fate was sealed. U.S. Ambassador to South Vietnam Graham Martin, a resolute anti-communist who had lost his only son in the war, refused to recognize the danger posed by North Vietnamese forces on Saigon. Despite news reports and the pleas of his advisers, Martin believed the South could still defend its independence. Some on his staff, however, realized the end was near and quietly defied him and surreptitiously organized the evacuation of senior South Vietnamese military officers, their families and other civilians. By mid-April, North Vietnamese troops were on the outskirts of Saigon and by month’s end, their rockets were landing in the heart of Saigon, signaling a ground attack from five directions on the city. Pandemonium ensued. Thousands of terrified South Vietnamese civilians rushed to the safety of the Americans, with more than 60,000 rescued at sea, while thousands of others drowned. As the bombs fell on the South Vietnamese capital, Martin finally ordered U.S. embassy personnel to begin evacuating all Americans from Saigon. As we remember the fall of Saigon on this anniversary, let us remember all those who paid the heaviest price for freedom. Just after 11 a.m. on April 29, a special message was broadcast on Saigon radio – “the temperature in Saigon is 105 degrees and rising” – followed by a recording of Tennessee Ernie Ford singing White Christmas that signaled the evacuation was to begin by helicopter from designated locations around Saigon. More than 10,000 South Vietnamese surrounded the U.S. Embassy seeking sanctuary. Despite strict orders from Washington to only evacuate Americans, Martin instructed staff to evacuate as many South Vietnamese as possible. Knowing that once the Americans were gone the evacuation would cease, Martin placed only one or two Americans on each helicopter. The remaining space on the massive C-46 helicopters were packed with 60 to 75 escaping South Vietnamese each time one took off from the Embassy's roof or courtyard. 
      Marine Lance Corporal Jimmy Reddington was killed in Vietnam in 1967.
       More than 75 helicopters crisscrossed the sky for over 18 exhausting hours ferrying fleeing Americans and South Vietnamese from Saigon to U.S. ships off South Vietnam’s coast. At the same time, many South Vietnamese military pilots commandeered helicopters to carry their families to American ships including the U.S.S. Kirk commanded by Navy Capt. Paul Jacobs, who made the fateful decision to allow 17 South Vietnamese helicopters to land on his ship’s deck, one at a time. Because of a lack of space on the ship’s deck, each of the helicopters was ditched at sea. The Kirk’s crew members used their own money to buy food, candy and clothes from the ship’s commissary for the families huddled on board. Jacobs’ brave actions saved 157 Vietnamese men, women and children. At the U.S. Embassy, Gunnery Sgt. Valdez desperately tried to manage the frantic crowd of South Vietnamese while other Embassy personnel were incinerating cash and mountains of classified documents – many of which named South Vietnamese friends and supporters of the American effort in the country. Most documents were not destroyed, however and those that were shredded were subsequently taped together by the North Vietnamese and used as justification for mass executions of South Vietnamese who were deemed collaborators. At 4 a.m. on April 30, Martin was ordered by the White House to leave the Embassy – with Marine Capt. Gerald Berry, himself exhausted from numerous flights, ordered to force Martin to go if he refused. 
      John McCain is pulled out of a Hanoi lake by a mix of North Vietnamese Army (NVA) and Vietnamese citizens in this October, 1967 file photo. McCain was shot down by a Surface-to-Air Missile (SAM) and had broken both arms and his right knee upon ejection, losing consciousness,
       As North Vietnamese tanks approached, the Marines lowered the U.S. flag, handed it to Martin and he was flown out to sea. “This will be the final message from Saigon station,” CIA Chief Thomas Polgar wired to Washington. “It has been a long fight and we have lost. Those who fail to learn from history are forced to repeat it. Let us hope that we will not have another Vietnam experience and that we have learned our lesson. Saigon signing off.” Eleven Marines under Valdez’s command remained on the Embassy roof despite the mistaken belief in Washington that all U.S. personnel had been evacuated. The desperate Marines radioed out a distress call for hours that went unacknowledged. But just as they had determined they’d fight it out with their sidearms, a helicopter appeared on the horizon. At 7:53 a.m. the last helicopter lifted off the Embassy roof. The valiant Valdez was nearly left behind, having stumbled and fallen as the C-46 ramp closed. Only after Staff Sgt. Mike Sullivan conducted a headcount and, finding they were one Marine short, was the ramp lowered so that Valdez could be pulled aboard, making him the last U.S. serviceman to leave Vietnam. The helicopter evacuation of Saigon – “Operation Frequent Wind” – was the largest such evacuation in history. Nearly 7,000 U.S. Embassy staff, foreign nationals and South Vietnamese civilians were flown to safety. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Together with the sea evacuation, over 130,000 South Vietnamese escaped the oncoming North Vietnamese forces. However, tens of thousands of South Vietnamese – including thousands of children fathered by American servicemen and 420 civilians in the Embassy courtyard who had been promised rescue by Embassy staff – were abandoned to their fate. By the end of that fateful day 45 years ago, South Vietnam fell, setting the stage for a prolonged period of losses by the forces of freedom in the Cold War. That changed, however, beginning in 1980 with the election of Ronald Reagan and ending with the fall of the Berlin Wall nine years later. But no one should forget the tremendous cost in blood and liberty paid by so many throughout the struggle against tyranny in the Vietnam War. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The last two American service members killed by enemy fire in the Vietnam War were Marines. Cpl. Charles McMahon Jr. of Woburn, Mass., who was only 21. Lance Cpl. Darwin Judge of Marshalltown, Iowa, who was only 19. They lost their lives in the final North Vietnamese artillery attack on Saigon before dawn April 29. As we remember the fall of Saigon on this anniversary, let us remember all those who paid the heaviest price for freedom.

Former Vice President Joe Biden remains silent on the sexual assault allegation by Tara Reade, his former Senate staffer; Fox News correspondent Peter Doocy reports. As many in the media work to cover up or dismiss Tara Reade’s explosive allegation that she was sexually assaulted by Joe Biden when she was on his Senate staff in 1993, their liberal bias and complete hypocrisy have been on full display. How many Americans have heard of Tara Reade? How many know her story? How many know what she has alleged that former Vice President Biden – now the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee – did to her in a Senate office building? No doubt far fewer Americans are familiar with the allegation against Biden than have heard the claim Dr. Christine Blasey Ford made about an alleged sexual assault when she was a high school student against now-Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh around his Senate confirmation hearing. TARA READE RESPONDS AFTER DC POLICE SAY HER SEXUAL ASSAULT COMPLAINT AGAINST BIDEN IS 'INACTIVE' Kavanaugh was nominated by President Trump, making him an immediate target for the media and Democrats. As a result, the attention the allegation made against him received was many times greater than the attention given to allegation against Biden. Let me be clear: all women should be heard. Survivors of sexual assault have experienced trauma, and speaking out takes tremendous courage – especially in today’s media landscape. But the accused should also be entitled to due process, unlike Kavanaugh, who was presumed guilty without any evidence supporting Blasey Ford’s claims. The liberal media believe that all women who bring allegations forward against a conservative man should be heard and commended for their bravery. But the left-wing media clearly believe that women who bring allegations forward against a liberal man should be silenced and pushed to the side. Don’t take my word for it. Earlier this month, The New York Times published an article about the Reade allegations online and then quickly deleted the end of the second sentence, which I have highlighted in boldface type below: “No other allegation about sexual assault surfaced in the course of reporting, nor did any former Biden staff members corroborate any details of Ms. Reade’s allegation. The Times found no pattern of sexual misconduct by Mr. Biden, beyond the hugs, kisses and touching that women previously said made them uncomfortable.” NEW YORK TIMES EDITS BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT COVERAGE, DELETES REFERENCES TO PAST INAPPROPRIATE 'HUGS, KISSES AND TOUCHING' For many in the media, Tara Reade’s allegations do not rise to the level of sexual misconduct because The New York Times decided they don’t. And the Times decided Biden’s past conduct that women said made them uncomfortable was not fit to print. Well, I’m not going to sweep Biden’s behavior and the allegations against him under the rug just because the liberal media want to do so. Let’s not forget about the women who came forward for years with allegations that were ignored against Hollywood mogul Harvey Weinstein, a longtime liberal donor and friend to President Bill and Hillary Clinton and President Barack and Michelle Obama. The hypocrisy is astounding and it has serious implications. What are the media teaching women about coming forward? That they will be believed and supported as long as they make accusations against a conservative man – but will not be believed, not be supported, and be silenced if they make accusations against a liberal man? Democratic politicians who attacked Kavanaugh are as hypocritical as their media allies. During the Kavanaugh confirmation hearing, Democrats denied him any semblance of due process, conducting the proceeding like a kangaroo court. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y., tweeted: “It all comes down to this question: Do we value women? Dr. Christine Blasey Ford deserves to tell her story. She deserves respect and a full investigation.” Well, how times have changed! Now that Gillibrand is desperate to be Joe Biden’s running mate, she stands with Biden. Why? Because she said: "Vice President Biden has vehemently denied these allegations, and I support Vice President Biden.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Except Biden has not denied the allegations – his staff has. The former vice president has not publicly addressed the allegations, nor has he called for an investigation. Biden hasn't even been asked about the allegations by the media. When Kavanaugh forcefully and convincingly denied the allegations against him, Gillibrand delivered a speech on the Senate floor defending Blasey Ford, saying: “It’s telling American women that your voice doesn’t matter. It’s telling survivors everywhere that your experiences don’t count, they’re not important and they are not to be believed. We are saying that women are worth less than a man’s promotion.” With her statement this week supporting Biden, Gillibrand is saying in no uncertain terms that Tara Reade’s experience doesn’t count, it’s not important, and that Reade is not to be believed – all because the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee denied the allegation. Because The New York Times has looked into the allegation and dismissed it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP And what about Democratic Sens. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Kamala Harris of California? All these potential Biden vice presidential picks are silent. Where is their support for survivors of sexual assault? Where is all their talk of fairness? It’s time for the left-wing media and Democrats to drop the act. If they truly believe that all women must be heard, then walk the walk. Don’t just talk the talk when it is politically convenient. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SEN. MARSHA BLACKBURN

Coronavirus-related lawsuits explode amid COVID-19 crisis.  Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  I’m just going to list some lawsuits arising from the coronavirus pandemic, straight from The Washington Post. Airlines have been sued over grounded flights. Ticket brokers have been sued over canceled events. Insurers have been sued over coverage limits. Grocers and Internet retailers have been sued over rising prices. Hospitals have been sued over protective gear. Universities have been sued over closures. Amusement parks have been sued over unusable season passes. Ski resorts have been sued over refunds. Strip clubs have sued for federal benefits. DEROY MURDOCK: TRUMP TEAM'S CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE — THEY INSPIRED, MOTIVATED AND TURNED THE TIDE A church has been sued for holding services. Cruise lines have been sued for sailing with the virus. Banks have been sued for helping existing customers first. Gyms have been sued for collecting membership fees. Walmart has been sued for allegedly allowing a sick worker to infect others. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Target has been sued over the efficacy of its hand sanitizer. Hooters has been sued over allegedly stinting on severance. Ride-hailing firms have been sued over sick leave. And multiple employers have been sued for allegedly firing workers who complained about safety measures. So here's a suggestion. When the lockdown lifts, everyone should go back to work – except the lawyers. Seriously. I think this is the first time we are starting a civilization with the burden of lawyers. When the world began, you didn't need a real estate lawyer to buy a cave. The witch doctor didn’t have to get malpractice insurance. There were no recalls on the wheel. And do you think we'd even have fire if a lawyer was near? CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So to get us out of this hole today, we need lawyers to lighten up. Congress should attach legal immunity to these bailouts, so companies and organizations don’t get ruined again – by some guy yelled "cough" in a crowded theater. Then when the economy returns, we can get back to suing the crap out of each other. This seems like a plan we can all get behind. Except maybe the lawyers. Which means it has to be good. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld’s monologue on “The Five” on April 29, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio is receiving backlash for his response to a large Jewish Orthodox funeral in Brooklyn; reaction and analysis on 'Outnumbered.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Concern over the spread of the coronavirus is no excuse for New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio’s outrageous outburst that scapegoated all Jewish New Yorkers after large numbers gathered in Brooklyn for the funeral of an Orthodox rabbi. Police broke up the funeral Tuesday night of Rabbi Chaim Mertz in order to enforce social distancing guidelines and limits on crowd size that were imposed to fight the spread of the pandemic. “My message to the Jewish community, and all communities, is this simple: the time for warnings has passed,” de Blasio tweeted. “I have instructed the NYPD to proceed immediately to summons or even arrest those who gather in large groups. This is about stopping this disease and saving lives. Period.” DE BLASIO APOLOGIZES FOR MESSAGE TO JEWISH COMMUNITY AFTER FUNERAL GATHERING, DEFENDS ‘TOUGH LOVE’ With approximately 1.1 million Jewish residents, New York City has the largest Jewish population of any city in the world. Even before the coronavirus pandemic hit the city harder than any other U.S. community, the New York City metropolitan area was already reeling from an unprecedented wave of violent hate crimes targeting primarily religious Jews. De Blasio’s inflammatory language blaming Jews as a group for the conduct of a few is like throwing gasoline on the fire of the anti-Semitism that burns in the hearts of haters and risks inciting some into violent action. The mayor tried to backpedal somewhat during a news conference Wednesday, saying his tweet was motivated by “frustration” and “anger” about the spread of the coronavirus. “I regret if the way I said it in any way gave people a feeling of being treated the wrong way, that was not my intention,” de Blasio said. “It was said with love, but it was tough love.” Love? To be clear, since the coronavirus pandemic hit the U.S., my organization – the Simon Wiesenthal Center – and others have been working hard on a grassroots level with local Jewish leaders in New York and New Jersey to ensure full compliance with social distancing and the closure of houses of worship, schools and other community facilities. There is absolutely no excuse when people fail to follow these rules. But de Blasio’s angry tweet called into question whether he even checked with the New York City Police Department about the funeral of Rabbi Mertz in Brooklyn.
In fact, Rabbi Mertz’s congregation had worked with the local police precinct to develop a plan to close streets so that the funeral of their spiritual leader could take place following social distancing rules, with mourners wearing masks. Members of the congregation and police were surprised by the large number of people who showed up. Many in the crowd were teens who would not listen to directions from the Shomrim (volunteer civilian patrol) or the NYPD. Such behavior cannot be tolerated in these perilous times. It deserves the universal condemnation that it generated. But it did not merit the emotional and harmful outburst from the mayor. Spouting this type of rhetoric could further fuel the full-blown efforts by extremists to blame the coronavirus pandemic on Jews and other minorities. How can I be so sure? CLICK HERE FOR FULL CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE First, because Jews have been falsely blamed for epidemics, economic crises and other unfortunate events for thousands of years. Jews have been the scapegoats of choice. Second, because the Simon Wiesenthal Center scours the Internet for hate activity around the clock. Our researchers have found a steady stream of social media postings calling for violence against Jews and others because of the coronavirus pandemic. We take these threats so seriously we share them with the U.S. Justice Department and the Department of Homeland Security, along with police departments across the nation. And third because de Blasio is far from the first politician to fan the dangerous flames of anti-Semitism – even if inadvertently. Inflammatory words have consequences. In New Jersey, a local city councilman recently sent out an offensive and potentially anti-Semitic comment on social media. But Sam Joshi, an Indo-American, publicly recognized his mistake, showed real leadership and is now in the vanguard in the fight against anti-Semitism. Joshi is also fighting the equally repugnant scapegoating of Asian-Americans who are being absurdly and unfairly blamed for spread of the coronavirus that began in China. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER New York is blessed with many talented grassroots politicians working to improve intergroup relations. De Blasio would do well to follow their example. One of the leading examples of a politician seeking to bring all New Yorkers closer together is state Assemblyman Walter Mosley, an African-American representing Brooklyn. In just a few weeks, the coronavirus pandemic has turned life as we knew it upside now. People everywhere are on edge. Millions are out of work, worried about paying their bills, and worried about being killed by the virus. My family has seen two cousins in New York die and other loved ones hospitalized by the coronavirus. Tragically, tens of thousands of other American families are struggling with death, sickness and dislocation. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We don’t need lectures about the need to change our behavior to fight this deadly pandemic. We need leaders to lead, to empathize, to provide accurate information and to be measured in the words and deeds. We hope Mayor de Blasio and all our other leaders do these things. We are, after all, in this fight against an invisible viral killer together. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY RABBI ABRAHAM COOPER

Fox News contributors Marc Thiessen and Judith Miller weigh in. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. The news media celebrated the #MeToo movement as righteously as they have embraced any cause in years. Until former Vice President Joe Biden was accused of sexual assault. Then the whole narrative switched. News outlets ignored the story or if they did cover it, they covered it up. None was more blatant about protecting the likely Democratic nominee than The New York Times. The paper had more than 1,700 mentions of #MeToo in 2019, according to Nexis. It’s mentioned Biden’s accuser Tara Reade just 18 times in 2020, and eight of those were versions of the same story about Hillary Clinton endorsing Biden. BEN SHAPIRO: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS – MEDIA'S DOUBLE STANDARD MATTERS AND THIS IS WHY According to the paper’s April 12 investigation, “The Times found no pattern of sexual misconduct by Mr. Biden.” Yet the paper also reported that, “Last year, Ms. Reade and seven other women came forward to accuse Mr. Biden of kissing, hugging or touching them in ways that made them feel uncomfortable.” The paper of record sat on the story as it gained traction in both left-wing and right-wing outlets. Then The Times came out with this detailed whitewash of the allegations, made far worse by the paper’s propagandist efforts to defend its own bad journalism. The paper “stealth-edited” the story according to Mediaite. “Initially, the report stated there was no evidence of a pattern of misconduct by Biden “beyond the hugs, kisses and touching that women previously said made them uncomfortable.” That is now removed from the Times story,” Mediaite wrote. The Times also deleted a tweet with the same wording. That wasn’t enough garbage journalism for The Times. It had to justify the whole horrendous episode to its readers. Media columnist Ben Smith interviewed his boss, executive editor Dean Baquet and actually asked him some key questions. That piece ran under the outlandish rationalization: “The Times Took 19 Days to Report an Accusation Against Biden. Here’s Why.” New York Times executive editor Dean Baquet said he wanted readers to “have all the information he or she needs to think about what to make of this thing.” Except they didn't. Baquet admitted the story was changed to placate Biden’s campaign. Smith asked his boss about the deletion of this sentence: “The Times found no pattern of sexual misconduct by Mr. Biden, beyond the hugs, kisses and touching that women previously said made them uncomfortable.” Baquet defended it but with telling honesty: “Even though a lot of us, including me, had looked at it before the story went into the paper, I think that the [Biden] campaign thought that the phrasing was awkward and made it look like there were other instances in which he had been accused of sexual misconduct. And that’s not what the sentence was intended to say.” He also defended not reporting the story initially. Baquet said he wanted readers to “have all the information he or she needs to think about what to make of this thing.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Except they didn’t. On April 24, The Intercept’s Ryan Grim reported about how “a new piece of evidence has emerged buttressing the credibility of Tara Reade’s claim that she told her mother about allegations of sexual harassment and assault related to her former boss, then-Sen. Joe Biden.” That was a call-in interview with former CNN host Larry King. Reade’s mother Jeanette Altimus called King anonymously and asked what her daughter could do about problems with a “prominent senator” “besides go to the press in Washington.” That meant there was corroborating evidence from the time of the alleged attack, something the media never found when it tried to destroy Justice Brett Kavanaugh. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The Times didn’t mention that interview when it produced its analysis of the assault claim. So, either the paper’s team of intrepid reporters failed to find the call or deliberately didn’t bother. Incompetence or cover-up. Given the paper’s one-sided coverage and its blatant hatred for President Donald Trump, it’s easy to believe either answer. One thing is certain, if Biden had an (R) after his name, this story would lead the paper’s front page every day. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAN GAINOR

Over 10,000 deaths nationwide in long-term care facilities; Bryan Llenas reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Near the end of his news conference Tuesday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo was asked a question about nursing homes. As part of his answer, he described the devilish dangers they face from the coronavirus outbreak because of their vulnerable sick and elderly residents. GOLDFEDER AND BEDZOW: CORONAVIRUS NURSING HOME CRISIS – 4 THINGS THEY NEED RIGHT NOW “What’s really happened in nursing homes is what we’ve feared from the get-go,” Cuomo said. He called them “ground zero” for the virus and added: “It just takes one [infected] person … to walk in there and then it is fire through dry grass.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As a statement of fact, there is nothing wrong and everything right with those words. But the governor’s clear understanding of the special circumstances that nursing homes face deepens the mystery about why he allowed his Department of Health to force sick patients into those same facilities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP After all, if a single infected staff member could start a “fire through dry grass” in a facility, what could 10 or 15 or 20 infected patients do to all the vulnerable people inside a nursing home? And what havoc could thousands of those infected patients cause in hundreds of nursing homes across the state? Add Maria Porteus to the long list of the bereaved who want answers to those and other questions regarding the state policy. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

Biden campaign denies sexual assault allegation; Fox News contributor Karl Rove, former White House deputy chief of staff under President George W. Bush, and Chris Hahn, syndicated radio host and former aide to Sen. Chuck Schumer, join the debate. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. This week, new evidence emerged in the sexual assault allegation by former Joe Biden staffer Tara Reade against the presumptive 2020 Democratic presidential nominee. According to Business Insider, four people have stated that Reade told them contemporaneously about her accusation that Biden forcibly penetrated her with his fingers in 1993. Meanwhile, the Media Research Center uncovered a clip, purportedly of Reade's mother, calling into "Larry King Live" back in 1993 to obliquely refer to the allegation. While such evidence does not speak to the actual event at issue, it does demonstrate that Reade has been talking about the alleged incident since it occurred. DAVID BOSSIE: TRUMP-HATING MEDIA SHOULD STOP COVERING UP BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS The media ignored the original allegation for weeks. Now, even while reporting on the new developments, they've found ways to downplay their importance. Thus, The Washington Post –democracy dies in darkness! – wrote an article headlined "Trump allies highlight new claims regarding allegations against Biden." Normally, headlines are designed to convey information about the underlying story. This headline was apparently written in English, translated to Swahili and then to Punjabi via Google Translate and then back to English before printing. Other news outlets skipped the revelations altogether. The New York Times, which ran a comprehensive piece two weeks ago attempting to debunk Reade's case, completely ignored the new information. NBC News didn't bother covering the information either. Meanwhile, NBC News and MSNBC Chairman Andy Lack printed a piece on the network website celebrating its journalistic performance. "Humbled by the responsibility we bear, we try our damnedest to serve our audience," he said. It's a wonder Lack didn't dislocate both arms trying desperately to pat himself on the back. As of this writing, Biden has not been asked a single direct question about Reade by a television reporter. Meanwhile, members of the media cheer their audacity in asking President Donald Trump questions like, "If an American president loses more Americans over the course of six weeks than died in the entirety of the Vietnam War, does he deserve to be reelected?" So. Much. Journalisming. The same media who laureled Democrats for cashiering Kavanaugh and now spend their days studiously avoiding any talk about Tara Reade deserve every ounce of skepticism the American people can muster.     Why does any of this matter? Not because Biden should be convicted in the court of public opinion without evidence. He shouldn't. The standards of due process should apply evenly, regardless of partisanship. Supreme Court Justice Brett Kavanaugh should not have been subjected to thousands of hit pieces, magazine covers and twisted accusations that his anger at rape accusations he disputed was mere evidence of his privilege. Christine Blasey Ford should not have been celebrated nationwide as a symbol of truth-telling without any corroborative evidence. #BelieveAllWomen was always an idiotic slogan. Only now are members of the media admitting it. That's why this matters. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Biden's candidacy will survive Tara Reade: Democrats aren't dumping Biden overboard based on a 27-year-old accusation of questionable veracity, and they certainly won't do so when running against Trump, who has his own checkered history. But the media's pathetically hypocritical standard on due process and sexual assault allegations won't survive. Neither will their credibility. President Trump spends an inordinate amount of time bashing the media for their lack of seriousness. The same media who laureled Democrats for cashiering Kavanaugh and now spend their days studiously avoiding any talk about Tara Reade deserve every ounce of skepticism the American people can muster. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP  There's a serio-comic tenor to this whole situation. We're living in a time when we must trust the media more than ever – to bring us unbiased, factual information about a global pandemic, to warn us of dangers and to be reasonable about risk assessment. Yet the media have spent so many years burning through their credibility that they have little left. That's their own fault. If they wish to restore their credibility, they could start by apologizing for their Kavanaugh coverage – and by providing some fact-checking about their own political motivations. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM BEN SHAPIRO

President sours on White House briefings; Fox News media analyst Howard Kurtz explains. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Throughout the Trump era, the media have hated President Donald Trump for both coming and going. They condemned him for not having "formal" press briefings. Now they condemn him for having them. The Washington Post and The New York Times augmented their aggression on the briefings by doing a content analysis of the transcripts. Research by reporters Philip Bump and Ashley Parker of The Post was published Monday under the headline "Trump briefings full of attacks, boasts but little empathy: Analysis shows how much politics dominates daily news conferences." They analyzed the transcripts of 35 press briefings since March 16 and complained there was too much presidential podium time: Trump has spoken for more than 28 hours, or 60 percent of the total time, more than the vice president or the scientists. DAVID BOSSIE: TRUMP-HATING MEDIA SHOULD STOP COVERING UP BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT ALLEGATION And he spoke for 13 hours in the past three weeks. Within the 13 hours, they counted "two hours spent on attacks and 45 minutes praising himself and his administration, but just 4 1/2 minutes expressing condolences for coronavirus victims." This would sound bizarre if it were any other president. Is it odd that a president speaks 60 percent of the time at his press conferences — especially since reporters want to press him the hardest? Would it be unusual for a president to defend himself, or odd that a president would criticize the other party?       No one could claim former President Barack Obama didn't boast about himself and his team. Critics used to count how many times he said the word "I" in his speeches. No one was shocked when Obama used press conferences to attack Republicans. What's strange about this project is it doesn't acknowledge how the press drives the briefings. The Post expressed alarm about that Trump "fills briefings with attacks" but doesn't acknowledge that a large chunk of those attacks was Trump returning fire from the press! Bump and Parker presented Washington Post White House Bureau Chief Philip Rucker — well, they failed to use his name — merely as an attack victim, not as an attacker. Rucker co-wrote a book-length attack on Trump sarcastically titled "A Very Stable Genius."        When The Post says "politics dominates" these events, it doesn't admit that politics dominates the questions from "objective" reporters. Can anyone imagine these papers and their chosen experts telling former President Jimmy Carter he couldn't defend himself regarding the Iran hostage crisis during the 1980 presidential campaign? It complains that these briefings are substitutes for Trump's stadium rallies — as if he gets accused of killing thousands of coronavirus victims at his rallies. The paper's aggression is intensified by its partisan desire to deny Trump the advantage of this TV time. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The New York Times released an online report Sunday in which it "reviewed more than 260,000 words spoken by Trump" since March 9. It, too, found that self-congratulations were common, counting around 600 examples, while Trump displayed "empathy or appeal to national unity" 160 times, only about a quarter of the amount that he praised himself or a member of his team. That doesn't match The Post's empathy count at all, but The Times is making the same negative point. The Times brought in professor Jennifer Mercieca to complain that Trump is not speaking "the language of transcendence, what we have in common," just touting the "good news" that his presidency is great. "It's not the right time or place to do that," she said. (She has a new Trump book coming out titled "Demagogue for President.") CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP  This is just pitch-perfect. These newspapers really believe the president should never speak positively about his presidency. It's not the right occasion. Can anyone imagine these papers and their chosen experts telling former President Jimmy Carter he couldn't defend himself regarding the Iran hostage crisis during the 1980 presidential campaign? They hate Trump so much they just want him to stop defending himself and lose miserably in November. Fighting back is impolite. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY TIM GRAHAM

Nursing homes and other long-term care facilities across the nation are struggling to combat the coronavirus; Bryan Llenas reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As of today, nearly1 2,000 people have died from the coronavirus at U.S. nursing home facilities. Tens of thousands more residents, in thousands of homes across the country, have also been infected. These are the confirmed cases; the actual numbers are likely much higher, and these elderly patients are the most susceptible to the virus and the most likely to have comorbidities. Supplies are running low and staffing is impossible, as those caretakers who have been infected or exposed must themselves be quarantined for safety. MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS NURSING HOME POLICY — THIS CUOMO APPROACH PROVES TRAGIC This is a national emergency inside of a national emergency. Congress needs to act now. Last week, President Trump and Vice President Mike Pence shared their concerns about the nursing home community and committed to increasing testing at these facilities. That is great, but Congress needs to do more, and fast, because hundreds of thousands of lives are at stake, and not just those who are in homes. The senior living industry is serving as a backstop against the surge of people coming to America’s hospitals. So, in a very real sense, our entire health care system is depending on this industry’s continued success in disease mitigation and infection control. Failure on the front lines will result in increased hospital admissions, straining already limited health care resources. In order to continue protecting the millions of seniors in senior living communities, not to mention the health care infrastructure they are buttressing, these communities need to have their funding explicitly included in federal relief packages. The initial $30 billion from the Public Health and Social Services Emergency Fund, which is designated for health care providers in the recently passed CARES Act, was overwhelmingly focused on hospitals. In fact, more than 95 percent went to other health care providers. In addition, unlike restaurant chains, nursing facilities were not excluded from the Small Business Administration’s affiliate rules and were ineligible for Paycheck Protection Program  (PPP) loans under the CARES Act. Like hospitals, these facilities have played heroic front-line roles in caring for the frailest among us, despite tremendous hurdles in obtaining equipment and staff, These communities need four things, and they need them yesterday. First, they need priority access to PPE and testing (for symptomatic and asymptomatic residents and staff). Thankfully, President Trump has agreed to provide this. Second, they need Health and Human Services to specifically allocate money for senior living communities. Costs are skyrocketing related to added staffing, purchasing added infection control supplies and expanding operations. A third-party analysis procured by Argentum and the American Seniors Housing Association (ASHA) shows that the increase in non-labor costs (infection control supplies and PPE) for a community without a COVID-19 positive case can be up to 73 percent. For communities with a COVID-19 diagnosis, it can be up to 103 percent. Third, they need to be able to access the PPP loans. On average, labor costs have increased up to 8 percent for senior living communities that remain COVID-19 free and up to 18 percent for COVID-19 positive senior living communities. Communities are hiring additional employees to provide added services and are paying overtime and hero bonuses. Meanwhile, lost revenue is estimated at around 8 to 23 percent. Because of COVID-19, communities cannot continue move-ins or use the revenue from new residents to counteract these expenses. All in all, lost revenue and an increase in expenses are projected at $40 billion to $57 billion over the next year. This means that many homes will fail. Fourth, they need guaranteed protections from liability for COVID-19 related fatalities. On top of soaring costs and plummeting revenues, plaintiffs’ lawyers are already waiting to attack with countless lawsuits seeking to blame nursing homes and assisted living facilities for asserted COVID-related fatalities. Like hospitals, these facilities have played heroic front-line roles in caring for the frailest among us, despite tremendous hurdles in obtaining equipment and staff, in the face of opaque directives from regulators, and at times under instruction to accept positive or presumed positive residents. These lawsuits would cripple the industry. The costs of defending against, let alone bearing liability for, baseless accusations arising of unavoidable circumstances would be in the billions, and would not benefit the American people. The industry needs protection against liability in order to survive. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In a statement released Thursday, the European director of the World Health Organization said up to half of the 110,000 coronavirus deaths that happened in Europe happened in nursing homes, where the staff was overworked, underpaid and without the protective gear and support that they needed. We cannot let that happen here. Industry leaders have been begging Congress to help for weeks but as of yet, there has been no specific relief. There is simply no more time to waste. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Dr. Ira Bedzow is an associate professor of medicine, the director of the Biomedical Ethics and Humanities Program, and head of the UNESCO Chair in Bioethics at New York Medical College.

Big technology companies are using the COVID-19 tragedy to increase their power over the American population. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Monday night on this show, we played you a clip from a nearly hour-long video produced by two physicians in California, Dr. Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi. HERE ARE ALL THE STATES SET TO BEGIN LOOSENING LOCKDOWN RESTRICTIONS THIS WEEK Likely, many of you had already seen it. That video has had more than 5 million views on YouTube. In their presentation, the two doctors presented a flurry of data pointing to what we are currently learning about the coronavirus and how it spreads. They cited pages of government statistics and then interpreted them in light of their own long clinical experience as doctors. At one point, they noted that the newly adjusted death rate in their state of California, which is much lower than anyone expected it to be, and they asked if government officials there should change their policies based on this new science. Dr. Dan Erickson: We've seen 1,227 deaths in the state of California with a possible incidence or prevalence of 4.7 million. That means you have a 0.03 chance of dying from COVID-19 in the state of California. 0.03 chance of dying from COVID in the state of California -- is that -- does that necessitate sheltering in place? Does that necessitate shutting down medical systems? Does that necessitate people being out of work? So, whatever your view of the mass quarantines -- and maybe you're enthusiastically for them -- the questions you just heard are valid questions. In fact, they're critical questions. We should all be asking those questions, including and especially our policymakers. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER But as Dr. Erickson pointed out later in the video, dissent of any kind is no longer tolerated in this country. Fact-based honesty, which is the soul of science, is under attack, even in hospitals. Dr. Erickson described physicians being pressured to classify illnesses and deaths as related to coronavirus, whether they believe that to be true or not. Erickson: We aren't pressured to test for flu. But ER doctors now, my friends and I talk, saying, you know, it's interesting when I'm writing up my death report, I'm being pressured to add COVID. Why is that? Why are we being pressured to add COVID? To maybe increase the numbers and make it look a little bit worse than it is? I think so. So, what you just heard -- what Dr. Erickson described -- is called lying, and lying has no place in science, ever. It's scary to think it takes place on a large scale in hospitals. He says it does. Viewers of Erickson's video were shocked and transfixed by this. They forwarded the video to friends, who forwarded it on to their friends, and suddenly, millions of people who spent the last six weeks on a diet of "Tiger King" and internet memes were watching sober-minded medical researchers reading from charts of statistics. It's hard to recall a science video taking off like this one did. Not everyone was impressed by it. Some criticized the doctors' policy conclusions, and of course, that's fair. Decent people have different opinions. We're not entirely certain what the perfect response to this pandemic is. Nobody is certain. There's no objective answer at the moment. At best, we can plod along with open minds and good faith. More informed debate is exactly what we need to make wise decisions going forward. Unfortunately for all of us, informed debate is exactly what the authorities don't want. They want unquestioned obedience, so they're cracking down on free expression. Last night, the doctors' video, the one you just saw, was pulled off of YouTube, the largest video hosting site in the world. It wasn't an accident, YouTube admitted doing it. The company cited a violation of "community guidelines" and they did not apologize. Looking back, when all of this is finally over and it will be, it's likely we'll see this moment -- what YouTube just did -- as a turning point in the way we live in this country, a sharp break with 250 years of law and custom. The two doctors' video was produced by a local television channel in California. It was, in effect, a mainstream news story. The video was not pornographic. It didn't violate copyright or incite violence or commit libel. It didn't break any law. The only justification for taking it down was that the two physicians on-screen had reached different conclusions from the people currently in charge. It was a form of dissent from orthodoxy. No wonder our leaders have done such a poor job protecting us from China. They're on the same team. YouTube and its parent company, Google have now officially banned dissent. The CEO of YouTube admitted that openly. Susan Wojcicki, CEO of YouTube: But then we also talked about removing information that is problematic. You know, of course, anything that is medically unsubstantiated, so people saying, like, to take Vitamin C, you know, take turmeric, like those all will cure you. Those are the examples of things that would be a violation of our policy. Anything that would go against World Health Organization recommendations would be a violation of our policy. And so, remove is another really important part of our policy. Brian Stelter, CNN chief media correspondent: So you're not just putting the truth next to the lie, you're taking the lie down. That's a pretty aggressive approach. We're removing "anything that would go against World Health Organization recommendations." It'll now be taken off the internet. Consider that for a minute. As a matter of just science, it's ludicrous. Like everyone else involved in global pandemic policy, the WHO has often been wrong in its recommendations. A lot of people have. In mid-January, WHO told us that coronavirus could not spread from person-to-person. In March, they told us that face masks didn't work. Those were lies, and they were welcome on Google's platforms. Doctors who are actually treating patients with the virus, meanwhile, have just been banned. So, no, this is not about science. Censorship never is about science. It's about power. Big Technology companies are using this tragedy to increase their power over the American population. They're working in concert with politicians in order to do it. Just on Tuesday, Facebook removed an events page for a political protest in Michigan. Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, who runs that state, was no doubt pleased to see it. Grossly mismanaging an entire state is a lot easier when citizens are not allowed to complain about it, and now they're not. Last week, Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg explained that protests like these are no longer protected political speech; they are "misinformation." As we fight this virus, we are becoming far more like the country that spawned it. We're becoming more like China. It's horrifying. And it tells you everything that our professional class enthusiastically welcomes this. George Stephanopoulos, ABC News host: How do you deal with the fact that Facebook is now being used to organize a lot of these protests to defy social distancing, defy the social distancing guidelines in states? If somebody is trying to organize something like that, that qualifies as harmful information. Mark Zuckerberg, CEO of Facebook: We do classify that as harmful misinformation, and we take that down. "Harmful misinformation" -- that is a phrase familiar to anyone who has watched totalitarian regimes in any country. It's now how Mark Zuckerberg describes political opinions he doesn't like. Our free press exists to push back against obvious abuses of power like this one. It's the reason we have a First Amendment. It's the only reason we have a First Amendment. But suddenly our media are not concerned about freedom of speech. Reporters applaud our overlords as they punish us for disagreeing. You just saw it in that clip from CNN. That happens every day. Our media are no longer challenging power, they are colluding with power. And that may be why there's been so little critical coverage of the massive expansion of our surveillance state currently in progress. In the name of fighting the coronavirus, tech companies are now following you through your cell phone. They're watching you from above with drones. Those sound like paranoid fantasies; they are not. It's happening as we speak. Needless to say, our politicians approve of this. Andrea Mitchell, NBC News chief foreign affairs and senior Washington correspondent: How do you feel about the drones? Sen. Cory Booker, D-N.J.: Look, at this point, we need to save lives and it's really important that in public spaces, people are abiding by the directives. Yes, we've got to do it. So, what do we have here? We have Big Tech companies partnering with the government to spy on you without your knowledge. Americans locked in their homes, banned from going to church, placated with sedatives, like weed and beer. Anyone who speaks up is silenced. Political demonstrations are illegal. Organizers are arrested. Only opinions approved by leaders, many of them unelected, are allowed on information platforms. Does that sound familiar? It sounds a lot like China. Of all the many ironies of this moment, so many of them bitter, the hardest to swallow is this one. As we fight this virus, we are becoming far more like the country that spawned it. We're becoming more like China. It's horrifying. And it tells you everything that our professional class enthusiastically welcomes this. Over the weekend, The Atlantic magazine published an article by two academics calling for an end to freedom of speech in America. Their model for an ideal system? The totalitarian government of China. "In the debate over freedom versus control of the internet, China was largely correct and the U.S. was wrong." You ought to read the whole thing. Truly, you should. It's the future. We could quote from it for the rest of the show, but we'll give you just one more: "Significant monitoring and speech control are inevitable components of a mature and flourishing internet and governments must play a large role in these practices to ensure that the internet is compatible with society's norms and values." "Norms and values." Whose norms and values? Well, our leaders' norms and values, of course, but mostly their interests. Those in power are the ones our professional class seeks to protect, not the rest of the country. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Freedom of conscience never endangers the public. It only threatens the powerful. It endangers their control. It hinders their ability to dictate election results, to loot the economy, to make policies based on whim for their own gain. No wonder our leaders have done such a poor job protecting us from China. They're on the same team. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on April 28, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Harvard Magazine publishes an op-ed warning of the risks of homeschooling during COVID-19; education reform advocate Derrell Bradford reacts on 'Fox &amp; Friends.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. A little over a month ago, my three school-aged children got a new teacher: me. Much like the one-room schoolhouse — but with Wi-Fi — our kitchen table became classroom to a kindergartener, second-grader and third-grader. (Plus their 3-year-old brother.) All of a sudden, my life got a lot more chaotic. At first, I thought the whole thing might just blow over, but after a few weeks we found out school would be canceled for the rest of the year. I didn’t fully anticipate the angst this would create. I grew up being homeschooled and I loved the experience. JIM DALY: HARVARD PROFESSOR SLAMS HOMESCHOOLING — THESE ARE THE FACTS SHE IGNORES My mom was a trailblazer in the movement who submitted her lesson plans to the school district and skillfully taught the four grade levels in our home. Essentially, many of us didn’t plan on educating our children at home but were thrust into it because of a crisis. We’re undertaking a large task we are underprepared for while being over-stressed and in survival mode. You’d think I’d have a homecourt advantage or something. But a few weeks in, I felt totally out of my depth. My children’s teachers were amazing, offering enrichment packets, online resources and weekly video check-ins. I would start the day with good intentions to get through every subject and “make learning fun” (as my 7-year-old requested), but feel like a total failure by day’s end for not accomplishing my goals. As I talked with other parents, many were feeling the same way. That’s when I heard about what one mom called “crisis schooling.” Essentially, many of us didn’t plan on educating our children at home but were thrust into it because of a crisis. We’re undertaking a large task we are underprepared for while being over-stressed and in survival mode. It’s no wonder that many of us feel inadequate. But there’s good news. While a three-month (or more) hiatus from school naturally causes parents some anxiety, there are actually factors more important to our students’ success than structured classroom learning. Here are a few. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Stress management. Research has shown that when parents model healthy ways of dealing with stress, they contribute to their child’s mental health. Having our kids at home is a great opportunity to work through stress together by taking walks, cooking, praying, having meaningful conversations and using technology to connect with extended family. Emotional intelligence. I have loved seeing my children’s empathy develop during this time. They are more in tune with their own feelings and the emotions of their siblings. They talk about how the crisis is impacting their friends and extended family members. (They’ve even observed when Mom is having a hard day.) Heightened self-awareness and social awareness are linked to graduating, avoiding high-risk behaviors and achieving overall success in life. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Adaptability and resilience. Research shows that these two characteristics predict success in life more than good grades or high test scores. These skills are forged in times of adversity. A global crisis is a perfect time to show your kids what it means to push through obstacles, bounce back from disappointments and cope with the demands of life. The other night, we were taking a walk through the neighborhood after a rough school day. At first, my mind was filled with the failures of the day. But as I listened to my children’s happy chatter and watched them lean over to admire wild violets, I smiled. I may not be doing everything right, but there are some lessons you can’t learn at school. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM SUZANNE HADLEY GOSSELIN

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Anyone who cherishes their freedom must be shaking their fists at the U.S. Supreme Court right now for ruling Monday that New York State Rifle & Pistol Association v. New York City is “moot.” This was the first significant Second Amendment case the high court had heard in a decade. Instead of handing down a ruling, a majority of justices took the dodge New York City’s lawyers offered them: They declared that the gun-control laws in question had already been changed by the city and state of New York, and therefore the challenge is made irrelevant. Justice Samuel Alito’s dissent to this decision is sharp. It begins: “By incorrectly dismissing this case as moot, the court permits our docket to be manipulated in a way that should not be countenanced. Twelve years ago in District of Columbia v. Heller … we held that the Second Amendment protects the right of ordinary Americans to keep and bear arms. Two years later, our decision in McDonald v. Chicago … established that this right is fully applicable to the states. ALITO DISSENT BLASTS NYC GUN LAW, AS SUPREME COURT PUNTS ON HIGHLY CHARGED CASE "Since then, the lower courts have decided numerous cases involving Second Amendment challenges to a variety of federal, state and local laws. Most have failed. We have been asked to review many of these decisions, but until this case, we denied all such requests.” The justices acted despite the “friend-of-the-court” brief last fall in which five U.S. senators, all Democrats, threatened the U.S. Supreme Court by writing: “The Supreme Court is not well. And the people know it. Perhaps the court can heal itself before the public demands it be ‘restructured in order to reduce the influence of politics.’ Particularly on the urgent issue of gun control, a nation desperately needs it to heal.” The issue behind this case’s central complaint was that New York City’s police commissioner forbade most licensed gun owners (those with “premises permits”) from taking their guns to ranges and second homes outside city limits. After the U.S. Supreme Court accepted this case, New York City repealed this rule, though it gave itself a lot of discretion in how to apply it; for example, it’s unclear whether individuals, when traveling out of the city with a licensed gun, can even stop to fill their gas tank. Now, the high court has punted this case back to lower courts. Incredibly, they are doing this at a time when some lower courts have been all but disregarding the U.S. Supreme Court’s previous landmark Second Amendment decisions — District of Columbia v. Heller (2008) and McDonald v. Chicago (2010). Alito argues that the central part of this case, New York City’s “premises license,” is still very much a live constitutional issue. In a concurring opinion to this decision, Justice Brett Kavanaugh, said as much: “I share Justice Alito's concern that some federal and state courts may not be properly applying Heller and McDonald. The court should address that issue soon, perhaps in one of the several Second Amendment cases with petitions for certiorari now pending before the court.” Alito argues that the central part of this case, New York City’s “premises license,” is still very much a live constitutional issue. He shows this by outlining what a New York City resident must endure to hopefully receive a premises license enabling them to shoot at a range, not to carry concealed. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER First of all, the New York City Police Department will only issue a premises license to someone the bureaucracy thinks has a “good moral character.” Then, New York City “residents must submit their applications in-person at One Police Plaza in Manhattan. An applicant must pay a fee of $431.50,” writes Justice Alito. In this lengthy process, an applicant must undergo a police investigation and provide detailed information on past employment, criminal history, health questions and more. The gauntlet goes on and on in a bureaucratic pummeling that the city can use to deny an applicant for any whim or asserted rationale whatsoever. “The NYPD may revoke a premises license at any time, including for such things as laminating the license. And a license expires after three years, so a licensee who wants to continue to possess a gun in the home after that time must file a renewal application,” writes Alito. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Clearly, New York City is not treating the Second Amendment as a right that’s specifically protected by the U.S. Bill of Rights. The city is treating it as a legal privilege they can restrict or outright take away whenever and however it likes. That, by itself, is an affront to the Supreme Court's Heller and McDonald decisions, yet the justices called it “moot.” CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY FRANK MINITER

Reaction from Steve Cortes, America First national spokesperson. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Americans broadly support federal relief for businesses and workers, but they don’t want to bail out failed business models and corporate corruption. So how would they feel about bailing out the governance failures of America’s most corrupt state? Welcome to Illinois, America’s shrinking state, home to 1,000 public corruption convictions in the last 20 years. Our acquisitive state politicians want over $40 billion from other states in a brazen attempt to spread the Illinois model beyond our borders. My Democratic state Senate colleagues garnered national attention with a letter containing this audacious request. Gov. J.B. Pritzker has separately requested billions in federal funds. The message from Illinois’ elected leaders is crystal clear: no humility, no regrets, no acknowledgment of failures, and no strings attached. American Taxpayers – bail us out! MICHAEL GOODWIN: CORONAVIRUS NURSING HOME POLICY — THIS CUOMO APPROACH PROVES TRAGIC Don’t let it happen. Federal dollars should not prop up Illinois’ failed system. Sober-minded Illinoisans have long warned that the next economic wind would topple our financial house of cards. However, our leaders had other priorities. Pritzker took to the lectern for his 2020 State of the State address declaring Illinois strong and dismissing fiscal realists as “carnival barkers” and “doomsayers,” receiving thunderous approval from his allies. Now the entire nation knows we’re broke and these same politicians are pleading for a bailout. 
      FILE - In this April 23, 2020 file photo, Gov. J.B. Pritzker announces an extension of the stay at home order for Illinois as well as a mandatory face covering order at his daily Illinois coronavirus update at the Thompson Center. Illinois State Rep. Darren Bailey, R-Xenia filed suit against the order, and a judge in southern Illinois ruled Monday, April 27, 2020, that the Illinois governor's order to stem the spread of the coronavirus exceeds his emergency authority and violates individual civil rights. (Tyler LaRiviere/Chicago Sun-Times via AP File)
       For decades, Illinois has chosen the fiscally irresponsible path – increased benefits, skipped pension payments, borrowing, taxing, spending and pretending. Moody’s pegs our state pension shortfall at $241 billion. Wirepoints.com adds in local liabilities for total debt of $430 billion, an insurmountable amount. Illinois’ present problems are not merely inherited, nor a failure to tax and spend enough. Our last two budgets set state spending records while taxation brought in record receipts. Yet Illinois failed to aggressively pay down debt or plan for a rainy day. Now, in the depths of this crisis, Pritzker is promoting another income tax increase on hard-pressed Illinoisans. Just as this tax increase wouldn’t be enough, a massive federal bailout won’t satiate the reckless spending habits of Illinois’ political class. We were once the blessed economic engine of the Midwest. But our debts have turned us into a zombie-state lagging in every meaningful financial metric, economic statistic and population trend. Here’s the harsh truth: The Land of Lincoln is no longer a government of the people, by the people and for the people. Illinois’ financial collapse reveals our government’s moral bankruptcy. Readers from other states likely assume that state governments prioritize the health, welfare, safety and property of residents. But not in Illinois, where the top priority is to provide lifetime platinum benefits for politicians and many of their political allies. Federal dollars for Illinois, beyond anything directly connected to the pandemic, would set a terrible precedent and make Washington, D.C., complicit in our sad story. Don’t just take my word for it. Read what my colleagues say in their letter. “Illinois’ largest liabilities are its unfunded pension … and other post-employment benefits,” it reads, adding that “In a normal year the size of those payments crowds out funding for services and programs.” Finally, they’ve diagnosed the fundamental problem with Illinois and it has nothing to do with a coronavirus from China. Even in good times, lavish benefits are prioritized over core functions like public safety, health care for the indigent, road construction and preparing for things like a recession. Illinois’ General Assembly Retirement System (GARS), funded at a 16 percent level, is a case in point. GARS provides generous benefits to the same elected officials now scrambling for a bailout. It’s insolvent. Legislators haven’t lifted a finger to fix their own broken system, yet they shamelessly request American taxpayers fund their obscene perks. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Our system is ethically bankrupt, too. Scan Illinois political headlines from the past year and you’ll see the FBI has been picking off powerful politicians and insiders for bribery, self-dealing and abuse of power. Some politicians, once pinched, wore wires in Chicago’s city council and our legislature, ensnaring others in the ongoing dragnet. A massive, systemic corruption scandal is being exposed. In the meantime, American taxpayers shouldn’t sink a dime into Illinois’ unreformed fiscal and moral quagmire. Why should the fiscally prudent people of Wyoming, Missouri or elsewhere be responsible for the failed policies of Illinois? Federal dollars for Illinois, beyond anything directly connected to the pandemic, would set a terrible precedent and make Washington, D.C., complicit in our sad story. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Most Illinoisans do things the right way. Families work hard, scrimping and saving under the weight of an onerous state. Meanwhile, Illinois politicians expect a bailout. It’s clearly not a plea to help the people of Illinois, who will continue to suffer until dramatic changes and systemic reforms are either made by or forced upon Illinois elected officials. Our leaders simply want to feed at the federal trough without fixing this self-inflicted disaster. But Illinoisans need and seek rejuvenation. We will thrive once again, but not until our government changes. Give our politicians the tough medicine they loathe to take and give our families the reforms they desperately need. Don’t bail out Illinois’ bankrupt system.

Gen. Terrence O'Shaughnessy on plans to move hospital ship to Norfolk, Virginia. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The Left’s rhetoric regarding President Donald J. Trump’s COVID-19 response grows sharper, even as this virus’ hospitalization and death curves grow flatter. “So as far as I’m concerned, what’s happening with this administration, it’s akin to war crimes,” Rep. Ayanna Pressley, D-Mass., said April 20. Two days later, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., complained on MSNBC’s “Morning Joe” that President Trump has confronted COVID-19 with “delay, denial, death.” BENNETT & LEIBSOHN: CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE — COMPARE FLORIDA WITH NEW YORK, AND LOOK AT THE RESULTS SO FAR “I compared Trump, who has called himself a wartime president, to the French general, Marshal Petain, who was in charge when the Nazis invaded and who essentially gave up and allowed them to occupy the country,” The Atlantic’s George Packer told “Morning Joe” Thursday. “Trump seems to be collaborating with the virus and doing its work for it.” These comments are not just unhinged. The doorframe has been pried off and a wrecking ball has smashed the wall to smithereens. Why do these leaders of Hate Trump, Inc. invoke war crimes, Nazi collaboration and pro-COVID-19 subterfuge? These partisan bitter- enders can’t handle the truth: Trump’s leadership mobilized sufficient resources to avoid the far-graver destruction the Left foresaw. On March 24, the Daily Beast anticipated a death toll between 200,000 and 2 million. Hence, “what determines whether 1.8 million people live or die … is how stringent our rules are on social distancing, quarantine, testing and treatment.”   “If the worst-case coronavirus scenarios are remotely accurate, more Americans could die from the pandemic than troops killed in every U.S. war combined,” Caleb Ecarma wrote in a March 25 Vanity Fair article headlined “Right-wing Media Is All Aboard Trump’s Coronavirus Death Train.” Ecarma thus worried that U.S. COVID-19 fatalities could exceed 1.35 million people. A month ago, such carnage sounded totally plausible. It now seems far-fetched, with COVID-19’s heartbreaking fatalities seemingly lodged in five digits — well below late March’s most-optimistic projections. Trump’s March 13 national-emergency announcement sprang largely from forecasts of flooded hospitals. A Mississippi River-style deluge of COVID-19 patients would cascade in and beg for beds, ventilators and doctors. Stretchers would swim in hallways as the infected waded into waiting rooms. And waited. And waited. As befell beautiful Italy’s lovely people, older patients would be invited to expire politely in peace, as their lungs filled with fluid. Younger, heartier patients would receive scarce beds and breathing gear. After all, their entire lives stood before them, and the octogenarians collectively had enjoyed a pretty good run. Arrivederci, Nonna.  This 3D horror epic never transpired, thanks to the tireless labors of President Trump, Vice President Mike Pence and the President’s Coronavirus Task Force; devoted public servants at the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Health and Human Services (HHS) and other agencies; America’s governors and CEOs; and the immeasurable sacrifice of doctors, nurses and first responders from Brentwood to Boston. Like sandbags that came within inches of being overtopped but stood firm, hospital-bed supplies surpassed demand. Many of the 14,566 beds that the Army Corps of Engineers has built at 18 temporary facilities stayed empty. One 250-bed pop-up hospital in Seattle closed after a week. Not one patient arrived. Some 95 percent of Americans seriously have quarantined. They followed the president’s guidance, slowed COVID-19’s spread, curbed the need for beds, and thus dodged bedlam. There’s a boat that’s leaving soon from New York. As Gothamites braced for a harrowing, COVID-fueled capacity squeeze, the 1,000-bed hospital ship USNS Comfort arrived March 30. But Comfort treated only 182 patients. The 2,106-bed infirmary that the Corps installed in just nine days at the nearby Javits Center eased pressure on the Comfort. This week, it steams toward its next mission. So, Trump over-responded. Would the Trump-nibbling hyenas prefer that he had under-responded? New York’s Democratic Gov. Andrew Cuomo predicted March 24 that his hard-hit state needed 30,000 ventilators – a frightfully tall order. This ventilator drought never happened. Private companies heeded Trump’s call, hastened production, and assembled 11,327 of these life-saving devices. They are so abundant that Cuomo announced April 15 via Twitter: “We will be sending 100 ventilators to Michigan and 50 ventilators to Maryland.” Meanwhile, Food and Drug Commissioner Stephen Hahn, M.D., has macheted through red tape to greenlight clinical trials for 72 potential COVID-19 vaccines and treatments. Another 211 related pharmaceuticals are speeding toward evaluation. “More than 31,000 National Guard stood up around the country,” Pence said April 22. He added that 5,500 active-duty military personnel are fighting COVID-19, including 964 uniformed medical professionals serving 17 hospitals in seven states. Ninety VA staffers are aiding New Jersey’s nursing homes. Sixteen VA teams are helping similar facilities in Florida. To date, FEMA, HHS and the private sector have harnessed 85 Project Airbridge flights to supply: How does any of this constitute “collaborating with the virus,” as Petain’s Vichy government dispatched Jews into Hitler’s ovens? CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Thankfully, some Democrats lack the weather-balloon-like detachment from reality that consumes Pelosi, Pressley and Packer. Other Democrats recognize that Team Trump furnished the tools they need to defeat COVID-19. “Building four field hospitals,” said New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy. “That was a decision the president, himself, took and I am grateful for it.”  “I want to thank the president of the United States, President Trump, who mobilized this effort, and he did it with all rapid speed,” Cuomo stated. “I’ll tell you, he’s been amazingly accessible,” the governor observed. “He has delivered for New York.”   CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP “Every single direct request that he was capable of meeting, he has met,” California’s Gov. Gavin Newsom noted. He asked Trump for testing swabs on April 22. “So conversation, commitment, promise made, promise kept; 90,000 on the way, to be distributed tomorrow.” Early headlines half-predicted/half-gloated: “Trump’s Katrina.” This brand-new disease triggered an unprecedented national emergency and yielded unwanted pain and death. But the devastation that could have engulfed America trails early warnings. Thanks to Team Trump and those they mobilized and inspired, unlike Katrina, this time the sandbags held, the flood crested and the levees remained unbreached. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM DEROY MURDOCK Bucknell University’s Michael Malarkey contributed research to this opinion piece. 

Hillary Clinton endorses Joe Biden for president during town hall. Hillary Clinton’s endorsement Tuesday of former Vice President Joe Biden in the November presidential election is just the latest sign of Democratic unity that will be needed to send President Trump into political retirement. Biden has also picked up the endorsements of many other prominent Democrats, including candidates who ran against him for the presidential nomination this year, former President Barack Obama, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California, and even Rep Alexandria Ocasio- Cortez of New York – one of the most progressive members of Congress. Democratic unity this year is quite a contrast with the disunity of 2016. Clinton struggled then to get endorsements, especially from Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont (who ran against her for the presidential nomination) and the more progressive wing of the party. HILLARY CLINTON ENDORSES JOE BIDEN: 'I AM THRILLED TO BE PART OF YOUR CAMPAIGN' The endorsement of Biden by Clinton – a former first lady, senator and secretary of state – may not get Biden many additional votes, but it’s likely to help him raise the millions of dollars he needs to defeat Trump. As a result, the Clinton endorsement gives Biden an important boost at a time he is finding it hard to get news coverage that is dominated by the coronavirus pandemic and by Trump’s lengthy coronavirus briefings that are televised almost every day. Clinton’s endorsement of Biden to run against the man who defeated her presidential candidacy in 2016 was as predictable as the rising sun. She won 3 million more votes than Trump, but lost to him in the Electoral College – and there is clearly no love lost between the two. Trump’s continuing insulting attacks against Clinton – including regularly referring to her as “Crooked Hillary” and falsely accusing her of wrongdoing – are strong motivators to her to work for the defeat of a president she clearly views as unfit for the nation’s highest office. Additionally, Clinton and Biden worked well together in President Obama’s administration and hold similar policy positions that differ dramatically from Trump’s. The sober and fact-based leadership styles of the two Democrats are far more similar to each other than to the erratic and unpredictable shoot-from-the-hip style favored by Trump. Democratic unity this year is quite a contrast with the disunity of 2016. I’ve always said that endorsements aren’t a big deal. Sure, a candidate might see a slight bump in his or her poll numbers immediately following the announcement, but endorsements aren’t what get people out to vote. Nearly all moderate Democrats want to make Trump a one-term president. While supporters of losing presidential candidates Bernie Sanders and Sen. Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts favor more progressive policies than Biden has advocated, Biden’s positions are far closer to Sanders and Warren than to those supported by Trump. So it’s a safe bet that with or without the Clinton endorsement, Biden could count on strong support from Democratic voters in November. In the same way, the predictable endorsement Biden received earlier from Obama likely won’t make a big difference in the number of votes Biden gets. Many independents and even some Republicans want to see Trump defeated. For example, former Republican Sen. Jeff Flake of Arizona told The Washington Post he will not be voting for Trump and hinted at supporting Biden. While a lot of independents and Republicans are them are more conservative than Biden, many are turned off by the way Trump conducts himself in office. The proven fundraising prowess that Clinton – as well as Obama – can bring to the Biden campaign could be a major factor in helping Biden become our next president. Right now the Trump campaign has nearly $200 million more than the Biden campaign, as both campaigns work overtime to raise still more funds. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Biden probably can’t catch up to Trump in the race for dollars, but he can certainly narrow the fundraising gap with the president. Biden needs money for ads on TV, the web, radio, print publications and direct mail. TV ads are expensive and particularly crucial now that many people are homebound and watching more TV than usual due to shelter-in-place orders imposed to combat the coronavirus pandemic. Trump usually gets an hour or more of free daily TV exposure with his coronavirus briefings, although his poor performance in the briefings may be losing him more votes than he is gaining from the appearances. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP A lot of surprises can happen between now and November. Few of us would have predicted at the beginning of the year than a global pandemic would confine millions of us to our homes, send unemployment soaring to levels last seen in the Great Depression, and make it impossible to wage a traditional presidential campaign filled with rallies and other events around the country. But the bottom line is that the Democratic unity illustrated by the endorsements from Clinton and others that Biden has picked up is a positive sign for those of us who long for competent leadership in the White House. I don’t know if Joe Biden will be our next president, but if I were a Trump supporter I’d be very nervous about the prospect. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LESLIE MARSHALL

Former Senate staffer accuses Joe Biden of sexual assault; reaction and analysis from the 'Special Report' All-Star panel. For the past five years, the liberal media have waged an unending war against Donald Trump. And as the November election draws closer, they are protecting former Vice President Joe Biden – the presumptive Democratic nominee to run against Trump – by downplaying coverage of a serious allegation that Biden committed sexual assault in 1993. There are many relevant questions that need to be answered by Sleepy Joe Biden about his fitness for office. But these questions have been largely ignored by the anti-Trump media. First and foremost is the allegation of sexual assault coming from Biden’s former Senate employee Tara Reade. Reade’s story is credible. Contemporaneous evidence supports her claim. TARA READE BLASTS HILLARY CLINTON AFTER BIDEN ENDORSEMENT: SHE'S 'ENABLING A SEXUAL PREDATOR' Reade’s allegation merits serious investigation by all major news organizations and by law enforcement agencies as well. It shouldn’t be swept under the rug by news organizations eager to defeat President Trump in November – but that’s what’s happening. A videotape unearthed Friday shows a woman Reade identifies as her late mother calling in to Larry King’s CNN show in 1993. The caller said her daughter had “problems” with a “prominent senator” but didn’t mention Biden by name or go into details of Reade’s allegations against Biden. And Fox News reported that “On Monday, two more people – a former neighbor and a former colleague of Reade’s – came forward to back her claims after conversations they had back in the 90s.” In addition, Reade told Fox News that she was upset by Hillary Clinton’s endorsement of Biden on Tuesday. “I voted for Hillary Clinton in 2016,” Reade told Fox News. “I voted for her in the primary. I’m a lifelong Democrat. But yet, what I see now is someone enabling a sexual predator and it was my former boss, Joe Biden, who raped me.” The gentle treatment Biden is getting from the Trump-hating media is a dramatic contrast to the way the same news organizations unfairly brutalized Trump’s Supreme Court nominee, Brett Kavanaugh, at his Senate confirmation hearing in 2018. There was no credible evidence to back up an allegation of sexual misconduct by Kavanaugh in high school. But Kavanaugh, who is now a Supreme Court associate justice, was presumed guilty from the start by the liberal media and their Democratic allies. We were told we had to believe his accuser despite the lack of any corroboration of her allegations. It’s time that Biden answer serious questions about Reade’s allegation. The #MeToo movement should demand it. Furthermore, Biden should simply instruct the University of Delaware, which is storing his Senate records, to release any information it has regarding Reade’s allegation. Biden must also answer questions about his relationship with the so-called whistleblower from the infamous impeachment witch hunt against President Trump. The American people have a right to know if the whistleblower’s actions were politically motivated.  Reade’s allegation merits serious investigation by all major news organizations and by law enforcement agencies as well. Biden should also disclose to the public what he knew about the Obama-Biden administration’s Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act warrants against Trump campaign adviser Carter Page. Using the FBI to spy on candidate Trump’s presidential campaign is a serious matter and Biden must answer questions. In addition, the American people deserve to know if Biden had any knowledge of the infamous Crossfire Hurricane investigation and the activities of disgraced former FBI Director James Comey, former CIA Director John Brennan, and phony Russian dossier author and ex-British spy Christopher Steele. Lastly, Biden must account for his cozy relationship and soft rhetoric regarding the Communist regime in China and his son Hunter’s lucrative business dealings there. In fact, it’s coming up on the one-year anniversary of this noteworthy statement about China from Joe Biden: “China is going to eat our lunch? Come on, man… They can’t figure out how they’re going to deal with the corruption that exists within the system. I mean, you know, they’re not bad folks, folks. But guess what, they’re not, they’re not competition for us.” Not only is this claim dangerously incoherent in the Biden tradition, but it’s also dead wrong. The bottom line is that President Trump has been right about China from the beginning and Biden needs to explain why his policy toward China was so detrimental to both our national security and American workers. The left is so concerned about Biden’s massive vulnerability on China that they’re publishing fake news about President Trump and the Bank of China to try to manufacture a political narrative that doesn’t exist. These attempts to change the subject away from Hunter Biden’s 2013 business trip to China with his father on Air Force Two will fail. Joe Biden should authorize the release of information relating to his son’s foreign travel on Air Force Two and transcripts of all his phone calls with Chinese government officials. These stories aren’t going away, and their impact will only grow with each passing day. Blatant media bias will end up being an in-kind contribution to Biden unless the mainstream media change direction and decide to cover the Trump-Biden race fairly. But don’t hold your breath. The inconvenient truth is that as a candidate and now as commander-in-chief, Donald Trump has had to endure relentless attacks and countless false narratives – not from a legitimate skeptical press corps, but from a delusional left-wing political opposition disguised as journalists. No president has been treated so unfairly by the mainstream media in our nation’s history. The mainstream media have always been skewed to the left, but with their coverage of this president they have morphed into something much different. In fact, the liberal media are losing credibility with the American people because their coverage is so biased and their double-standard so pronounced. When they can’t create news with self-serving questions, they seek to become the news by pulling outrageous stunts. Take New York Magazine’s Olivia Nuzzi’s juvenile question this week equating coronavirus deaths to our soldiers who died on the battlefield in Vietnam as a prime example. Instead of asking a serious question, Nuzzi used her time to ask President Trump: “If an American president loses more Americans over the course of six weeks than died in the entirety of the Vietnam War, does he deserve to be re-elected?" CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It seems that many reporters are openly engaged with the Democratic Party to defeat President Trump. Their reluctance to ask Biden any probing or inconvenient questions is going to backfire spectacularly. By not testing Biden now and sharpening him for the onslaught coming this fall, the liberal media are allowing their candidate to remain a dull blade. If these biased journalists weren’t suffering from Trump Derangement Syndrome, they’d realize a public airing of Biden scandals sooner rather than later is helpful. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The 2016 presidential campaign demonstrates that steel sharpens steel. Donald Trump became a better candidate by walking through the primary election fire and was further hardened by becoming the greatest counterpuncher ever during the general election. The efforts by the Trump-hating media to prop up the weak Biden candidacy will end in spectacular failure when Trump is reelected by the American people, who recognize the extraordinary leadership and successful policies he has brought to the White House. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID BOSSIE

Former CIA station chief and Fox News contributor Daniel Hoffman says the U.S. must hold China accountable for its mishandling of coronavirus by outsourcing pharmaceutical goods and partnering with allies. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Nearly 50 years ago, President Richard Nixon made history when he became the first American president to visit the People’s Republic of China. His visit in February of 1972 would be known as “the week that changed the world” because it allowed the emergence of China into the world’s economy after being a social pariah for a quarter of a century. “The question is whether we, with different philosophies, but both with feet on the ground, and having come from the people, can make a breakthrough that will serve not just China and America, but the whole world in the years ahead,” Nixon said to Chairman Mao Zedong at his Peking residence during their first-ever meeting. The idea was that as China opened to the United States, both nations not only would prosper economically, but China’s totalitarian ideology and structures would be reformed as it came in contact with Western democracy. Of course, we know what happened with the economic aspect. In a few decades, China became the world’s second-largest economy and a major military power. Now, China is using that freedom to validate the worst of its historic instincts. SEN. COTTON, REP. CRENSHAW: CORONAVIRUS HAS DESTROYED COUNTLESS LIVES — HERE'S HOW TO MAKE CHINA PAY The prosperity that made China an economic superpower in some ways had the opposite effect on individual rights and democratic reform as it helped its leaders tighten their grip on the Chinese people. The world’s willingness to turn a blind eye to China’s human rights abuses in order to profit from Chinese businesses and investments only made matters worse. Under President Xi Jinping, who in 2018 essentially made himself ruler for life, China now has one of the most repressive regimes in the world. The PRC has brutalized its citizens and minorities and clamped down on civil rights, such as freedom of speech and religious liberty, making it one of the few nations that can nearly cut off its entire population from the rest of the world at a time when we have never been more connected. Even as the COVID-19 pandemic spreads across the world, millions of Uighur Muslims continue to suffer imprisonment in “re-education” camps. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now the world is paying a hefty price for giving China a free pass on its human rights offenses. It’s precisely because of China’s disregard for freedom of speech that hundreds of millions of people will suffer for decades because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The coronavirus may have originated in one of China’s wet markets — or even a test lab in Wuhan as some reports suggest — but it became a global pandemic because of the CCP’s interference. Freedom of speech is more than simply the right of expression or conscience. It includes the right to dissent and to publicize information that is critical for citizens to know. A totalitarian regime that guards information or disseminates disinformation can cause untold harm to millions. If China cherished a free press and freedom of information, this is what could have happened: At the first notice of the outbreak of the virus — which may have been as early as November 2019 — China would have raised a global alert based on the early reports of the medical personnel in Wuhan instead of trying to cover the emergence of the virus. China also would have taken early proactive steps to stop travel through Wuhan and in and out of mainland China. Moreover, China would have welcomed the help of the United Nations, the World Health Organization and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control to investigate the virus’ mechanism of action, setting in motion the process to find a vaccine so citizens around the world could be protected before it eventually reached their nations’ shores. Instead, there’s ample evidence that China engaged in a campaign of misinformation and coverups — misleading governments, slandering whistleblowers and waiting to act until it was too late. The Chinese Communist Party also disappeared a business tycoon who dared criticize the government and other medical professionals and scientists whose oath demanded they raise their voice against the coverup. “What brings us together is a recognition ... on our part that what is important is not a nation’s internal political philosophy. What is important is its policy toward the rest of the world and toward us,” Nixon said to Mao toward the end of their meeting. Seeing what is happening today in the world because of China’s illiberal political philosophy, I cannot help but disagree with Nixon. The United States and its democratic allies should reverse Nixon’s great experiment, and either demand China change or allow her to succumb to her own devices. As a citizen of the world’s largest democracy — India, where hundreds of millions of people will suffer economically and physically because of COVID-19 — I have seen how freedom of information and speech are essential not only for a free, prosperous society but for the national and health security of the world. As China’s democratic neighbor to the south, we watch with alarm as the global system has continued to allow China to do what it wants in order to lie, cheat and steal its way into the rarified air of our world’s few but powerful superpowers. Enough is enough. The United States and its democratic allies should reverse Nixon’s great experiment, and either demand China change or allow her to succumb to her own devices. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Going forward, no major global economy should be allowed to be integrated with the rest of the world while it continues to violate the fundamental rights of its citizens. The alternative isn’t just death to Western democracies, but the lives of millions of everyday people, across the world. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM JOSEPH D'SOUZA

Parts of the state with lower infection rates are planning to slowly reopen after May 15; David Lee Miller reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. I’m an emergency physician at St. Barnabas Hospital in the Bronx. I have been in the ER every day these last few weeks, either supervising or providing direct care. I contracted a COVID-19 infection very early in the outbreak, as did two of my daughters, one of whom is a nurse. We are all well, thank God. COVID-19 has been the worst health care disaster of my 30-year ­career, because of its intensity, duration and potential for lasting impact. The lasting impact is what worries me the most. And it’s why I now believe we should end the lockdown and rapidly get back to work. From mid-March through mid-April, the ER staff at St. Barnabas huddled in groups of about 20 every morning. We asked ourselves what had happened over the previous shift. We generated a list of action­able tasks for the following 24 hours. At first, we addressed personal protective equipment and the management of patients with mild illness who were seeking COVID-19 tests. BENNETT & LEIBSOHN: CORONAVIRUS RESPONSE — COMPARE FLORIDA WITH NEW YORK, AND LOOK AT THE RESULTS SO FAR Then came the wave of critically ill patients in numbers none of us had ever seen. This lasted for two weeks. The number of patients on ventilators accumulated in the ER and throughout the hospital. We witnessed an unprecedented number of deaths. The tone of the huddles became more somber. We became accustomed to the morbidity; we did our jobs. It is precisely what I have witnessed that now tells me that it’s time to ease the lockdown. Here’s why: First, the wave has crested. At 1 p.m. April 7, the COVID-19 arrivals slowed down. It was a discrete, noticeable event. Stretchers became available by 5 p.m., and the number of arriving COVID-19 patients dropped below the number discharged, transferred or deceased. Testing is important work, but it should happen in parallel to the immediate resuscitation of the economy and getting people back to work. This was striking, because the community I serve is poor. Some are homeless. Most work in “essential,” low-paying jobs, where distancing isn’t easy. Nevertheless, the wave passed over us, peaked and subsided. The way this transpired tells me the ebb and flow had more to do with the natural course of the outbreak than it did with the lockdown. Second, I worry about non-coronavirus care. While the inpatient units remain busy with sick COVID-19 patients, our ER has been quiet for more than a week. We usually average 240 patients a day. For the last week, we averaged fewer than 100. That means our patients in this diverse, low-income community are afraid to come to the ER for non-COVID care. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Gotham-wide, the number of 911 ambulance runs declined to 3,320 on April 18, down from a peak of 6,527 on March 30, according to New York Fire Department data. The current nadir is significantly below the average. A large share of those staying home surely have emergency medical and surgical conditions not related to the novel coronavirus. The growing numbers ­dying at home during this crisis must include fatal myocardial infarctions, asthma exacerbations, bacterial infections and strokes. Meanwhile, our pediatric volume in the ER has practically disappeared. Visits to primary-care pediatricians are also down, with vaccine schedules falling behind. Everyone seems to be avoiding the health system — an important and unfortunate consequence of the stay-at-home strategy. Third, inordinate fear misguides the public response. While COVID-19 is serious, fear of it is being over-amplified. The public needs to understand that the vast majority of infected people do quite well. Finally, COVID-19 is more prevalent than we think. Many New Yorkers already have the COVID-19 infection, whether they are aware of it or not. As of today, over 43 percent of those tested are positive in The Bronx. We are developing a significant degree of natural herd immunity. Distancing works, but I am skeptical that it is playing as predominant a role as many think. More testing will better establish the numbers among those with mild illnesses and no symptoms. My professional ­experience tells me the number of infected people will be high. Testing is important work, but it should happen in parallel to the immediate resuscitation of the economy and getting people back to work. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP At present, the testing is ­imperfect. We can’t wait months. We must protect the vulnerable and mitigate without destroying the economy. Standing up to this virus can’t be the job of essential workers only. We’ve been strong, but we’re tired, and we need the rest of you to help us. By getting back to work. CLICK HERE TO READ THIS COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST


Thousands of schools are closed across the country due to coronavirus spread concerns, which has left at least 42.1 million school students without a classroom to learn from. A homeschool expert sits down with Fox News to offer some tips and recommendations of what parents should and shouldn’t do while trying to temporarily homeschool their children. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. By now you’ve seen some of the many homeschooling memes making their way around social media in this era of COVID-19 inspired education. One of the most humorous – and realistic –features a mother asking on Day 3 of school, “How do I get this kid transferred out of my class?” As a longtime homeschool teacher BC (before coronavirus), I’ve said that more times than I would like to admit. In fact, it might happen on a weekly basis, or maybe even more often than that. To be totally transparent, the thought might even occur daily – but please don’t tell my children. For most of us, the fever, not the one of the coronavirus variety, but the one that hits in the spring, came the second week of quarantine and it hasn’t let up. Some might even say that it happened on the second day. DRS. FRIEDEN AND SHAHPAR: CORONAVIRUS TESTING 1, 2, 3 – IT'S TIME FOR PLAIN TALK ON WHAT'S NEXT During a normal school year, we have extracurricular activities, afternoon breaks, weekends and even vacations to break up the monotony when spring shows its lovely face. It’s hard to see the bright, green grass and budding flowers and not long to be on the outside looking in. The physical distancing and quarantine have put an end to all of that and taken a toll on everyone. How do we continue homeschooling when no one wants to be reciting multiplication tables and writing research papers? Here are five tips that have helped me over the years when I wanted to prematurely close up shop – or transfer our children to another class. I hope they will help you over the hump. Get out in the sunshine and shelve the books. If the sun is calling your name, then by all means go. A couple of days ago, I woke up with a migraine. I felt better mid-day, but the last thing I wanted to do was teach school. So, we all went outside in the backyard. We made chalk drawings, played with the dog, talked, laughed and rolled in the dirt.
The next day, we went back to work with fresh eyes and happy hearts. And I didn’t feel one iota of guilt. Remember: 90 percent of success is just showing up. On most days, we don’t do anything earth-shattering in our homeschool. The math pages are completed, the spelling words are written, but I don’t feel like they learned much. Yet, those days are just as important as the days when a light bulb of understanding comes on or when a science experiment goes off without a hitch. Just show up, open the books, and close them when you’re done. That will be all. That will be enough. 
      In the Batura family homeschooling room, Riley reads while his brothers Will and Alex work off some excess energy.
       Realize you’re also a referee. I just broke up the fifth fight of the day, and it’s only 10 a.m. We have three boys, and they can be competitive and argumentative. (I’m describing most of us, but this is about the children, right?) I’m constantly breaking up fights or wiping tears. The skirmishes often happen during the school day, and I get frustrated and lash out. So, I have to stop and apologize, give them a break or send them to their rooms.
After 10 or 15 minutes, I call them back, and we continue where we left off. Don’t stop when you hit the wall. Keep going. My husband, Paul, has run 80 marathons. He’s a mastermind at the never-quit cliché, but I didn’t come by that trait naturally. He says that the 20th mile is always the hardest and that if you trudge through it, the second wind comes for the last six.
By now, the novelty of school at home has worn off, and it’s tempting to quit. Resist the urge. The finish line will soon be in sight but you have to keep going. If you can’t run, walk, however slowly. You’re going to make it. By now, the novelty of school at home has worn off, and it’s tempting to quit. Resist the urge. The finish line will soon be in sight but you have to keep going. Ask for help. Phone a friend. Pray. Our youngest two were diagnosed with dyslexia last year. I had been pulling my hair out trying to teach them to read. They are extremely bright, wildly creative and eager to learn. Dyslexics don’t have a disability, they just learn differently. I found a whole new way to teach by talking to other parents, researching a lot and seeking help from expert teachers.
If you are struggling with homeschooling, do not hesitate to contact their teacher, or talk to other parents, or FaceTime a good friend. I regularly discuss homeschooling with other moms because I garner new ideas from them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And I pray. Sometimes out of desperation, but always because I know that I can’t do this alone.
Finally, let’s be clear. All of the school kids in America are behind, and none of them are ahead. We’re all navigating this storm together – and together we’ll get through it.

We aren't demanding that Democrats assume Biden is guilty. But it's also a little disturbing if they don't. We've made this comparison before, but you really can't make it enough because it's just such a striking contrast. It was just a year and a half ago that Washington was completely convulsed, overturned by the Brett Kavanaugh confirmation battle. For more than a month, everything in Washington revolved around the spectacular allegations against Kavanaugh from a woman called Christine Blasey Ford. WASHINGTON POST BLASTED FOR CLAIMING 'TRUMP ALLIES' ARE 'AMPLIFYING' BIDEN ACCUSER TARA READE Those allegations had very few details accompanying them. There was no proof they were true. In fact, there was ample evidence that they weren't. But it didn't matter. Democrats had a very clear standard at the time. They believe women and the allegations they make -- always. Sen. Mazie Hirono, D-Hawaii: Not only do women like Dr. Ford, who bravely come forward, need to be heard, but they need to be believed. Guess who's perpetuating all of these kinds of actions? It's the men in this country, and I just want to say to the men of this country to shut up and step up. Do the right thing for a change. Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn.: Let me just say right at the outset: I believe, Dr. Ford. I believe the survivor here. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER John Berman, CNN anchor: Do you believe her story? Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill.: Well, I can tell you, it really does have a ring of truth to it. Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y.: I believe her. Many, many, many Americans believe her. Many, many women in America who have been taken advantage of certainly believe her. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y.: I believe her because she's telling the truth. Judge Kavanaugh has not asked to have the FBI review these claims. Is that the reaction of an innocent person? It is not. Well, it was unanimous in the Democratic Party: They believe all women, and they believed Christine Blasey Ford because she is a woman. And of course, if the Democratic Party takes a view -- if the word goes down --  all the troops have to mouth the party line. You can be certain the media are repeating the same words. We're not demanding that Democrats assume Joe Biden is guilty. They shouldn't. No one should be assumed guilty. We certainly don't assume he is guilty. But it's a little weird that they don't take this [Tara Reade's allegations] seriously. And in fact, they did. Kavanaugh, they said, was likely a serial rapist and anyone who defended him was an enabler of a rapist. Jason Johnson, MSNBC contributor: I've never heard of a guy who is a one-time rapist. I've never heard of a guy who is a one-time sexual assaulter. I grew up with guys like this. He's from around this area, right? He's the fifth guy in a gang rape. Jeffrey Toobin, CNN legal analyst: Maybe this country is a lot more racist and sexist than we thought. Chris Matthews, former MSNBC host: I'm glad we have mostly women on tonight. I think young women have experienced this kind of thing with guys who have been drinking. I think they know this guy got -- to say out of hand is ridiculous. Worse than out of hand. Toobin: Three women came forward and said under oath in various ways that Brett Kavanaugh sexually assaulted them. And they were told, we don't believe you. That's the legacy of this hearing. Joy Behar, co-host of "The View": These white men -- old, by the way -- are not protecting women. They're protecting a man who is probably guilty. So, it's all white men. They're the worst. And by the way, there was Chris Matthews very upset about sexual harassment. He won't put up with that, won't tolerate it -- ever. Well, now suddenly, a very similar case has emerged. Tara Reade says Joe Biden sexually assaulted her in the early 1990s. The specifics are pretty overwhelming. We don't know if they're true; they're unproven. But so far, they seem to have a lot more supporting evidence than the charges against Brett Kavanaugh did. But the case is being handled very differently. The media are, for the most part, ignoring the story. Tara Reade doesn't have two front doors, so she can't be credible, apparently. Democrats aren't simply ignoring the story; they're proudly endorsing Joe Biden anyway. They don't care what women say. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi: I'm proud to endorse Joe Biden for president, a leader who is the personification of hope and courage, values, authenticity, and integrity. Nancy Pelosi endorsing authenticity. Uh-huh. Now, just to be clear, we're not demanding that Democrats assume Joe Biden is guilty. They shouldn't. No one should be assumed guilty. We certainly don't assume he is guilty. But it's a little weird that they don't take this seriously. That would mean -- in fact, we're starting to conclude -- that their attempt to destroy Brett Kavanaugh wasn't based on any genuine belief that he committed those crimes. Instead, it's looking increasingly like a cynical political ploy: Destroy a man and his family, his children, his two little girls in order to get power. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It looks like that's what they did. You should keep that in mind going forward. Adapted from Tucker Carlson's monologue from "Tucker Carlson Tonight" on April 27, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ FROM FROM TUCKER CARLSON

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Getting my parents and grandparents to talk about their experiences during the Great Depression and World War II was always difficult. They lived in the pre-Dr. Phil generation before people went public with their deepest thoughts. I have been thinking how they might have responded to the current panic caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. I suspect their reactions would come in ways far different from ours. Between 1931 and 1940, the unemployment rate during the Great Depression rose to above 14 percent. One out of four Americans were out of work. We are not at that level today, but the total number of Americans filing for unemployment benefits has risen above 26 million. Some predict it will get worse. ROBERT GARRETT: CORONAVIRUS — 6 LESSONS FROM A NEW JERSEY HOSPITAL SYSTEM ON THE FRONT LINES The Congressional Budget Office forecasts the unemployment rate will surge to 16 percent by this September. We have a larger population today and potentially more jobs lost than those earlier generations experienced. During World War II the draft was in force. Young men, many of whom had never been away from their small towns, were sent overseas. More than 418,000 U.S. military service members and civilians died in WWII. The number of American deaths ascribed to COVID-19 nears 55,000. Even one death then was too many, every death now is, too, more than we are prepared to lose. We must do all we can to stem the tide. Some of us complain about having to line up to get into supermarkets, wear masks or practice social distancing. Those earlier generations had ration books and did without a lot of food and conveniences they had once enjoyed. And they endured it for 15 years, from 1930 when the Great Depression began to really grip the country to V-J Day in 1945. Some experienced hard times for several years after the war ended. Part of this complaining, I think, is that those of us who have benefited from their sacrifices have never had to experience what they did. That was one of the motivations behind their “doing without,” wasn’t it, so their children and grandchildren wouldn’t have to? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER That has been a blessing and a curse. Never having been required to sacrifice for anything and told we should always expect more and better of everything, we feel our right of entitlement has been unfairly stolen from us. Not knowing what sacrifice looks like we are unable to react to it in a positive way, a way that is more likely to lift us from our current circumstances, or at least sustain us in them. Those previous generations would shake their heads at how we are reacting to current economic challenges. They dealt with smallpox and polio. Did they read in their newspapers and hear on radio people saying America would never be the same again? No, they heard Franklin Roosevelt say, “The only thing we have to fear is fear itself” and Winston Churchill telling the British people, “Never give in. Never give in. Never, never, never, never — in nothing, great or small, large or petty — never give in, except to convictions of honor and good sense.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP President Trump is trying optimism, saying America will come back stronger than before the pandemic, but he is being drowned out by voices of pessimism and defeatism that would be foreign to those two previous generations. To paraphrase the song, if we can’t make it in America, where can we make it? Kudos to those governors who are carefully reopening some businesses in their states. Results will take a while to determine whether their decisions have been good or bad, but these leaders are behaving in ways that those who have gone before would admire. Attitude is key. That’s what my parents and grandparents taught me, not so much in words, but by their example. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM CAL THOMAS

Protests continue in Texas as demonstrators call for all Texans to get back to work; Casey Stegall reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. America’s initial response to the coronavirus pandemic rightly prioritized good public health policy. Now, Washington is focusing on getting Americans safely back to work. The aim is to preserve livelihoods as well as lives. However, the plan put forward so far is missing some key pieces, parts that need to be added to ensure the safety, prosperity and freedom of Americans long into the future. While the White House has been steering the response ship, there has been no shortage of mutinous rumblings below decks. This partisan squabbling has clouded recognition of what the U.S. has accomplished. DRS. FRIEDEN AND SHAHPAR: CORONAVIRUS TESTING 1, 2, 3 – IT'S TIME FOR PLAIN TALK ON WHAT'S NEXT So far, deaths from COVID-19 are way below estimates. Our hospitals have not been overwhelmed. U.S. per capita mortality rates are among the lowest in the world, and we’ve conducted far more tests for the presence of the virus than any other nation. The U.S. is actually building up, not drawing down, its stockpiles of medical supplies. We are developing an expanded arsenal of ways to combat COVID-19. The U.S. government is providing assistance to America’s workers. The stock market is coming back. There is a plan to open the country. Clearly, America is in better shape than most. It is also clear that more and more Americans are getting anxious to get America back to work. Protesters have rallied at statehouses in many parts of the country, demanding that governors start relaxing lockdown restrictions that have shuttered millions of businesses and left tens of millions of workers without jobs. These protesters are not out of touch. They are the vanguard recognizing that the time has come to get to work. Rightfully, they reject the false idea that our nation is faced with only one choice: either shelter in our basements until a cure is found or act as though the disease doesn’t exist. The formation of the White House presidential advisory council on reopening the country has come at the right time. Americans are ready to start on the road to recovery. The council is rightly focused on finding the best way to restart the economic engine. And while that’s what is engaging the attention of most Americans, there is more to be done. The National Coronavirus Recovery Commission organized by my colleagues at the Heritage Foundation is also advising the White House. But the commission’s perspective is broader than the portfolio given the advisory council. For one thing, the commissioners rightly recognized that America’s economic recovery can’t be achieved just within America’s borders. Some folks have been talking up the idea of making the U.S. economy completely self-contained. No need to rely on foreign suppliers for anything. From I-phones to minerals to drugs, we’ll make ’em all right here in the good ol’ USA. That’s a pipedream. The reality is that, when it comes to restarting the economy, we have to work with the economy we have. Job number one is to get it up and running and get everyone back to work. To make things go, we’ll need to engage with some vitally important foreign partners — partners that, unlike China, share the American vision of free markets and free peoples. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Take the U.S.-Canada-Mexico partnership, for example. Many subcomponents of American products come from our two neighbors. U.S. assembly plants may be ready to start running, but they will sit idle if their suppliers in Mexico are still shut down because of COVID-19. Also important are economic and strategic partnerships in Europe and the Indo-Pacific, nations like India, Japan, South Korea and Australia. In short, the U.S. economic recovery will hinge to a great degree on the economic recovery of the free world. We will have to come back from this crisis together, with the U.S. leading the way. America’s effort shouldn’t look like the Marshall Plan or traditional, and often ineffectual, foreign aid. Instead, Washington ought to be looking for investments, innovation, new supply chains and relationships that not only help bring our economies back quickly but also strengthen the bonds among free peoples. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Washington also needs to start thinking about how to prevent and mitigate the next pandemic. Sadly, many on the left want to use this crisis to advance a socialist agenda, everything from government-run health care to redistributing national income. The administration needs to have a plan to fight back. Battling future pandemics shouldn’t undermine our freedoms, the virtues of federalism, and the instruments of a free market that create prosperity. If the White House doesn’t come up with a powerful program now to fill these policies spaces, progressives will be all too happy to fill the void. They will deliver ideas that could be as dangerous as the plague. Instead what we need is a plan from the president for American global economic leadership and a vision that will ensure this disaster never happens again. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

Kiron Skinner, former senior adviser to the secretary of state and 2016 Trump campaign foreign policy adviser, weighs in. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. President Trump was spot-on when he called the COVID-19 pandemic “our big war.” Our battle with it may not be the kind of war we are used to fighting, but when an enemy has killed tens of thousands of our fellow Americans, severely damaged our economy and upended our daily society – make no mistake we are at war. As long as COVID-19 continues to spread around the world, the lives of Americans will not be safe. And when this stealth invader respects no border or boundary, this new war needs a new kind of battle strategy. LIZ PEEK: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS TURN RACE ON ITS HEAD – HERE'S WHY When I was coming up the ranks in the Air Force, we were taught national security strategy through the DIME framework – Diplomatic, Informational, Military and Economic. While these civilian and military elements of power are essential, we now must expand the paradigm to include investments in global health in order to protect our homeland. To win this war, we must approach this national security crisis with a truly global response. Viewing disease threats around the world as a national security threat is not without precedent. In 2005, President George W. Bush presciently said, “a pandemic is a lot like a forest fire. If caught early it might be extinguished with limited damage. If allowed to smolder, undetected, it can grow to an inferno that can spread quickly beyond our ability to control it.” These words resonate with striking accuracy today. President Bush saw the global health threats on the horizon that could attack our country. He invested in programs to combat them because he understood cutting off disease at its source was necessary to protect Americans in our interconnected world. Last year, I had the opportunity to travel to Zambia to see the impact of two global health programs in action, started under the former president. I saw how America’s global HIV/AIDS program has saved more than 17 million lives. And in a small, rural village, I witnessed how the provision of mosquito nets and spray through the president’s malaria initiative is working to reduce malaria-related mortality by 50 percent across 15 high-burden countries in sub-Saharan Africa. President Trump has addressed the importance of these and similar programs as part of a global health strategy, stating during a recent COVID-19 White House briefing “there would be tremendous death” if we pulled funding – and has suggested America may need to step in to provide additional support to countries battling COVID-19. And the truth is these programs are not just good for these countries, they are good for America. When we do not act to stop the spread of disease around the world, we not only put the health and safety of our people at risk, we put the primacy of American power in danger. Throughout my career and beyond, I have seen how American intervention in the world responding to national security threats has made us stronger and safer at home.  Right now, China is already exploiting the COVID-19 pandemic to make power plays and extend its economic reach. They know that putting a stake in developing nations and emerging economies means more opportunities for diplomatic and economic power in key markets for them and fewer for us. Since I was in Zambia, China has previewed how it is leveraging loan agreements to gain access to strategic state assets. In an April 17, 2020, report, the Wall Street Journal detailed how “two senior Zambian officials on a government panel negotiating with China said they are considering giving the Chinese copper-mining assets, including the country’s third-largest mine… in exchange for debt relief.” When we disengage, China fills the void in an effort to weaken our strategic advantage on the global stage. We must not cede our position to them, particularly when developing and emerging markets will be essential to our own economic recovery. Before COVID-19, more than half of U.S. exports were going to the developing world. It is not only the Chinese we need to be concerned with during this crisis. The coronavirus has the power to completely destabilize countries already teetering on the edge of collapse. If these states fail, dangerous actors can fill the power vacuum, leading to refugee crises and creating breeding grounds for terrorism that can end up knocking on our front door. These threats alone are enough to merit a global response, but COVID-19 also presents a real danger to our most valued national security asset, our military. Just look to the USS Theodore Roosevelt aircraft carrier, where over 800 crewmembers have tested positive for the virus and one sailor has died. This virus has the ability to quickly stampede through our ships and military bases around the world unchecked, creating soft targets and sickening our men and women in uniform during one of our greatest global crises. This is a risk we cannot take. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Now is the time for swift action. Throughout my career and beyond, I have seen how American intervention in the world responding to national security threats has made us stronger and safer at home. And today, we are up against one of the greatest national security threats our country has ever faced. I am confident we will defeat this enemy as we have others, but doing so requires us to lead a global response to COVID-19. Our country’s future and security depend on it. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LIZ PEEK

'You don't have to be draconian,' says Florida Governor Ron DeSantis discussing how Florida used a data driven approach to flatten its coronavirus curve Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  A forgotten principle of public policy reform: focus on failure and you will get failure, focus on success and you will get success. Looking at the past two months of our state responses to the coronavirus, it is time to revive that idea.  There’s one state in America that has a larger elderly population than New York, that is more ethnically diverse than New York, and that has two million more people than New York. Yet its death rate from COVID-19 is 5 percent that of New York. That state is Florida.  The tale of these two states, New York and Florida, illustrates that perhaps the media should have been less adulatory of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo and given Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis more attention. Instead, the facts and statistics reveal the media got this backward.  LIZ PEEK: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS TURN RACE ON ITS HEAD – HERE'S WHY  In March, Florida was projected to be the second-worst state for COVID-19 deaths, with predictions of 174 per day and a total of nearly 7,000 by the end of the summer.  Nothing like this has transpired and it will not come to pass.    Meanwhile, Cuomo’s daily press briefings have been covered in full, and he has been lauded as everything from “The Golden Governor” to “The Politician of the Moment.” DeSantis, however, receives headlines such as “Florida Governor Issues Coronavirus Stay at Home Order After Heavy Criticism” and “Florida Governor Keeps Hitting New Lows In the Battle Against Coronavirus.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER  Yet while New York kept chalking up bigger and bigger infection rates and deaths, Florida contained its problems early and without the heavy hand so many urged.  While one might be tempted to point out the ways in which New York and Florida are different, and there are differences, a few things of a comparative nature are not well-understood. As is well documented, the most vulnerable population for the coronavirus is in the 65-plus age group.   Only one state has a higher percentage of elder Americans living in it than Florida — Maine. In Florida, that population constitutes over 20 percent of the state. In New York, it’s just over 16 percent. Florida is also more ethnically diverse than New York. While 17 percent of Florida’s population is African-American and New York’s is just under 18 percent, Florida’s Hispanic population is 26 percent to New York’s 19.2. Florida is also a much more populous state than New York with about two million more residents.  But Florida has done well with the coronavirus, as the media is quiet to report, while New York has not. Of the 55,425 COVID-19 deaths in America, New York (with over 22,000 deaths) is responsible for over 40 percent while Florida (with nearly 1,100 deaths) is responsible for just under 2 percent. Yet, Florida shut down its state much later than New York, almost two weeks later.  And there was much criticism for its delay. The shutdown in Florida was also much less severe than New York’s. Florida did not close churches and synagogues, nor did it order the shuttering of most of its beaches.  DeSantis was criticized for being late in his “shutdown.” Wrong: It wasn’t late, it was targeted to the vulnerable population, and was less restrictive overall.    What DeSantis did do was take a much more vertical approach to the virus than others, like Cuomo. In early March, DeSantis put out targeted and preventative messaging to his elder population, advising them to stay at home. In places like The Villages (home to over 125,000 retirees), DeSantis implemented golf-cart drive-through coronavirus testing. He deployed the National Guard to help institute testing in the state’s nursing homes where, unlike New York, older COVID-19 patients were not sent.    Early on, DeSantis suspended visitation and ordered staff screening at long-term care facilities.  He also dispatched millions of masks and gloves and hundreds of thousands of face shields and gowns, also known as personal protective equipment, to nursing homes and other centers caring for the elderly. These actions, among others, led Florida to a 93 percent better per capita long-term care facility death rate than New York.    Florida’s worst day was nearly two weeks ago with 72 deaths, and its total deaths are seven times less than predicted. Indeed, Florida has 94 percent less the per capita COVID-19 death rate than New York. Still, DeSantis was being criticized for being late in his “shutdown.” Wrong: It wasn’t late, it was targeted to the vulnerable population, and was less restrictive overall.    CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP  Now, having been wrongly criticized for issuing orders “so late” in the coronavirus panic-passion play, DeSantis is working not on further clampdowns and shutdowns but, rather, reopening as much of the state as possible. Perhaps more in the media can open their gaze and more fairly assess his administration’s and state’s actions and record now, too.  For Florida, DeSantis was much more ready, and, as Shakespeare says, readiness is all.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BILL BENNETT  Seth Leibsohn is a senior fellow at the Claremont Institute and the host of "The Seth Leibsohn Show," heard daily on 960am/KKNT in Phoenix, Ariz. 

 Michael Flynn is the victim of one of the worst miscarriages of justice in modern times — an innocent man who was unfairly targeted by the FBI, wrongfully prosecuted by special counsel Robert Mueller, and coerced into a guilty plea under threat.  New court documents finally handed over to Flynn’s lawyer contain exculpatory evidence that has been long sought, yet concealed until now. The charge against him should be dismissed. Then, he should sue the very people and government that persecuted him under the pretext of a legitimate prosecution.  The unvarnished truth is that the retired Army lieutenant general and former National Security Adviser never did anything wrong and committed no crimes. He was set up by unscrupulous FBI officials, then relentlessly pursued by Mueller’s team of overzealous prosecutors who were desperate to show that President Trump and his campaign colluded with Russia to win the 2016 presidential election. DAVID BOSSIE: RUSSIA INVESTIGATION – DECLASSIFY RECORDS, PUBLIC HAS A RIGHT TO THE WHOLE TRUTH Of course, no such conspiracy with Moscow ever existed. It was a fantasy built on the sand of Russian disinformation and lies.The FBI knew it but didn't care. As I wrote in a column as far back as 2018, the FBI lied to Flynn to ensnare him in the crime of making a false statement, even though Flynn did not lie at all about his perfectly legal and appropriate conversations with Russian Ambassador Sergey Kislyak. In my 2019 book, "Witch Hunt: The Story Of The Greatest Mass Delusion In American Political History," I laid out the evidence of Flynn’s innocence. Specifically, here is the FBI summary report on the interview of Flynn conducted by two bureau agents, including the notorious Peter Strzok. It is dated July 19, 2017: “Throughout the interview, Flynn had a very ‘sure’ demeanor and did not give any indicators of deception. Strzok and (redacted FBI agent) both had the impression at the time that Flynn was not lying or did not think he was lying.” So, how is it possible to charge someone with lying to the FBI when the only witnesses — the two agents — determined that the person they interviewed did not lie? The answer is quite simple: you cannot bring such a prosecution. Yet, Mueller did it anyway. The goal was to put pressure on Flynn to say something incriminating about Trump, even if that meant inventing a story that prosecutors wanted to hear.  There is no indication that Flynn did this. But he did plead guilty to making a false statement. Why did he cop a plea? Because Mueller crushed him financially and threatened to take legal action against the retired general’s son. It was classic intimidation by ruthless prosecutors.  It is now beyond dispute that Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn committed no crimes. But, it appears that top FBI officials and prosecutors may have.  Before being sentenced, Flynn changed course and hired new defense attorneys, including former federal prosecutor Sidney Powell. Armed with better counsel, Flynn has been trying to convince a federal judge to allow him to withdraw his guilty plea, citing “bad faith” on the part of prosecutors.  Powell has waged an intense (and skilled) legal battle to get the government to turn over the exculpatory evidence that has long been hidden and is required under law (Brady v. Maryland) to be produced. Prosecutors and the FBI stonewalled, at one point claiming that the original witness report of Flynn’s interview (known as a FD-302) was “missing.” Right.  Fortunately, Attorney General William Barr ordered a review of the Flynn case and guess what? Exculpatory documents have suddenly and magically been found. They were never missing, just buried by the FBI in a black hole of calumny and cover-up.    CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The material is still under protective seal so that the public cannot yet read its contents. However, Powell has access and offered this insight in a court filing:  “This afternoon, the government produced to Mr. Flynn stunning Brady evidence that proves Mr. Flynn’s allegations of having been deliberately set up and framed by corrupt agents at the top of the FBI. The government deliberately suppressed this evidence from the inception of this prosecution — knowing there was no crime by Mr. Flynn.” The case against Flynn was originally conceived by FBI Director James Comey and Assistant Director Andrew McCabe under the phony pretense of a Logan Act violation, which had no relevance or application. Once appointed as special counsel, Mueller accepted the baton and pursued the case against Flynn with a vengeance.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It is now beyond dispute that Lt. Gen. Michael Flynn committed no crimes. But, it appears that top FBI officials and prosecutors may have. Evidence was concealed and justice obstructed. This is unconscionable behavior. The charge against Flynn should be dismissed, allowing him to seek redress in civil court. Moreover, U.S. Attorney John Durham should consider filing charges if the evidence shows that government officials breached their duty to uphold the law and abused their power to prosecute an innocent man. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM GREGG JARRETT 

Outlets ignore sexual assault allegation against Joe Biden. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In case you missed it, check out this CNN headline: "Trump goes into hiding." I guess CNN should know. Hide and seek is their expertise. Take the story of Tara Reade, former Vice President Joe Biden’s accuser. LIZ PEEK: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS TURN RACE ON ITS HEAD — HERE'S WHY As she gains credibility, who loses it? CNN. After all, they've avoided this story, even as evidence appeared on CNN decades ago, when the accuser's mom mentioned the alleged assault to Larry King: LARRY KING: San Luis Obispo, California, hello. JEANETTE ALTIMUS, MOTHER OF BIDEN ACCUSER: Yes, hello. I’m wondering what a staffer would do besides go to the press in Washington? My daughter has just left there, after working for a prominent senator, and could not get through with her problems at all, and the only thing she could have done was go to the press, and she chose not to do it out of respect for him. KING: So she had a story to tell but, out of respect for the person she worked for, she didn’t tell it? ALTIMUS: That’s true. You’ve got to love CNN for avoiding a story that appeared on CNN. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER This video was not unearthed by Fox News, but by The Intercept, Glenn Greenwald's progressive outfit. And what did CNN do? What do you expect? Forget President Trump “hiding.” CNN is now hiding from CNN. CNN ran hundreds of stories on Brett Kavanaugh -- with flimsier accusations. Meanwhile, the Biden accuser: So, where's CNN’s story? Their silence is the story. They're protecting Biden so he can be president. And Reade? The media has tossed her story into the Juanita Broaddrick file of crimes that never happened because liberals allegedly committed them. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Thank God, CNN did some heroic work during Trump’s first term, though. Chasing down people who posted memes. Which is really the second part of this story. The media will protect you if they like you -- and destroy you if they don't. Adapted from Greg Gutfeld's monologue on "The Five" on April 27, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM GREG GUTFELD

Nasal swab samples are mailed in for results; insight from Fox News medical contributor Dr. Marc Siegel. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. Our initiative, Resolve to Save Lives, released a brief Monday on how to prioritize testing for COVID-19 in the United States. It’s time for plain talk on testing. Plain fact one:  We have nowhere near enough tests, and it’s not clear how many week or months away we are from having them. Facts are stubborn things, and so is math. ROBERT GARRETT: CORONAVIRUS – 6 LESSONS FROM A NEW JERSEY HOSPITAL SYSTEM ON THE FRONT LINES Ideally, we would test everyone in the country with symptoms of COVID-19, every one of their contacts, every hospitalized patient, and many people in places such as nursing homes, homeless shelters, prisons, and jails where the virus can spread explosively and kill quickly. That would be over a million tests a day, more than four times more than we are doing now. And that’s without even considering testing others at risk, such as health care and other essential workers who don’t have symptoms. That would require millions of more tests per day. Plain fact two:  Until we have enough tests, we have to prioritize. People who need to be managed carefully and safely in hospitals – such as those older than 60 and people with diabetes, lung or heart disease – need to be tested so they can be cared for more intensively, something that could save their life. Residents and staff of nursing homes, homeless shelters, prisons and jails who have symptoms must be tested and isolated to prevent explosive spread. Health care workers with symptoms must be tested so we can better protect our front-line heroes and keep our hospitals safe. Contacts of infected people need to be tested so we can box the virus in through testing, isolation, contact tracing and quarantine. And ideally, every hospitalized patient and every resident admitted to a nursing home would be tested to prevent spread. Testing just those groups is probably twice as many tests as we are doing today. Plain fact three:  No matter the reason tests are still scarce, we need to deal with it and do the best we can. In New York City over the past few weeks, we have simply assumed that people with cough and fever have the infection and encouraged them to stay home and not get tested if they are only mildly ill. There’s a lot that everyone can do until we have enough tests. Stay home. Wear a mask when out. Wash your hands often. Try to avoid touching your face when your hands might have been contaminated.  There’s a lot that everyone can do until we have enough tests. Stay home. Wear a mask when out: this protects others because you might have and spread the infection without knowing it. When others wear a mask, they are protecting you. Wash your hands often. Try to avoid touching your face when your hands might have been contaminated. Work with communities to ramp up contact tracing in order to support patients and contacts to limit the spread of the virus. Isolate the infected and quarantine the exposed so the virus stops with them. Protect our nursing homes and health care facilities by stopping visits, keeping sub-groups together, finding infections quickly and stopping outbreaks there before they spread. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER In our report, we address testing for the virus itself, currently done by a method called a polymerase chain reaction, or PCR. Testing for antibodies – which may reflect either current or prior infection with the virus – is different. We do a deep dive into testing in Monday’s edition of our weekly science briefing, for those who want to know more. We’re not certain the priority list we’ve suggested is the right one. Effective leadership through the COVID-19 pandemic means shifting advice to reflect the best information we have, when we have it. However the list evolves — some groups might need tests less urgently, other groups might quickly need to be prioritized — only by prioritizing can we make optimal use of the test capacity we have. We can get out into the new normal as soon and as safely as possible if we recognize that there isn’t one simple fix. The virus is a dangerous opponent. We have one strong tool against it – staying home. But we don’t want to and can’t do that forever. So we need to do whatever works, and do it as effectively as possible. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP   That means being smart about testing as we scale up capacity. It means being safer as we resume some activities carefully – hand sanitizer, physical distancing, face masks and more. It means investing in and collaborating with public health and contact tracing. And it means recognizing that we’re all in this together. We’ll get through together by facing facts, acting accordingly and being creative about getting back to as much of our lives as soon and safely as possible. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. TOM FRIEDEN Dr. Cyrus Shahpar is director of the Prevent Epidemics Team at Resolve to Save Lives. 

Cuomo says Trump will work with him on coronavirus test goals; reaction and analysis on 'The Five.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Congress has just passed another half-trillion-dollar coronavirus stimulus package – the fourth major response in the last six weeks – and congressional Democrats are already talking about yet another massive spending bill. This one, they said, would include another huge bailout for state and local governments, possibly even on the order of $500 billion. To his credit, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., declared his opposition to such nonsense and even suggested that perhaps bankruptcy was a better solution for some states. And that’s when Democrats and the media, predictably, went nuts. First, let’s be clear about what exactly was said. During an April 22 interview with talk radio host Hugh Hewitt, McConnell declared: LIZ PEEK: BIDEN ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS TURN RACE ON ITS HEAD – HERE'S WHY “We all have governors regardless of party who would love to have free money. And that’s why I said yesterday we’re going to push the pause button here, because I think this whole business of additional assistance for state and local governments needs to be thoroughly evaluated. You raised yourself the important issue of what states have done, many of them have done to themselves with their pension programs. There’s not going to be any desire on the Republican side to bail out state pensions by borrowing money from future generations … "I would certainly be in favor of allowing states to use the bankruptcy route. It saves some cities. And there’s no good reason for it not to be available. My guess is their first choice would be for the federal government to borrow money from future generations to send it down to them now so they don’t have to do that. That’s not something I’m going to be in favor of.” McConnell understands what Democrats are trying to do here – take the coronavirus crisis and combine it with the Washington Swamp’s love of throwing around other people’s money to solve their own long-term, pre-coronavirus finance problems while no one is looking. After all, when the federal government is adding debt by the trillions, what’s a few hundred billion among friends, right? Fiscally irresponsible states are trying to take advantage of the crisis to solve their long-term fiscal problems by reaching into the wallets of other states’ residents. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, for instance, made his pitch directly to his fellow New Yorker president on April 21. “The states are in desperate shape,” said Cuomo after leaving his meeting with President Trump, noting that the fourth response bill contained no funding for state and local governments. “The president seemed very open and understanding of that and said the next piece of legislation that passes he’s going to be open to that.” Illinois wants in on the action, too. Last week, the Democrat president of the state Senate sent a letter to the Democrats in his state’s congressional delegation, seeking a $40.6 billion federal bailout -- $15 billion in unrestricted block grant funding, $6 billion for the state’s unemployment trust fund, $10 billion for pensions and $9.6 billion in unrestricted aid for Illinois cities. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And while you’re at it, he wrote, could you also please jack up the federal share of the state’s Medicaid payments to 65 percent? Everyone knows what’s going on here. Fiscally irresponsible states are trying to take advantage of the crisis to solve their long-term fiscal problems by reaching into the wallets of other states’ residents. Others want to remain shut down, but don’t want to bear the brunt of those decisions either. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Either way, they’d rather steal money from future generations who don’t get a say in the matter and aren’t even here to raise a ruckus. That’s just wrong, and it should be stopped. Whether or not enough Senate Republicans have the courage to join Leader McConnell and block another massive bailout remains to be seen. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JENNY BETH MARTIN

What do we have to do to get our leaders to follow the data and science? Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As the coronavirus shutdown drags on, backed by the work-from-home elitists on TV, the majority of Americans who can't make a living from their laptop are screaming, "What do we have to do to get our leaders to follow the data and the science?" Here's the data: 21 percent of New York City residents have had coronavirus, nearly half a million in Los Angeles. In Santa Clara County, California, up to 85 times more people have had it then the official statistics claimed. LOS ANGELES COUNTY SAYS THOSE IN LOWER INCOME COMMUNITIES MORE VULNERABLE TO CORONAVIRUS The fatality rate, therefore, is not the 3.4 percent or 2 percent or 1 percent we were told. It's closer to 0.01 percent. Yes, seasonal flu is just more contagious. That's why it comes in a rush. That's why we had to flatten the curve and slow the spread. But we did that. So, why are we still shut down? Here's the science. Viruses don't disappear because we stay at home. They keep going until there's not enough people left to infect. A vaccine is over a year away, they say, but millions of Americans have already had the virus. Most didn't know they had it. Eighty percent have mild or zero symptoms. That's more than you can say for the victims of the shutdown. Their toll is rising every day. And here's what our leaders think about it. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo: Economic hardship -- yes, very bad. Not death. Emotional stress from being locked in a house -- very bad; not death. Domestic violence on the increase -- very bad; not death. Have you ever heard anything so callous or stupid? Economic hardship causes death. Here's what else causes death: Millions of medical procedures cancelled because of wildly inaccurate coronavirus projections. Just one example: In the state of Arkansas recently, there were 80 people in hospital with coronavirus and 8,000 empty beds. The mindset of the shutdown zealots is the opposite of science. Instead of adapting their thinking in the light of new information, they cling to their old position, despite new information. This insanity has to stop. We know who's most vulnerable and how to protect them. Twenty percent of U.S. coronavirus deaths are in nursing homes. In some states, it's over half. So, what are our leaders doing about that? They're making it worse. For weeks, New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, instead of sending nursing home coronavirus patients to the nearly empty Navy hospital ship, sent them back into nursing homes. With that one demented decision, he is responsible for a big part of America's death toll. We know who's at risk and how to protect them. Why aren't our leaders surging medical capacity and equipment to our nursing homes and care facilities, where the greatest generation is so obviously vulnerable? I'll tell you why. Because they're too busy putting sand in skate parks, flying creepy surveillance drones, and worst of all, hiring armies of busybody contact traitors to implement this idiotic, unscientific reckless establishment groupthink that the only way we can open up is widespread testing, contact tracing and isolating. Rep. Steny Hoyer, D-Md.: We need to test. We need to isolate those who test positive. We then need to contact trace. Chris Hayes, MSNBC host: We cannot truly reopen the economy without widespread testing. Anderson Cooper, CNN anchor: Testing, testing, contact tracing, testing, contact tracing. Different forms of testing, antibody testing. You know, testing people who are asymptomatic in order to get the country back to work. MSNBC had a two-hour special this week based entirely on this misinformation. It was literally called "Testing and the Road to Reopening." Testing, contact tracing and isolating are great if you're trying to contain an outbreak at the start, where you have hundreds of cases. It is totally absurd after a pandemic with millions infected, where you'll miss most of them anyway because they have no symptoms. And the absurdity rises to a level of grave danger if you're making this a condition for reopening, knowing that every day you delay will kill more Americans. Last week, we set up questions for Dr. Anthony Fauci. Well, he may not care about being accountable to you, but our state and local leaders do listen to him. He's the one that started this nonsense, still using an old playbook, even though the facts have changed. I beg you, Dr. Fauci, tell the governors, tell the mayors, how to protect the vulnerable in our nursing homes who are dying in droves because of inadequate infection control. Tell them that if we properly protect the vulnerable, we don't need the costly, complicated, technocratic nightmare of testing and contact tracing. And tell the American people so terrified by months of misinformation that many are scared to go out even if states do reopen. Tell them that most Americans, according to the data, have nothing to fear from coronavirus. Tell them that there is no scientific basis -- as long as we properly protect the vulnerable -- for this shutdown. The mindset of the shutdown zealots is the opposite of science. Instead of adapting their thinking in the light of new information, they cling to their old position, despite new information. It's not science, it's ideology. It's not based on data, but dogma. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Dr. Fauci, tell the world that, based on the data, based on the science, we must protect the vulnerable and end the shutdown and save lives now. Adapted from Steve Hilton's monologue from "The Next Revolution" on April 26, 2020. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM STEVE HILTON

Bryan Llenas reports from outside the Cobble Hill Health Center in Brooklyn. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. To make sense of the carnage at New York nursing homes, you don’t need to sprout wings and survey the scene from 30,000 feet. Just keep your BS detector on and connect a few big dots. NEWT GINGRICH: WE CAN RETURN TO A PRE-CORONAVIRUS ECONOMY – HERE'S HOW Start with the knowledge Albany had for months — that the coronavirus was extra-lethal for the elderly. Study after study showed death rates climbed with age, especially among those with serious, pre-existing health issues. That describes the entire population in most nursing homes. Then look at the now-infamous March 25 directive from the New York State Department of Health that orders those homes and rehabilitation centers to admit and readmit patients sick with the coronavirus. The devil comes in the first sentence of the fifth paragraph: CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER “No resident shall be denied re-admission or admission to the NH solely based on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It reads like a legal warning against discrimination — because that’s what it is. The order effectively makes patients contaminated with a highly contagious disease a protected class, akin to the way bias is banned along ­racial and gender lines. The concept is obscene. For the same reason that you don’t strike a match near gasoline, anyone carrying the virus should be banned from nursing homes, not forced on them. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING MICHAEL GOODWIN'S COLUMN IN THE NEW YORK POST CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MICHAEL GOODWIN

Fox News Flash top headlines are here. Check out what's clicking on Foxnews.com. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here. New Jersey’s first COVID-19 patient entered our hospital in early March and the last six weeks have been unlike anything I’ve experienced in nearly four decades in health care: an unending loop of intensely ill patients; urgent calls for more ventilators and surgical masks; ICU nurses holding up iPads to dying patients so families could say good-bye. For the first time since this scourge upended our world, with New Jersey’s caseload surging at a staggering rate of 24 percent a day at its peak, the number of cases is slowing. Thankfully, in New Jersey we hit a milestone last week: there are now more hospital discharges than new admissions. We are far from declaring victory, however, as our front-line heroes continue to battle this ferocious pandemic and our courageous patients continue to fight for their lives.  NEWT GINGRICH: WE CAN RETURN TO A PRE-CORONAVIRUS ECONOMY – HERE'S HOW But as one of the hardest-hit health networks in the country, we have already learned so much, so quickly. And it is incumbent upon all of us to remember those lessons and apply that life-saving knowledge now and in the future. First, stay home. It really works. I applaud the governors who mandated strict policies to break the back of this beast. We must remain vigilant to save lives. If you think you’re invincible, consider the case of Michael Goldsmith, a 34-year-old father of two who spent a hellish three weeks on a ventilator at one of our hospitals, fighting for his life. He returned to his family on Sunday, a “walking miracle,’’ as his wife told the media who reported his homecoming. For the first time in more than a month, his young daughter curled up on his chest and fell asleep. Michael’s survival grants all of us hope and fortifies our care teams as they continue the fight. Second, we quickly learned to delay intubating patients and putting them on ventilators. Whenever possible, we found it beneficial to place patients on their bellies – what’s known as "proning" – to better expand lung capacity and simultaneously deliver highly concentrated oxygen. It’s too early to produce peer-reviewed studies, but there’s enough anecdotal evidence to seriously consider the practice. Third, make a robust acquisition and conservation plan for Protective Personal Equipment (PPE) for the weeks and months ahead. If there’s one thing we learned, today can look radically different from tomorrow. If you are part of a larger health network, take advantage of that by marshaling supplies to the hardest-hit areas. If you are a stand-alone provider, find new partnerships and leverage that power. A nurse from one of our southern hospitals volunteered to be deployed to Hackensack, the epicenter of the pandemic in New Jersey. When she saw what her colleagues were up against, that day of help turned into a 200-mile roundtrip daily commute. As a 17-hospital network, we have the advantage of maintaining and replenishing vital supplies and deploying them effectively. For example, we instituted a universal masking policy for both staff and patients to ensure the safety of all. Additionally, we have the option of better managing patient volume. We transferred COVID patients from isolated treatment areas to other hospitals in our system less taxed by the pandemic. Fourth, understand that your teams are not inexhaustible. I have been in awe of our teams’ stamina and dedication. A nurse from one of our southern hospitals volunteered to be deployed to Hackensack University Medical Center, the epicenter of the pandemic in New Jersey. When she saw what her colleagues were up against, that day of help turned into a 200-mile roundtrip daily commute. She couldn’t bear the thought of leaving behind the critically ill patients or her colleagues in such a relentless storm. Even though we appear to be hitting a plateau, we are planning staffing six weeks out because our teams will need a break. They are experiencing trauma and it is incumbent upon all of us to provide counseling and needed care for these warriors. This is priority one. Fifth, in a crisis, communication is vital. Every day, we are witnessing exceptional leadership from our health experts at daily briefings: they are factual, empathetic and a model of fortitude. In our network, we are keeping 7,000 physicians and 36,000 front line and support teams apprised of daily developments: the number of patients in our hospitals; changes in essential policy from CDC that have moved at breakneck speed; important information on quarantining and benefits. Additionally, we hold weekly webinars and virtual town hall meetings so that team members have access to our clinical and executive leadership, including me. In fact, I am rounding at our hospitals and facilities to see first-hand the heroic efforts of our care teams and leaders. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER And lastly, remember that hope is essential to our survival. There’s a beautiful quote from Martin Luther King Jr. I’ve been thinking of so much these days: “Only in the darkness can you see the stars.’’  In the midst of our searing pain and unspeakable tragedies, we also are bearing witness to a glorious constellation: a global celebration of health care workers; unbowed nurses and doctors who return to the front line because it is what they were put on Earth to do, and the birth of the next generation who will one day hear stories of valor, loss and survival in the age of the coronavirus pandemic.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

A look at what's in&nbsp;Bernie Sanders' coronavirus plan Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. The presidential campaign of Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., may have ended, but his "Medicare-for-all" crusade marches on. Writing in The New York Times last week, Sanders argued that the coronavirus outbreak proved the government should take over our nation's health care system. Sanders isn't the only one championing "Medicare-for-all" in the wake of the pandemic. More than half of voters now say they support a single-payer system. But "Medicare-for-all" would not have improved our nation's response to the outbreak. Other countries with socialized medicine have struggled mightily to combat COVID-19. In fact, the United States would have been even less prepared for the pandemic under "Medicare-for-all." DR. NICOLE SAPHIER: CORONAVIRUS ANXIETY – HERE ARE WAYS TO RELIEVE STRESS AND STAY HEALTHIER Sanders claims that COVID-19 lays bare the "absurdity and cruelty" of our health care system. He takes issue with the fact that millions of Americans who have recently lost their jobs have also lost their employer-sponsored health insurance. The Vermont senator worries about hospitals going bankrupt and health care workers getting laid off, even as the pandemic rages around us. Sanders believes "Medicare-for-all" is necessary to fix all those problems. He's sorely mistaken. Take the coverage issue. Anyone who has lost their employer-sponsored insurance has the ability to purchase insurance through ObamaCare's exchanges. Thanks to an executive order promulgated by the Trump administration, many can also purchase an affordable short-term, limited-duration health plan that can last for up to a year. Insurers can renew the plans for up to three years. Some of these short-term plans offer more generous coverage at lower cost than is available on the exchanges. Sadly, short-term plans are unavailable in 11 states, whether due to outright bans or regulations that have resulted in insurers declining to sell coverage. More than half of states restrict the availability of short-term plans beyond what the Trump executive order envisions. Sanders envisions "helping" those who lost their employer-sponsored coverage by just banning private insurance altogether and dumping everyone into a one-size-fits-all government plan. That would be tremendously disruptive. According to the most recent U.S. Census figures, some 178 million people had private insurance coverage through their employers; another 34 million purchased private insurance directly. Most working privately insured households would pay more for health coverage under "Medicare-for-all." The U.S. government's own mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic is proof enough that it's incapable of running the entire health care system "Medicare-for-all" would also hasten hospitals' descent into insolvency. The plan envisions reimbursing health care providers at levels similar to Medicare's existing rates, which are about 40 percent less than what private insurance pays. One-quarter of rural hospitals are already at risk of closure due to poor finances. A massive pay cut could force them to shut – and leave millions of Americans without ready access to care. That's a position many patients in countries with socialized medicine have found themselves in. Their health care systems don't have sufficient capacity to handle a health crisis like COVID-19. Italy has just over 12 intensive-care unit beds per 100,000 people. The United Kingdom has fewer than seven per 100,000. The United States, by contrast, has 35 ICU beds for every 100,000 people – the highest per-capita rate worldwide. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Perhaps more important, the United States has more open acute care beds than most developed countries, as Doug Badger and Norbert Michel point out in a new analysis for the Heritage Foundation. Over one-third of acute care beds are open in the United States, compared with just 15 percent in the United Kingdom and under 10 percent in Canada. Finally, the U.S. government's own mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic is proof enough that it's incapable of running the entire health care system. "Sloppy" practices at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention left the agency's first batch of COVID-19 tests contaminated and set the country's pandemic response back nearly a month. Federal officials assured us everything was fine – and went so far as to initially prohibit private labs from producing COVID-19 tests of their own. Those labs later struggled to get approval to create and conduct tests. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP "Medicare-for-all" wouldn't serve the country any better post-pandemic. Americans are understandably shocked at the prospect of hospitals choosing which COVID-19 patients get ventilators. But such rationing occurs on a daily basis in countries with single-payer. Under "Medicare-for-all," rationing and long waits for care would become the norm in the United States, too – not just during once-a-generation outbreaks but each and every year. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY SALLY PIPES

Snohomish County Washington Executive Dave Somers and Boston City Councilor Annissa Essaibi George join ‘America’s News HQ.’ Do quick shutdowns work to fight the spread of Covid-19? Joe Malchow, Yinon Weiss and I wanted to find out. We set out to quantify how many deaths were caused by delayed shutdown orders on a state-by-state basis. To normalize for an unambiguous comparison of deaths between states at the midpoint of an epidemic, we counted deaths per million population for a fixed 21-day period, measured from when the death rate first hit 1 per million—e.g.,‒three deaths in Iowa or 19 in New York state. A state’s “days to shutdown” was the time after a state crossed the 1 per million threshold until it ordered businesses shut down. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER We ran a simple one-variable correlation of deaths per million and days to shutdown, which ranged from minus-10 days (some states shut down before any sign of Covid-19) to 35 days for South Dakota, one of seven states with limited or no shutdown. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The correlation coefficient was 5.5%—so low that the engineers I used to employ would have summarized it as “no correlation” and moved on to find the real cause of the problem. (The trendline sloped downward—states that delayed more tended to have lower death rates—but that’s also a meaningless result due to the low correlation coefficient.) T.J. Rodgers was founding CEO of Cypress Semiconductor Corp. CLICK HERE TO CONTINUE READING THIS COLUMN IN THE WALL STREET JOURNAL

Newly-resurfaced video from decades ago lends support to allegations against Joe Biden; insight from journalist Rich McHugh. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Tara Reade could save the Democratic Party. Reade, a former aide for then-Sen. Joe Biden, has accused the presumed Democrat candidate of sexual assault. Evidence has surfaced that appears to bolster Reade’s allegations. In this #MeToo era, Democrat officials could use that accusation to get Uncle Joe to withdraw from the race. TAMMY BRUCE: HYPOCRITICAL DEMS IGNORE BIDEN SEXUAL ASSAULT ALLEGATIONS, BUT EMBRACED KAVANAUGH'S ACCUSER Why would that be good for Democrats? Because they know that Biden is a weak candidate who may be suffering cognitive decline and is not likely to beat President Trump in November. The inability of the former vice president to reliably string two sentences together is alarming and will only become more evident as the months pass. Currently, the Biden camp is keeping the candidate under wraps, even as they try to keep him in the game, a difficult balancing act with the former veep holed up in his basement. The ever-helpful New York Times just ran an extensive puff piece about Biden; shockingly, the “campaign declined to make him available for an interview.” What Democrat candidate turns down the chance to speak to the Times? Democrats are not only concerned about Biden’s penchant for spewing meaningless word salads. It is also because his candidacy suffers a huge enthusiasm gap, and is also way behind on fund-raising. By sidelining Biden, Dems could re-up their commitment to #MeToo, find themselves a better candidate, and simultaneously save themselves from a colossal defeat in November. A win-win. Admittedly, it would be messy. But not any messier than Democrats being squashed in the Electoral College. Tara Reade worked as an aide in Biden’s office in the 1990s. Last year she joined numerous other women who publicly accused Biden of inappropriate physical contact. More recently, Reade has expanded her accusation to include an encounter in which Biden "had me up against the wall; he used his knee to spread open my legs,[and] put his fingers inside me." Reade says she called her mother that night to tell her about the incident; her mom insisted she tell the police, which she did not do. However, her mother apparently reached out for advice on how her daughter should handle the matter. A 1993 video has just surfaced that appears to show Larry King receiving a call from Jeanette Altimus, Reade’s mother, who asked “what a staffer would do besides go to the press in Washington?" She adds, "My daughter has just left there after working for a prominent senator… and the only thing she could have done was go to the press, and she chose not to do it out of respect for him." The liberal media has naturally tried to minimize coverage of the Reade accusation; she leveled the charge on March 25, but most major news outlets ignored it until April 12, fully 19 days later. Reade has confirmed the voice to be that of her mother, who has since died, and the location of the caller matches her mother’s address at the time. One of Reade’s friends and her brother confirm hearing about the incident at the time; another was told a few years later. In other words, there is a more credible history here than presented by Christine Blasey Ford when she famously accused Associate Justice Brett Kavanaugh of assault. Ford’s friend denied ever hearing about the supposed encounter; in fact, not a single soul could back up her story. Biden’s office and his apparatchiks deny Reade’s accusation. The liberal media has naturally tried to minimize coverage of the Reade accusation; she leveled the charge on March 25, but most major news outlets ignored it until April 12, fully 19 days later. Criticized over the delay, the New York Times’ editor Dean Baquet explained that the paper wanted to have enough information about the charge that readers could “understand” the story. But the Times even edited its own story about Reade. It originally reported that, “The Times found no pattern of sexual misconduct by Mr. Biden, beyond the hugs, kisses and touching that women previously said made them uncomfortable.” In later editions it dropped the last (and most damaging) part of the sentence. Baquet explained, “The campaign thought that the phrasing was awkward and made it look like there were other instances in which he had been accused of sexual misconduct.” Since when do newspapers run a story by a “campaign” for approval? Nonetheless, the new video has given Reade’s allegations new legs. In part, that is because Joe Biden has a troubling history of inappropriately touching women – a record his backers ascribe to his “folksy” manner and old-fashioned “tactile” politics. But, one also wonders whether Democrats are beginning to face up to what many have seen for months: Biden is not a strong candidate. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Faced with the very real prospect of Bernie Sanders becoming their standard-bearer, Democrats panicked and rallied around Biden. President Obama’s former wingman has consistently polled ahead of Donald Trump in national surveys, and currently leads the president by roughly 6 points, according to   Real Clear Politics. However the polling in critical swing states like Michigan and Florida tells a different story. In those surveys, Biden leads Trump, but his margin is only about half that held by Hillary Clinton at the same time in 2016. Recently, some have proposed that New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who has won plaudits for his (questionable) handling of the coronavirus crisis, might be a better choice than Biden. A poll found 56  percent of voters would choose to make that swap, over 44 percent content to stay with Biden. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Sanders, who still controls his delegates, would fight to prevent such a handoff.  With numerous primaries yet to come, Sanders could theoretically re-enter the race. Bottom line: the Milwaukee convention could still offer up some surprises. And, Joe Biden is not the candidate yet. If Democrats want to win, he never will be. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LIZ PEEK

White House coronavirus task force response coordinator Dr. Deborah Birx joins 'Watters' World' to discuss the latest on the virus. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. COVID-19 is so new and information is changing so rapidly that it is difficult to separate fact from fiction and truth from partial truth. Like everyone else, I'm just trying to make sense of the evolving information. Many of us have been monitoring the daily reports measuring the number of deaths relative to the number of cases. We've been treated to crash courses in lay epidemiology via daily press briefings and voluminous articles. We understand that the administration and state governments have been trying to "flatten the curve" of the coronavirus by slowing its spread. The main purpose, as has now been clarified, is to reduce the velocity of the contagion so that our hospitals and necessary equipment are not overwhelmed, which would result in more deaths. NEWT GINGRICH: WE CAN RETURN TO A PRE-CORONAVIRUS ECONOMY – HERE'S HOW  Though many didn't grasp this initially, flattening the curve doesn't greatly reduce the overall number of deaths, except for those saved by reducing the burden on hospitals and others saved by lifesaving therapeutic treatments and vaccines developed with the extra time flattening provides. Many have suggested that the estimated death rates have been grossly overstated because the numerator (number of deaths) has been exaggerated and the denominator (number of people infected) has been understated. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER They say the numerator was inflated because many deaths actually caused by the flu were attributed to COVID-19, and because every death of a person with the virus in their system was treated as a death caused by the virus even though some other accompanying illness may have been the proximate cause. The denominator was likely understated because so many people had the disease before we were aware it was circulating here; many were asymptomatic and never got tested; and many who were symptomatic assumed they had the flu. Several recent studies have confirmed, through randomized antibody testing, that in certain locations, exponentially more people were infected than we'd assumed. Stanford University researchers found that Santa Clara County in California had between 50 and 80 times more infections than officials were reporting. A separate antibody study showed that the number of coronavirus infections in Los Angeles County could be 28 to 55 times higher than the official count. A just-released study estimates that some 2.7 million New Yorkers may have been infected – more than 10 times the state's confirmed cases to date. Obviously, we'll know more when antibody testing is conducted throughout the country. But these tests strongly indicate that the virus is less lethal by orders of magnitude than previously known. Many argue that this emerging data proves we overreacted by shutting down our economy and wreaking such financial devastation. If we knew in December what we think we know now, this may have been true. Until comprehensive testing is performed and the data analyzed, however, we won't be sure of the virus' lethality. I suspect it will be more than that of the flu. If it is as contagious as we fear, we might think twice before making final judgments as to what should or shouldn't have been done. I think the critics' skepticism is based on their distrust of other experts who have ginned up fear over apocalyptic climate change based on computer models. Knowing how much disinformation those experts have spread, people are justifiably suspicious of what now appear to be wildly erroneous coronavirus models that scared the world into a global economic shutdown. People are still debating whether these initial models factored in mitigation measures, but we can certainly fault modelers for their absolutism and arrogance, and we can use this experience to challenge the credibility of climate change modelers on their projections. We have to be prudent moving forward. We don't want to immediately reopen every aspect of our society if it would cause the virus to rebound, which would make the economic pain we've already suffered pointless – and much worse. So where does it leave us? While there is still much we don't know, I am less cynical than some about the mitigation measures we've employed to slow the spread. If I weren't, I'd be freely moving about in public without fear of catching the virus. I do believe we have slowed the spread and saved lives. But I am also very saddened by the immeasurable economic devastation and suffering. While some may be too readily dismissing the threat of the virus, others are unspeakably insensitive to the financial disruption and pain people are experiencing, and callous about mitigating it. We have to be prudent moving forward. Even with these new findings on lethality, we have nowhere near approached herd immunity, so the virus is still highly contagious. We don't want to immediately reopen every aspect of our society if it would cause the virus to rebound, which would make the economic pain we've already suffered pointless – and much worse. So, I think the administration is wise in recommending a phased-in approach and deferring, when practicable, to state authorities. I trust that the more we learn and the more testing we have, the better we'll be able to combat the virus if it resurfaces in the fall and in subsequent years. Scientists will be armed with more widespread antibody tests as well as tests to determine whether people have the disease so that contact tracing can be used to find who they might have infected. Officials will also have developed efficient systems and strategies for preventing flare-ups from igniting full-blown outbreaks. We can then employ a more targeted approach against the virus that will not cause economic devastation, as research confirms that the virus is far more deadly to certain groups: the elderly and those with certain underlying health conditions. Until we develop herd immunity, less vulnerable groups can freely move about, and more vulnerable ones can self-isolate. As we reflect on this crisis, we must also reflect on our precious constitutional liberties and consider how quickly they can be compromised in actual or perceived national emergencies. While individuals and businesses deserve to receive relief funds from the government because it forced them to suspend their economic activities, we must now soberly consider our national debt and the existential threat it represents to the republic. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Perhaps we will become more responsible about our out-of-control federal spending, which can only be rectified by entitlement reform – a subject we can no longer afford to avoid. Pray for America and those hurting from this pandemic. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DAVID LIMBAUGH

Every day and in every community, the coronavirus pandemic is bringing out the best in Americans. Take a look at some inspiring images of Americans pulling together in a time of crisis. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  “…a time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance;” Ecclesiastes 3:4 “Are your caregiving duties different as you now care for your wife, Gracie, with the COVID-19 virus?” A reporter asked me that in a video interview recently. “Well …she won’t keep her hands off me, and that’s a problem!”  I replied with one eyebrow raised. PAUL BATURA: AMID CORONAVIRUS CRISIS, LOOK FOR THESE MESSAGES OF HOPE AND INSPIRATION She was truly speechless at my response. “How can you laugh given what you all live through!?” We often hear that question when people learn of our 30-plus years through a medical nightmare. From Gracie’s 80 surgeries (including both legs amputated) to multiple emboli, bouts with MRSA, severe chronic pain, and now the COVID-19, Gracie and I are no stranger to brutal realities. Yet, we’ve discovered joy, strength, and even humor in often dire challenges. If laughter is the best medicine, then comedians need to step up production as much Mike Lindell’s pillow factory. Humor heals, and laughter is permitted — even in pain, loss and sorrow. If you doubt it, watch John Cleese eulogize Graham Chapman. Ask Jay Leno to tell you the story of standing at Rodney Dangerfield’s deathbed. Or ask my wife. Once while getting a manicure, the busy manicurist said to Gracie, “You’re a pretty lady, you should a get a pedicure!” When you exchange your misery for just a few minutes of laughter per day, watch how your life changes. Gracie looked her incredulously and blurted out, “I don’t have any feet!” Without missing a beat, the distracted manicurist said, “OK, maybe next time!" Gracie herself howls with laughter when she tells that story. While we may never feel better about the heartache of this virus or any of the challenges we face, we’re going to get through this. In doing so, we’ll discover “feeling better” can’t be our highest goal. The goal is to BE better. Part of being better, is to offload the stress, heartbreak and pain with a sense of humor. The tears flowing down our cheeks often dry with the smile of a lighter heart. A sense of humor can detach from heartache without detaching from the person. Like most caregivers, I possess a painfully serious side. Yet intense situations and somberness often need a release. Humor helps. But humor doesn’t have to be a defense mechanism, nor belittling at someone else’s expense. Rather than living in the punchline, the healing power of humor is that it’s a lifeline to a bright blue sky above the dark clouds of heartache. CLICK HERE TO READ THE OPINION NEWSLETTER When Gracie’s COVID-19 symptoms appeared, the nurse and physician asked us to meet them in the hospital and asked, “Do you have a mask to wear?” “We do … it’s a Darth Vader mask, but that’s kind of personal.” Hearing the nurse laugh on the phone, Gracie also chuckled at that one — even with a fever and feeling sick. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Take time to watch a funny movie, listen to standup comedians, read a funny book. When you exchange your misery for just a few minutes of laughter per day, watch how your life changes. Every caregiver will admit the tears are never in short supply. But the inventory of laughter remains scarcer than a roll of Charmin at Walmart. Humor can not only help the healing process with the patient but also for the caregiver — as well as the country. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM PETER ROSENBERGER

Frank Barbieri, Frontline Foods founder partner, joins ‘America’s News HQ.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As the coronavirus pandemic rolls on, do you look for signs of good news – encouraging and uplifting indicators that everything is going to be OK? It seems doom-and-gloom-type headlines are everywhere. Even as the crisis appeared to hit its peak last week, experts began warning of a second wave of the virus striking this fall. So, amid all the challenging news, I’m particularly drawn these days to inspirational and aspirational signs. They’re actually everywhere, especially if you know where to look. NICK HALL: AS CORONAVIRUS SPREADS SUFFERING AND DEATH, MANY PEOPLE ASK: WHERE ARE YOU, GOD? But I’m not talking about indices like dropping infection rates, news of a vaccine or a rising stock market, all of which are welcome. I’m referring to physical signs – often in the form of engraved quotes on buildings, monuments or other prominent displays. As I travel, I carry a small notebook with me to capture thoughts, ideas, conversations – and quotes. I love quotes. Maybe it’s because my parents always tacked them up on our kitchen bulletin board. Reading a pithy, witty or insightful observation is like unwrapping a great treasure. Engraved wisdom is everywhere you turn in Washington, D.C., from the 272 words of the Gettysburg Address inside the Lincoln Memorial to the tip of the Washington Monument, which contains the Latin phrase, “Laus Deo” – God be praised. Fittingly, the first rays of each day’s sun hit and illuminate that tip. Too bad the words aren’t visible from down below. Not far from the famed obelisk on the National Mall is the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial. The four-acre site overlooking the Tidal Basin contains a granite statue with the following engraving, a quote from a speech of the famed civil rights leader:  “Out of the Mountain of Despair, a stone of hope.” Walk back toward the Mall and you’d find another sign on a random lamppost: “In valor, there is hope.” Having grown up in New York, my family and I especially enjoyed seeing Rockefeller Center’s famed Christmas tree each year. It stands right in front of the old art-deco-styled RCA Building at 30 Rock – an iconic address that has housed and hosted many broadcast giants. If you walk through the doors of the main entrance, you’ll walk right below a giant engraving: “Wisdom and knowledge shall be the stability of thy time.” “May God grant to the living, grace. To the departed, rest. To the Church and the world, peace and concord. And to us sinners, eternal life.”  I wonder how many agnostic or atheist pedestrians have realized over the years they’re being encouraged to embrace the words of the Old Testament prophet Isaiah. If you ever visited the library at the University of Texas and looked up above the main entrance, you’d see another biblical reference, this one from the gospel writer John: “Ye Shall Know the Truth and the Truth Shall Make You Free.” For far too many, the pandemic is more than a nuisance or trial – it’s a tragedy. We see the number of deaths the virus has wrought – and it’s important to remember that every single one represents a loved one and a wonderful life. To those left behind, there are signs of comfort out there, too. Across the Atlantic in Westminster Abbey, mourners might read this engraved prayer: CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER “May God grant to the living, grace. To the departed, rest. To the Church and the world, peace and concord. And to us sinners, eternal life.” Up north at the ruins of the Holyrood Abbey in Edinburgh, Scotland, you will read this: “A soul prepared needs no delay. The summons comes, the saints obey; Swift was her flight, and short the road.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP This year’s Boston Marathon, originally scheduled for April 20, was postponed to September. But on the marathon’s monument in Copley Square you’ll find the last line from Alfred Lord Tennyson’s poem, “Ulysses” – a sentiment that strikes me as a fitting inspiration as we run the race with determination to beat COVID-19: "One equal temper of heroic hearts, Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will, To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield." CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY PAUL BATURA

Many Americans are driving, walking and using public transit after weeks in isolation. Should this be a concern? Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Living during COVID-19 is not normal. For most Americans, life has been significantly disrupted by the measures being taken to slow the spread of the novel coronavirus wreaking havoc across the globe. It is not surprising, then, that so many people are reporting a change in their mental health during this time, and not for the good.  A national survey from the American Psychiatric Association (APA) reported COVID-19 is seriously affecting Americans' mental health, with half of U.S. adults reporting high levels of anxiety. Although nearly half of survey respondents (48 percent) reported feeling anxious about the possibility of contracting COVID-19, far more respondents (62 percent) said they feel anxious about the possibility of family and loved ones falling ill and potentially the future of our nation. In academia and health care, we are often encouraged to “suck it up” and press on when difficulties arise. But we all need time to process the anguish that comes with the loss (albeit temporary) of our former professional and social lives. Especially, it is important to recognize that there is a lot happening right now that we can’t control so we should not dwell on the guilt that we may not be functioning at maximum productivity levels – none of us are. NEWT GINGRICH: WE CAN RETURN TO A PRE-CORONAVIRUS ECONOMY – HERE'S HOW Even though it is incredibly hard, try to make every attempt to shift attention to things you can control. For example, you cannot control the number of people dying from COVID-19 nor can you save people from the economic fallout that is happening around us.  However, you can continue doing your part to lower the spread of illness and lessen the severity of a future viral wave by increasing handwashing frequency, staying home when sick and limiting interaction with large crowds until a proven treatment or preventable vaccine is available. But containing the virus alone is myopic when considering how to quell the effects of the pandemic. There are additional, tangible ways to not only decrease your chance of catching the virus but also to strengthen your body (and mind) to ward off direct and indirect consequences of future illness, COVID-19 or other. Rather than continue our past behaviors of spending money on fitness quick-fixes and scouring social media for the latest "Top 10 Tips of Wellness," put the cell phone down for a minute because the news feed itself is causing further angst. Did you know in addition to physical movement, there are also certain foods that have been shown to improve your immune system and reduce anxiety — and we all want to feel as good as we can right now. So, what are they? People are feeling a lot of stress right now, and the unfortunate reality is that stress worsens feelings of low mood or angst, and it also suppresses our immune systems. Although not as widely studied, there are many other healthier foods that are linked to immunity-boosting and lowering anxiety: CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It’s hard to cope with being quarantined and not reach for your favorite comfort snack because of boredom or feeling edgy. A few pretzels or an occasional cookie during this time is OK (believe me, I am also having my fair share), but many people cannot limit themselves to not eating the entire bag once it has been opened. Even more, the thought of cooking a healthy meal may not be appealing to you while you are feeling sub-par, but I encourage you to try because it might make you feel better, physically and mentally. People are feeling a lot of stress right now, and the unfortunate reality is that stress worsens feelings of low mood or angst, and it also suppresses our immune systems. Processed foods and shelf-stable items contain a lot of simple carbohydrates that can cause a sharp rise then fall of our blood sugar, which can actually worsen feelings of anxiety. Therefore, targeting immune-boosting foods will have a dual effect — you may feel less anxious and boost your immunity. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Keep in mind, no matter how often you exercise, or how hard you work out, you will never be able to “out exercise” a bad diet, so while we are in the current state of disarray, try to get rid of some of those bad eating habits. I can’t give you the motivation to eat a healthier diet or increase your physical activity during this time of calamity; I can only provide you with the tools to use once you find your own motivation.  However, we are all in this COVID-19 crisis together and if we all focus on making ourselves a little bit healthier, we will not only feel better in the short-term, but we will be on our way to a healthier country for the long-term. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. NICOLE SAPHIER

 Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  At a time when our lives have been fundamentally changed by the coronavirus pandemic many people have been asking: Where are you, God? People have lost their jobs, people are sick, people have died and more continue to die. So, where is God in the midst of our suffering? JIM DALY: GOD IS USING CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC TO ACCOMPLISH HIS PURPOSE I recently found myself asking this same question, but it wasn’t because of the coronavirus. My sister was diagnosed with cancer seven months ago. Six months later, she passed away. Her illness and death were devastating. I had many moments where I was angry with God for taking her too soon. I still miss my sister terribly and I always will. But as I walk through the grieving process, I have begun to understand that God does not condemn us for our feelings or our questions – or even for being angry at Him. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER I believe God sometimes uses our suffering to show us where our hope is and where it should actually be. We tend to put our hope in things, places and people. When things fall apart – when the doctors can’t save our loved ones or the job we thought was so secure suddenly vanishes – we also fall apart. Suffering reminds us that we cannot control everything that happens in our lives, but we can control in whom we put our trust. The Apostle Paul wrote about trusting God in the middle of suffering in one of his letters. Scholars believe that what he describes in this passage was an actual near-death experience: “For we do not want you to be unaware, brothers, of the affliction we experienced in Asia. For we were so utterly burdened beyond our strength that we despaired of life itself. Indeed, we felt that we had received the sentence of death. But that was to make us rely not on ourselves but on God who raises the dead. He delivered us from such a deadly peril, and He will deliver us. On Him we have set our hope that he will deliver us again.” (2 Corinthians 1:8-10 ESV) Whatever it was that Paul experienced, it clearly caused him intense mental, emotional, spiritual and perhaps physical pain. But it was in the middle of this excruciating experience that he remembered God was his only hope. If you are grappling with the question of God’s presence and power in your suffering, you are not alone. As you try to process what is happening around you, I encourage you to think about these three things. It’s OK to give yourself a break to feel angry and sad when bad things happen in life. Feel your feelings Be honest with yourself and with your loved ones about how you’re feeling and what you’re going through. To deny your feelings is to deny who God made you to be. I take great comfort in the fact that Paul was so vulnerable about his suffering. He confessed that he and his companions “despaired of life itself” and “felt that we had received the sentence of death.” While it’s tempting to think that Paul was superhuman or flawless, he was just as human as we are. It’s OK to give yourself a break to feel angry and sad when bad things happen in life. We need to give ourselves permission to feel, so God can heal us, and others can help us. Pray for perspective When you are hurting, it is easy to give up on prayer. But don’t stop praying. Cry out to God, tell Him what’s on your mind and heart. Ask Him to give you perspective on your suffering. Be willing to wait for His response. Psalm 34:18 says: “The LORD is near to the brokenhearted and saves the crushed in spirit.” We sometimes may think that because we are experiencing pain God is far away from us, but He is a lot closer than we realize. Land on truth Don’t allow hard times to make you question everything you know about God, your family and your friends. Don’t let one thing lead you into questioning everything you know to be true and foundational. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Turn to God’s Word in your suffering. Read what He has to say to you. Speak aloud or write down who God says He is and who God says you are. In the middle of suffering, Paul and his companions reminded themselves of who God was: “He raises the dead,” He had “delivered [them] from the deadly peril” and He “will deliver” again. This is why Paul could boldly say, “On Him we have set our hope.” When you start to feel depressed by your suffering, pause, and reflect on what God has done for you in the past. He is an unchanging God, and we can confidently set our hope in Him. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY NICK HALL

Pastor Greg Laurie answers coronavirus questions. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. My all-time favorite writer is C.S. Lewis. He wrote: “The more we let God take us over, the more truly ourselves we become – because He made us. He invented us. He invented all the different people that you and I were intended to be . . . It is when I turn to Christ, when I give up myself to His personality, that I first begin to have a real personality of my own.” I love this insight because it directly opposes the thought that God expects His followers to be “perfect” robot-like clones. Lewis points us to the fact that God is actually the inventor of individuality. He created each of us with unique personalities and gifts meant to be used to further His kingdom. Nice thought, but why does our individuality matter? What does God get out of it? In his book “You the Leader,” Pastor Phil Pringle highlights that all through the Bible and human history, God has used individuals to impart His godly vision throughout the world in order to create positive change. He referenced Moses leading the Israelites out of slavery and John the Baptist preparing the way for Jesus, stating, "When we follow great leaders, their vision becomes ours. We start to see what they see, and we begin to own a vision larger than ourselves." Pringle reminds us every great leader must first go through a period of trial. SEN. JONI ERNST: CORONAVIRUS -- OUR ESSENTIALWORKERS ARE OUR HEROES. IT'S TIME WE PAY THEM BACK The entire world is facing an intense trial right now as we try to mitigate the potential harm from an extremely contagious and invisible virus. We now have a heightened awareness of the power of unseen dangers – and my prayer is that this revelation will help people have a better understanding of another invisible enemy – one that has been attacking us much longer than the coronavirus. I’m referring to a spiritual enemy God has warned humans about since the beginning of time. The Apostle Paul said of this adversary: “For our struggle is not against flesh and blood, but against the rulers, against the authorities, against the powers of this dark world and against the spiritual forces of evil in the heavenly realms” (Ephesians 6:12). Paul was trying to explain we should not view people as our enemies, but instead recognize it is in fact a spiritual force of evil who creates disharmony and struggle between us. How does this happen? How does the evil one get a foothold in our lives? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER There are honestly countless tactics the enemy uses against us – but I believe one of the most successful methods is creating a spiritual “desert” in our hearts. This happens when we believe things like, “Living by God’s standard is outdated and impossible” or “God is too busy to worry about my problems.” It’s a sad reality that many people don’t even attempt to have a relationship with God because it seems too daunting. Far too often, people give up before they’ve even really begun their spiritual journeys, and they pretend God doesn’t exist – because that seems easier than answering to someone who they believe is constantly judging them. But the truth is, those feelings about God are actually lies spoken to us by our spiritual enemy who ruthlessly attempts to skew our vision of God’s loving nature. Though this can feel discouraging, it’s important to remember God is constantly on a mission to correct people’s misconceptions about Him. Over the past month, I’ve heard many pastors say they believe God is specifically using this unique time in history to create a revival in the church by softening people’s hearts. I agree with them. Too many people are trapped in spiritual deserts; some believers even slip into this gray area of disbelief and loss of connection with Jesus. But I am confident although God didn’t cause this virus, He is using it to pour His living water into the hearts of countless individuals, creating streams in their spiritual deserts. And by doing this, God transforms these individuals into spiritual “springs” so to speak. Because when we accept Jesus for who He truly is, we are filled with His all-consuming and powerful love, and this love inevitably flows out from us to others from Jesus – the source. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP By sprouting up new “springs,” God is creating more opportunities for others to come into contact with His living water of love and salvation. So you see, each individual person matters in God’s grand plan. And though we are all experiencing the same global crisis, I believe God is bringing unique revelations to every single human heart, leading them to a higher calling. “But whoever drinks the water I give them will never thirst. Indeed, the water I give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life” (John 4:14). CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM CHRISTEN LIMBAUGH BLOOM

Former House speaker and Fox News contributor Newt Gingrich weighs in on 'Fox &amp; Friends.' Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. As Americans know all too well, the coronavirus pandemic has forced government at all levels – federal, state, and local – to impose protective measures that amounted to a national shutdown. Many of the measures have been necessary, but they have also been devastating. Since March 14, an astounding 26.5 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits. The unemployment rate, which was 3.5 percent in February, will likely be in the double digits in April. And it will take time for these workers to return to the labor force. Many will not be able to go back to their old jobs. Too many families and businesses will continue to struggle, through no fault of their own. DR. WILLIAM HASELTINE: CORONAVIRUS -- REOPENING AMERICA WILL REQUIRE THIS KEY THING THAT'S BEEN IGNORED Understandably, some governors want to begin to reopen their states. President Trump has unveiled federal guidelines for them to do so. The three-phase plan recommends that states and localities show a two-week “downward trajectory” of coronavirus symptoms and documented cases before beginning to ease lockdowns. Simultaneously, hospitals should be able to treat all patients without crisis care and have robust testing in place. As America begins the process of reopening, we need to have a plan. So I thought it would be helpful to hear from someone who is not only designing such a plan, but is also in a position to influence policy at the highest level. In this week’s episode of my podcast “Newt’s World” I speak with Larry Kudlow, the director of the National Economic Council. As President Trump’s top economic adviser, there is no one better qualified to discuss this issue. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Kudlow, like me, is a strong believer in supply-side economics, which maintains that focusing on incentives for businesses, especially lower taxes and fewer regulations, creates more wealth, more jobs and more opportunities. This framework was astonishingly successful for the first three years under President Trump, leading to strong, consistent economic growth and historically low unemployment rates. Only when the pandemic hit did the economy slow down, and Kudlow’s job is to get us back to the pre-coronavirus economy. The economic model of limiting government’s role and prioritizing incentives has worked well for past presidents, including Ronald Reagan, and can succeed for President Trump. May will be an important transitional month from a shutdown to a gradual reopening, and the key will be to let the free enterprise system flourish to create rapid economic growth. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I hope you will listen to this week’s episode to learn more specifically how we can revive American society after the pandemic. It is critical to hear what our president’s top economic adviser is advising at this pivotal moment for our country. I also hope you will listen to the next episode of my ongoing series on health care breakthroughs during the coronavirus pandemic, which is set to air this coming week. To read, hear, and watch more of Newt Gingrich’s commentary, visit Gingrich360.com. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM NEWT GINGRICH

How long you can be asymptomatic and still be a carrier of COVID-19? Insight from Dr. Manny Alvarez, Fox News Channel's senior managing editor for health news. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  For several weeks, hospitals and medical practices around the nation have been out of reach for many patients for elective surgery, certain diagnostic tests and regular medical visits. This was necessary to minimize their exposure to the coronavirus that causes the disease COVID-19, as well as to utilize all the resources available in hospitals to treat COVID-19 patients. Many portions of hospitals were converted to COVID-19 units as well as intensive care units. Unfortunately, medicine is a continuum that never stops. As America begins opening up again, a significant priority should be to focus on the opening of hospitals for general admissions and individual solo medical practices. Looking at the current landscape, solo practices are hurting. Some 42 percent have laid-off workers and we may lose 20 percent of small private medical practices. There is a genuine concern that the general medical population is inadvertently being hurt by the lack of general health services. LESLIE MARSHALL: CORONAVIRUS RESTRICTIONS SAVE LIVES – PROTESTERS BLOCKING HOSPITAL ENTRANCES ENDANGER LIVES What should you do if your surgery was canceled or postponed? The most important thing is to keep communicating with your surgeons. They are usually monitoring the conditions of all their patients and providing information through telemedicine or phone calls. If the condition goes from elective to needing urgent or emergency surgery, they will facilitate the operation in a timely manner. Can you go to your doctor’s office? The answer is yes. Many practices are still open. However, you should contact them since their routine schedule probably has changed. Many practices will continue with safety measures to make sure that patients don’t have any COVID-19 symptoms before coming to the office. Facial masks need to be worn and there should be proper spacing between you and your physician during your visit. It is important, however, that you should see your regular physician if your visit is necessary due to some medical problem. Many medical societies are creating a roadmap for hospitals to resume elective surgery. Some of these guidelines include: A sustained reduction in the rate of COVID-19 cases for at least 14 days before assuming elective surgical procedures. The ability to provide hospitalization services in a normal capacity. Having the appropriate number of intensive-care beds available in case of emergencies, along with appropriate medical and surgical supplies. An appropriate staff ratio of physicians and nurses to handle general hospital services and create an environment of patient safety and staff safety. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The reopening of the health care system is very important. We already know that a lack of access to health care leads to inadvertent complications. One only has to think of how many cancer patients have been affected by changes in schedules, how many organ transplants have been delayed, and how all the effects of monitoring patients with diabetes, hypertension and cardiac disease could affect some of the long-term health problems that we hope to reduce year after year. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Every hospital, every physician and nurse, and all who support the health care system are committed to getting back to their regular schedules and are dedicated to continuing to protect and save the lives of patients in this country. I am very grateful that many politicians are pointing out that health care workers are heroes. I hope this continues after we get back to normal. Health care workers have always been heroes to me. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DR. MANNY ALVAREZ

Fox News contributor Andy McCarthy weighs in on the balancing act between safety and economic security. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  There is never a good time for a pandemic, but an election year in a deeply divided country is an especially bad time. Everything is politicized. I would add that even science is politicized, but that would suggest that this was something new. Sadly, we’re inured to the politicization of science, thanks to climate change and to the centrality of government funding to academic endeavors. Research resources are diverted toward our political conflicts, rather than being freely allocated where they could better advance the search for truth. The politicization of science has ingrained in our political life something about which we ought to be highly skeptical: The argument from authority. It is doing extraordinary damage to the republic, through governmental responses — federal, state and municipal — to the coronavirus. BRANDON JUDD: AS CORONAVIRUS SENDS UNEMPLOYMENT SKYROCKETING, TRUMP’S IMMIGRATION RESTRICTIONS CLEARLY NEEDED And it will keep doing damage unless and until we restore the burden of proof. There is no doubt that governments have a compelling interest in public safety, which includes preventing the spread of a potentially deadly infectious disease. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER It is nevertheless the foundational conceit of the American republic that governments are created to secure the fundamental rights of a nation’s citizens — our rights to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness. Moreover, the legitimacy of government is dependent on the consent of the governed. In the United States, authority is subordinate to liberty. Government is the servant, not the master. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP

Ken Cuccinelli, acting DHS Deputy Secretary, discusses President Trump's executive order suspending immigration and what it accomplishes Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  With over 26 million Americans filing for unemployment benefits in the past five weeks due to the coronavirus pandemic, President Trump’s decision to issue an executive order Wednesday barring some categories of immigrants from entering the U.S. for at least 60 days is eminently reasonable and the right thing to do. The immigration restriction is well within the president’s authority and is a genuine “no-brainer” that should be supported by every American concerned about the grievous harm the coronavirus has caused to public health and the economic health of our country. The coronavirus pandemic is plunging the U.S. into what could be the sharpest economic disaster in nearly a century – and potentially even worse than the Great Depression that ravaged our nation from 1929 until the late 1930s. TRUMP SIGNS EXECUTIVE ORDER RESTRICTING IMMIGRATION: HERE'S WHAT'S IN IT Massive federal stimulus and financial relief measures are necessary to keep businesses from going under and families from losing everything. And yet, there are a few bright spots, as some sectors of America’s economy are going on a hiring binge in the midst of the crisis. Walmart has already added 150,000 new positions and will add 50,000 more. Amazon is planning to hire 75,000 new workers in addition to the 100,000 hires it made last month. Grocery delivery service Instacart announced plans to hire 300,000 people to shop for customers who don’t want to leave their homes. Other retailers, as well as health care industry employers, are hiring as well. To steal the phrase House Speaker Nancy Pelosi used – absurdly – to describe President Trump’s border wall, it would be “an immorality” if these newly created jobs were to be filled by anyone other than American citizens and existing green card holders who have been put out of work by the coronavirus. Without the president’s temporary moratorium, the American economy would be adding tens of thousands of workers every month through legal immigration, all of whom would then compete with Americans in a job market thrown on its head by mass layoffs. The president could not allow this injustice to American workers to occur. That’s why he announced Monday that he would use his authority as president to temporarily suspend green cards for immigrants who are now outside the U.S. and don’t already have valid immigrant visas. The coronavirus pandemic is plunging the U.S. into what could be the sharpest economic disaster in nearly a century – and potentially even worse than the Great Depression that ravaged our nation from 1929 until the late 1930s. Immigrants seeking green cards through the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services are not affected by the new restriction on immigration because they are already in the U.S. The restrictions also don’t apply to health care professionals, farmworkers and others who enter the U.S. on temporary visas, and to spouses and minor children of American citizens. Illegal immigration has already been largely curtailed by the Trump administration’s implementation of rapid, summary, expedited deportation of all border crossers during the pandemic. The president’s executive order makes his necessary protective agenda complete. Public support for this new executive order is overwhelming. Even early in the coronavirus crisis, 80 percent of Americans polled in a USA Today survey that they wanted to see drastic action on immigration. As millions of Americans began losing their jobs, common sense dictated that a moratorium on some immigration will be necessary until Americans are back to work. The moratorium will offer immediate protection for Americans facing the risk of unemployment by removing the threat of competition from low-wage foreign workers. It will prove even more beneficial during the hiring spree that will come on the heels of reopening our economy. Even in the most optimistic scenarios, our economy and employment rate will take time to get back to where we were before this pandemic. Some especially combative Democrats nonetheless started lining up to dispute that commonsense morality of the president’s executive order almost immediately. Rep. Joaquin Castro, D-Texas, or instance, has already called the moratorium “authoritarian-like.” The truth is, though, that the president’s authority to issue the order is unassailable.  CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The Immigration and Nationality Act clearly states that the president of the United States can “suspend the entry of all aliens or any class of aliens” whenever he finds that their entry “would be detrimental to the interests of the United States.” Moreover, economic considerations are only part of the reason that immigration would be detrimental to American interests at this moment. It’s equally obvious that we cannot safely permit large-scale entry of foreigners as long as the invisible enemy virus is still lurking in just about every corner of the world. Throughout the saga over President Trump’s travel ban from eight terror-prone countries early in his administration, Democrats tried to argue that the letter of America’s immigration law doesn’t actually mean what it says. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Thank goodness the Supreme Court shot down that absurd reasoning two years ago, clearing the way for the White House to protect Americans who have been hurt by the coronavirus pandemic. Politics doesn’t present nearly as many “no-brainers” as politicians like to pretend, but temporarily halting a significant portion of new immigration while millions of American workers struggle to get back on their feet clearly meets the criteria.   CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY BRANDON JUDD

Protesters across the country claim the economic toll is worse than coronavirus; Jonathan Serrie reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox.  Sign up here.  Small protests popping up around the country against shelter-in-place orders that were imposed to slow the spread of the coronavirus pandemic are dangerous. The protesters are calling for conduct that would inevitably result in in more deaths and more hospitalizations from COVID-19, the respiratory disease caused by the virus.   In the Los Angeles area where I live, a news photo of a woman carrying a sign that read “Give me liberty or give me death” in one such protest went viral. She was standing outside a Baskin Robbins ice cream store open for take-out orders. Seriously? Being able to eat an ice cream cone inside the store is worth dying for? DONNA BRAZILE: IT’S WRONG TO PROTEST CORONAVIRUS RESTRICTIONS KEEPING US AT HOME – SAVING LIVES IS PRIORITY Some protesters have blocked traffic outside hospitals, determined to keep dedicated medical professionals from getting to work to treat and save the lives of others, and to keep patients from getting to the hospitals. This is crazy. There can never be any justification for obstructing medical care like this.  Another photo that has gone viral shows a man in turquoise medical scrubs with an N95 respirator mask courageously standing in the middle of the road in front of a car attempting to block traffic in a protest outside a hospital in Denver. The image clearly captures both the frustration and the divide among those working on the front lines to handle the devastation the coronavirus has brought upon us and save lives – versus protesters who desperately want society reopened despite the pandemic. As the wife of a doctor, I’m angered by protesters yelling at anyone wearing scrubs. Doctors took an oath to “do no harm.” Nurses and other medical professionals are working just as hard to restore the health of COVID-19 patients and every patient entering their hospitals. All these medical professionals and other hospital employees risk getting infected with the coronavirus and possibly dying every time they walk through the hospital doors. But they keep doing it, day after day, putting the welfare of patients ahead of their own safety.    These brave and selfless men and women didn’t create the coronavirus. They didn’t issue stay-at-home orders. Whether they are Democrats, Republicans or independents is irrelevant. Yet some people demonstrate against them and try to stop them from saving lives! Obviously, no one in their right mind likes being told by government leaders to stay home, not go to work, not send their children to school – and venture out only to buy food or medicine, get medical treatment, or perform an essential job such as health care. On top of this, many small-business owners and their employees – such as restaurant owners and workers – are suffering grievous financial losses and can’t come up with money to pay their bills and feed their families. It’s understandable that these people want to turn back the clock a few weeks and get rid of all the restrictions imposed on us since the coronavirus pandemic hit the U.S. with full force. But the temporary shutdown of many businesses, schools and other locations in the face of the coronavirus is needed because it is, quite literally, a matter of life and death. And even if protesters are willing to risk their own lives to reopen everything that has been shut down, they have no right to risk the lives of others – including their spouses, children and parents –  and flood hospitals with even more COVID-19 patients. Yet the anger over the restrictions imposed to fight the coronavirus seems to be growing every day as protests spread – including some organized by right-wing groups that support President Trump. And some of the protesters are crowding together without masks, much closer than six feet apart, potentially spreading COVID-19 to each other and worsening the pandemic that is the cause of their protests. Many people in other countries are shocked at the protests in the U.S. and can’t understand why Americans are angry about medically effective measure to protect them and their families from an illness that might kill them. One British newspaper headline read “Only in America.” CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER As I write this, the confirmed death toll from COVID-19 in the U.S. is nearly 52,000 people. Undoubtedly, more people have actually died from the disease because so few Americans have been tested. And more people keep dying and keep getting sick with this new disease every day. Each of these lost lives is a tragedy. Those who have died have left behind wives, husbands, sons, daughters, other relatives, friends and colleagues who now mourn them. The medical professionals who tried valiantly to save their lives also mourn. We all want to reopen America and return to normal as soon as we safely can. Some of the smartest people in the world are working as speedily and intensely as possible to find a vaccine and effective treatment for COVID-19 – and at some point they will succeed.  The sooner the better. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The inevitable easing of restrictions on where we can go and what can reopen must be based primarily on public health considerations – not political considerations, arbitrary dates, or the unreasonable demands of sign-carrying protesters. We must stem the tide of economic harm our country and the American people are suffering, but the best way to do that is to first reduce the terrible toll of hospitalizations and deaths the coronavirus is causing.  CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY LESLIE MARSHALL

Hairstylist and salon owner Eddie Rubinov joins ‘The Daily Briefing.’ Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. "Honey, I really don't want a COVID-19 hairdo,” I said. “You have to help me out. It's looking rough.” My wife furrowed her brow and looked at me out of the corner of her eye. “I can’t cut your hair,” she said. ANDY PUZDER: LATEST ROUND OF PPP CORONAVIRUS RELIEF SHOWS HARDWORKING AMERICANS NOT FORGOTTEN But I had no other choice. My barber is out of commission and buzz cuts make me look like I’m 12. That left me at the mercy of Raquel and a pair of unused clippers.  "Please, Raquel." She sighed. "OK, but you probably ought to sign a waiver before I do it. I can't guarantee anything." Raquel asked me to find a good YouTube video on how to do a fade on the sides and keep it long on the top. I waded through a bunch of “do it yourself” videos until I finally settled on a video called “The Perfect Fade in 4 Minutes,” featuring a guy cutting someone’s hair in his kitchen. I looked into the mirror and honestly said, “That’s one of the best haircuts I’ve ever gotten.” Raquel watched the video a couple of times, picked up the clippers, turned them on, and went for it. And thank goodness, about 45 minutes later, I looked into the mirror and honestly said, “That’s one of the best haircuts I’ve ever gotten.” CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER More importantly, I walked away from the chair with some valuable lessons about giving and getting feedback from my wife: 1. I need my spouse’s feedback because I have blind spots that I can’t fix by myself. Like the back of my head, there are areas where my character needs development and I don’t notice them. My wife has a better vantage point than I do, so I need to pay attention when she points out unseen areas that need a "trim." 2. My point of view is still valuable. Even though my wife had a unique perspective on my hair, she didn’t know everything. There were a couple of times during my haircut when I had to stop her and tell her she wasn’t getting it right. Working together on character development (or hair) isn’t a one-person job. I know a lot about myself and if my wife is going to help me grow, she needs to be curious about my point of view. Basically, helpful feedback requires a willingness to be a good teacher and student. 3. My wife has blind spots, too. It’s no secret in our house that my wife’s hair isn’t looking that great since COVID-19 shut down her salon. In fact, it's been four months since she got it cut; and as a result, it’s lost its shape and split ends are cropping up. Sometimes she makes an effort to style it; other times it looks like she just rolled out of bed and left it alone (because she did). She has to be willing to hear my feedback without getting her feelings hurt. We all need to change, and if we’re willing to dish out the feedback, we’ve got to be willing to take it. My resistance to COVID-19 hair was a success, thanks to some teamwork between my wife and me -- not to mention the “Perfect Fade” guy on YouTube (a reminder that sometimes we all need outside help). CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP I just had to trust that my wife was doing her best to help and be willing to share my point of view respectfully. Most importantly, we both had to remember that if positive change is going to happen in us as spouses, it’s going to require us both to grow (or get a trim). CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM JOSHUA ROGERS

Real science is complicated and hard and often incremental. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. From early on in this crisis, we took the virus seriously, but we doubted that Chinese-style lockdowns were a wise response to the Chinese coronavirus. Even if they worked as advertised and as you just heard, there's now overwhelming evidence that they don't work as advertised, despite what politicians continue to say. Mass quarantines under the best circumstances are really just a stopgap. The only way to tame a virus like this is with science. A single effective treatment would make all the difference right away. You wouldn't have to cure every sick patient, but if you could cure a significant number of sick patients and lower the death rate, this would be a completely different country. Hope would return. Fear would reside. We could begin to regard this as a manageable illness as we do so many other illnesses. LARRY ELDER: BELIEF THAT CORONAVIRUS CAME FROM A CHINESE LAB GAINS INCREASING CREDENCE  More than 600,000 Americans, for example, will die this year from cancer. That's a tragic number. You doubtless know some of them. But we accept it, and we live our lives bravely in the face of it, in part because cancer, horrible as it is, isn't very mysterious anymore. There are treatments for it. Those treatments, sadly, don't always work, but they work often enough that we can manage to live without panic. It's been obvious from day one that the main goal here as we fight this pandemic has got to be finding effective treatments for the virus. That's obvious, and most people understand it intuitively. The president does. He regularly uses his daily press briefings to tout potential new medical advances. One of the first off-label drugs that doctors around the world used to treat the coronavirus was hydroxychloroquine. Hydroxychloroquine is a cheap, decades-old medicine long recognized as a therapeutic for lupus and rheumatoid arthritis -- autoimmune diseases. It was originally an antimalarial drug. If you've traveled to the third world, it's entirely possible you have already taken this drug. Early evidence suggested that hydroxychloroquine might be promising. Physicians in the hardest-hit countries, Spain and Italy, fox example, reported that it was their preferred treatment for the coronavirus. One day, from the podium, the president touted the drug as a promising lead. From that moment on, precisely that moment, in the minds of the partisans in our media establishment, hydroxychloroquine was purely a political issue. The drug was no longer a medicine or therapy. It was the medical equivalent of Vladimir Putin. It was a cudgel they could swing in the air mindlessly to hit their ideological opponents in hopes of political gain. They ignored evidence that hydroxychloroquine might be effective in some ways. They waited anxiously for evidence that it might not be, and the other day they got it. Several recent studies suggested hydroxychloroquine is unlikely to help people who are already severely ill with the coronavirus. For most Americans, this was disappointing news. They wanted it to work. But at CNN, it was cause for celebration. The network produced a video for its website tallying up every time the president had mentioned hydroxychloroquine. Over at The Washington Post, which so often seems to work in tandem with CNN and shock troops for the Democratic Party, a person called Philip Bump produced a 3,000-word timeline looking at "the rise and fall of Trump's obsession with hydroxychloroquine." It was yet another exercise in deep irony. Bump himself obsessively chronicled every time the president as much as retweeted a mention of the drug. Bump logged the precise number of times that hydroxychloroquine was mentioned on this channel and on Fox Business. Paging Dr. Freud: It's possible that Mr. Bump may be exhibiting symptoms of obsession. Earlier this week, Bump wrote yet another article on the same topic, and he ended that piece this way with a suggestion of a sinister conspiracy at work, writing, "Why promote that drug and why so energetically?" Hmm. He left the question hanging in the air. Philip Bump doesn't believe in human optimism. He always assumes a secret agenda. But as usual, this was pure projection. What the creeps in big media accuse you of doing, every single time, they are fervently doing themselves. They're the ones obsessed with hydroxychloroquine. Most people just want a drug that works. Those in the media are the ones with a weird, unspoken agenda that's obvious, and yet hidden. Most people in this country just want a drug that works, and in fact, in some circumstances, this drug may work. Hydroxychloroquine is still being used to treat coronavirus patients. Dozens of studies of its effectiveness are now in progress, still, at this hour. Many doctors believe it can help if used early or in mild cases of the disease. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie recently said as much in an interview with Stephanie Ruhle on MSNBC recently: QUESTION: President Trump has touted this, but it is linked to higher rates of death in the V.A. coronavirus related. Can you elaborate? What's going on with this drug? ROBERT WILKIE, SECRETARY OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS: Sure. That's an observational study. It's not a clinical study.  It was done on a small number of veterans.  Sadly, those of whom were in the last stages of life, and the drug was given to them. And I have to -- I have to also say that the drug -- we know the drug has been working on middle age and younger veterans. Oh, so correlation is not causation. These are deep waters. Many people on television are not prepared. They're not wearing their swimsuits. In real life, we are getting mixed results. We need to know more. This is how science actually works. It's why we still haven't cured cancer despite decades of working on it. But we have prolonged the lives of cancer patients significantly. That's a victory. These are the kinds of victories you get in this business. Real science is complicated and difficult and almost always incremental. The party of science no longer understands that because they left science a long time ago. Karen Whitsett is a Democratic lawmaker in the state of Michigan. She believes she was suffering from coronavirus and steadily getting worse until she received hydroxychloroquine from her physician. Then she recovered. Whitsett came on this show to explain what happened, and as she explained it, she gave some credit to a president she didn't vote for. KAREN WHITSETT (D), MICHIGAN STATE REPRESENTATIVE: Dr. Arsiwala did save my life and I do credit, you know, the president to doing so and putting this out there because it wasn't accessible to me if it weren't for that fact. CARLSON: Yes. WHITSETT: I had very little time to be able to get to this and be able to make it because my breathing did become very labored. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP So, you just saw a woman who at bare minimum went through a harrowing experience and escaped with her life. We should celebrate, but not everybody is. A Detroit branch of the Democratic Party says it plans to censure Whitsett and expel her from the Democratic Party for daring to meet with the president after she got well. They didn't congratulate her for surviving. They punished her for violating party orthodoxy. Adapted from Tucker Carlson’s monologue from “Tucker Carlson Tonight” on April 24, 2020. CLICK HERE FOR MORE FROM TUCKER CARLSON

New details about efforts to find out how the coronavirus pandemic began; Gillian Turner reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. In February the Daily Kos, an influential left-wing website, denounced "a whole parade of right-wing hand-waving that includes not just Republican [Sen.] Tom Cotton claiming that COVID-19 was cooked up in a Chinese bio lab." Likewise, The Guardian reported that Dr. Peter Daszak, the president of EcoHealth Alliance in the United States, an organization that researches emerging diseases, said:  "Conspiracy theories circulating on social media claim the coronavirus was artificially manufactured in a lab conducting bioweapons research. They are 'crackpot theories that need to be addressed, but in the age of social media it is just impossible.'" The Chinese government claimed that the COVID-19 originated at a Wuhan food marketplace where live animals are sold. But Cotton, R-Ark., thought otherwise. BRADLEY BLAKEMAN: CORONAVIRUS FAILURES — HERE'S WHY CHINA LIABLE FOR DAMAGES CAUSED BY COVID-19 Cotton said: "We don't know where it originated, but we do know that we have to get to the bottom of that. We also know that just a few miles away from that food market is China's only biosafety level-four super laboratory that researches human infectious diseases. Now, we don't have evidence that this disease originated there, but because of China's duplicity and dishonesty from the beginning, we need to at least ask the question to see what the evidence says." Rutgers University chemical biology professor Richard Ebright dismisses the idea that the virus was a product of a laboratory. Ebright said: "There's absolutely nothing in the genome sequence of this virus that indicates the virus was engineered." But Ebright, according to the Asia Times, also said he "could not rule out the possibility that the unfolding pandemic could be the result of a 'lab incident.'" Bear in mind, Cotton did not claim the virus was manufactured in a Wuhan lab, let alone that the virus is a product of biological warfare. He speculated that the virus might have accidentally escaped from the lab. The virus-might-have-escaped theory suddenly became less crackpot when The Washington Post recently published an opinion piece called "State Department Cables Warned of Safety Issues at Wuhan Lab Studying Bat Coronaviruses." American experts who visited two virology labs in Wuhan in 2018 were shocked at the lack of security and appropriate protocols to prevent a virus from escaping. The Post's piece said: "What the U.S. officials learned during their visits concerned them so much that they dispatched two diplomatic cables categorized as Sensitive But Unclassified back to Washington. The cables warned about safety and management weaknesses at the WIV (Wuhan Institute of Virology) lab and proposed more attention and help. The first cable ... also warns that the lab's work on bat coronaviruses and their potential human transmission represented a risk of a new SARS-like pandemic." CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER As to China's official story that the virus started at a so-called wet market that sold bats, The Washington Post wrote: "As many have pointed out, there is no evidence that the virus now plaguing the world was engineered; scientists largely agree it came from animals. But that is not the same as saying it didn't come from the lab, which spent years testing bat coronaviruses in animals, said Xiao Qiang, a research scientist at the School of Information at the University of California at Berkeley. ... "The Chinese government's original story -- that the virus emerged from a seafood market in Wuhan -- is shaky. Research by Chinese experts published in the (British medical journal) Lancet in January showed the first known patient, identified on Dec. 1, had no connection to the market, nor did more than one-third of the cases in the first large cluster. Also, the market didn't sell bats." It is maddening that there is so much about this virus that we do not know. We are uncertain of its origin. We are uncertain about its lethality. We don't know whether one develops an immunity after infection and survival. We don't know how many have or have had the virus and have recovered. We don't know how many have the virus and are asymptomatic. There are still questions about whether after one can get the virus, survive and get it again. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP We do know that the disease does not discriminate against Republicans or Democrats. Nor does the disease care whether theories about its origin came from the right-wing "crackpots" or left-wing Trump haters. This is a political year. And President Trump and his supporters are so despised by Democrats and their media enablers that many reflexively wrote off conservative skepticism about the official Chinese government story on the origin of the coronavirus. But suddenly, the skepticism is no longer "crackpot." CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM LARRY ELDER

Vermont State College trustees ready to vote on proposal closing three campuses permanently; Jacqui Heinrich reports. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Last year I took a year-long course in German through an online program at a community college.  I travel to Germany on business quite a lot, and after five years of visits wanted a thorough understanding of German grammar and basic vocabulary. It was an astonishingly good course, difficult and thorough. My teacher prepared weekly videos that went over the topics of that week. I had about 15 to 20 separate assignments to finish every week, including video dialogues, quizzes and tests. I also interacted with my fellow students through Skype and telephone calls. I was quizzed regularly by my professor to see how well my conversation practice with fellow students was progressing. MARIA CASTELLUCCIO: AFTER CORONAVIRUS, THIS IS HOW SCHOOLS MUST ADAPT TO THEIR STUDENTS' NEEDS I have taken in-person language classes most of my life – including four years of French in college. I was astonished to find that my online German course was as good and in many ways much better than classes in which 40 students gather daily in traditional classrooms. I also saved a tremendous amount of time that would have come with driving 30 minutes to and from the college, finding parking, and sitting at a desk every day for 50 minutes. The cost: $264 per semester. Had I taken the same class at the private Catholic college where my daughter goes to school I would have paid $7,500 – or 28 times more. As millions of students nationwide are now discovering after in-person classes were halted by the coronavirus pandemic, online classes aren’t that bad. In fact, they can actually be quite good. My wife has taken many nursing administration classes online and finds them more demanding than many in-person courses. Yet even though at least 50 percent of the teaching in the sciences and virtually all of it in the humanities can be effectively conducted with advanced online teaching technologies, colleges and universities have strongly resisted online teaching for decades. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Some schools have a handful of online courses here and there, but most don’t allow students to earn degrees entirely online. The colleges claim that students need the in-person interactions with professors and fellow students that only traditional classes provide. The truth is that college administrators know that once students and parents learn just how effective online teaching can be, the decades-old boondoggle that is higher education in America – the annual $60,000 in tuition at some private liberal arts colleges – will come to a screeching halt. Parents especially will conclude that the billion-dollar campuses, luxury gyms, Olympic-size swimming pools, climbing walls, yoga classes, gourmet cafeterias and over-paid professorships are utterly unnecessary. For 40 years, university administrators have paid for these and many other extraneous goodies by raising tuition and fees into the stratosphere and saddling an entire generation of young people with massive student loan debt – debt that cannot be expunged in bankruptcy proceedings and that some students carry with them to their graves. This is not true in most of the world. Only Americans tolerate what is, in effect, a systematic fleecing by the higher education establishment. University education throughout most of Europe is virtually free because European universities are stripped down, no-nonsense affairs with an emphasis on learning over lifestyle and a centuries-old commitment to meritocratic testing as the key to advancement. When they tried to institute modest tuition in Germany the early 2000s there were riots in the streets. In February I toured a number of universities in Berlin and Vienna – schools where the likes of Sigmund Freud and Albert Einstein received their educations. There are no climbing walls at Humboldt University, no gourmet cafeterias at the University of Vienna. The cost to attend, even for foreign students, is about 300 euros annually in fees. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP In the end, the coronavirus pandemic will grant us at least one unintended but beneficial side effect: The college scam that has contributed to the financial ruin of America’s middle class over the past four decades is finally coming to an end. Cal-State Fullerton just announced all of its classes in the fall will be conducted entirely online. Many other California schools are expected to follow suit. Soon, the pressure to offer more classes and even entire degrees online will be overwhelming. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ROBERT HUTCHINSON

Brooklyn landlord Mario Salerno has suspended April rent for over 200 of his tenants. He says his faith guided him to making the decision. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Liberals never let a crisis go to waste, and sadly for America's landlords and real estate developers, the current pandemic is no exception. Far-left lawmakers including members of "The Squad" -- Reps. Ilhan Omar, D-Minn., Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, D-N.Y., Rashida Tlaib, D-Mich., and Ayanna Pressley, D-Mass.-- are exploiting the crisis to advance their social justice warrior agenda at the expense of property owners. They seek to punish landlords by forcing them to provide free rent for all tenants impacted by the coronavirus. Don't let them. For if Omar's bill, introduced last week and titled the Rent and Mortgage Cancellation Act of 2020 gets passed, it'll be a disaster for our economy, job creation, tenants, landlords, real estate developers, banks and even state governments whose budgets will suffer massive tax revenue loses as a result. REP. ANDY BARR: CORONAVIRUS — CONGRESS, MAKE CHINA ANSWER FOR PANDEMIC Omar's bill says all renters and mortgage holders don't have to pay their monthly rents or mortgage obligations -- regardless of income. A rent moratorium that lasts for one calendar month following the end of the national emergency. A crisis, mind you, that could extend for many months as experts predict a resurgence of the virus in the fall and winter. "Landlords need to show compassion and humanity for those impacted by the coronavirus but economically capable renters should not view this moment as a chance for a free ride," one of Boston's largest apartment owners, Bruce A. Percelay, chairman of the Mount Vernon Company said in a statement. "Respecting contracts and obligations are what keeps our system together and when that ethic begins to disappear, the threads that hold everything together will fall apart." The bill calls for the creation of a government fund to be established and run by the Department of Housing and Urban Development where landlords can go to recoup crushing rental income losses. Here's the kicker: They'll only qualify for relief if they accept a laundry list of misguided requirements such as a five-year rent freeze and other over-the-top demands only a radical liberal or card-carrying socialist could love. Some of these extreme demands require landlords to be barred from refusing to rent to ex-convicts, those with bad credit histories or illegal immigrants. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER It's worth stating the obvious that if landlords don't get paid by their tenants, then they will no longer have the funds available to do maintenance repairs or other needed property improvements. It also doesn't protect tenants, or society, if landlords go broke and have to default on their loans. Apartment buildings could go into foreclosure, teeing up another banking crisis. "Those activists who are calling for a national rent strike are creating a risk of economic anarchy which will damage our system beyond repair and ultimately hurt those who it is trying to help," said Percelay. "Mass foreclosures of rental properties both large and small will result in diminished supply and financial havoc." Not to mention the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs. Real estate developers who get burned financially on lost rental income would no longer build housing units, hotels, restaurants, and other properties, which means lost jobs for construction workers and related industries. A far better approach is to have tenants work something out privately with their landlords. Get on a reasonable payment plan that works for both parties without the government inserting itself. When the government does intervene, it inevitably fails to understand the chilling ripple effect these "feel good" measures inflict long term. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It's important to note that many states have already passed bills that protect tenants from being evicted for failing to pay their rent during the crisis. That's a good thing. We want protections in place for citizens who are truly struggling. But expecting landlords to foot the bill for all tenants regardless of income goes too far. "Putting landlords and lenders in the middle of a socialist restructuring of the housing market is not the answer," said Percelay. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ADRIANA COHEN

New York subsidizes Kentucky, says Rep. Peter King of New York. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Congress took the important step of extending the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) this week. The program provides a critical lifeline to small businesses, independent contractors, and self-employed Americans who have had their lives and livelihoods upended by the coronavirus pandemic. This step is good news. But it wasn’t taken without great – and completely unnecessary – partisan difficulty. Not surprisingly, small businesses – which have been hit hard by COVID-19 – quickly exhausted the $349 billion Congress allotted to the PPP in March. STEVE LEVY: CORONAVIRUS COSTS STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS BILLIONS – THEY NEED MASSIVE FEDERAL AID Two weeks ago, President Trump requested more funding for this popular program. Congress was ready to approve additional funding last week, but Democrats in Congress blocked the move. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., said Congress needs to spend more to bail out states, and they wanted to finance a litany of left-wing budget priorities. Holding American workers hostage in a time of national peril is unconscionable. The tumultuous effect on these individuals, whether they lost their job or are on the front lines of the pandemic, has been devastating. Millions of Americans have had to pause their lives and businesses they’ve spent a lifetime building, but some in Washington refuse to pause business as usual. As the former state treasurer of Kansas, I understand how difficult it is to balance state budgets and make hard choices. But Congress doesn’t need to bail out state and local governments any more than we already have. The least we in Congress can do is to help make workers whole. That’s what the PPP is designed to do. It is targeted, temporary and it’s the right thing to do. It’s also why Congress provided funding for health care providers and for increased state and local spending due to COVID-19. This is similar to federal support for previous disasters. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Congress – or, more specifically, American taxpayers – have been extremely generous toward states. In terms of direct funding, Congress has provided: And Congress has already directed hundreds of billions of dollars more in indirect funding for priorities like unemployment insurance and other loans that will relieve state budgets. Congress also spent $293 billion on "economic impact payments" to individuals, which is another budget burden states won’t have to carry. But the federal government should not replace lost state revenue. Sending the same taxpayer dollar to Washington first just to send it back to the state to fill a hole in the state budget isn’t logical. All that does is allow federal politicians to take credit for the funding. States are much better at knowing their needs than the federal government. Whatever formula that is derived in Washington will inevitably treat some states better and some states worse. We don’t need to create a precedent of using federal money to make up for lost revenue at the state level. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The two best support areas from the federal government are addressing increased health care costs and getting the economy going again. Reinvigorating our recently strong economy as soon as possible will provide needed tax revenue. Our priorities on funding PPP loans, providing tax rebates, and supplementing unemployment insurance are designed to be a bridge for Americans during these challenging times. Some in Washington seem to want to use this crisis to advance their partisan and ideological goals. But in a time of crisis, clear thinking and common sense are more important than ever. Congress should continue to serve the people making the most significant difference – American workers, individuals, and families – and not delay steps that are critical for our recovery.

 The United States is calmer, though still threatening, following days of rioting that spread with lightning speed across the nation, with murderous assaults on police officers and civilians and the ecstatic annihilation of businesses and symbols of the state. Welcome to a real civilization-destroying pandemic, one that makes the recent saccharine exhortations to “stay safe” and the deployment of police officers to enforce outdoor mask-wearing seem like decadent bagatelles. This particular form of viral chaos was inevitable, given the failure of Minneapolis’s leaders to quell the city’s growing mayhem. The violence began on May 26, the day after the horrifying arrest and subsequent death of a black man named George Floyd as he lay handcuffed on the ground. EX-NYPD COMMISSIONER KELLY ADMITS NYC MAY NEED NATIONAL GUARD 'IF THIS CONTINUES FOR A COUPLE MORE NIGHTS' On the night of May 28, Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey ordered the city’s Third Police Precinct evacuated as the forces of hatred, distinct from legitimate forms of protest, descended upon it for a third day in a row. The building was promptly torched, sending a powerful sign that society would not defend its most fundamental institutions of law and order. On May 29, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz explained his reluctance to mobilize the National Guard as an unwillingness to seem “oppressive.” Naturally, he apologized for his white privilege – “I will not patronize you as a white man without living [your] lived experiences” – and explained the feral violence as an understandable response to racial injustice. “The ashes are symbolic of decades and generations of pain, of anguish, unheard,” Walz said. Few arrests were made after five days of rampant crime. The media, visibly exhilarated by this latest explosion of black rage, had its own explanation for the chaos: people were upset that the white officer who had kept his knee on Floyd’s neck for a sickening eight-plus minutes had not yet been arrested and charged. But when that arrest came, along with murder and manslaughter charges after a lightning-fast investigation by the district attorney, the anarchy continued – not just in Minneapolis but across the country. The charge against the fired officer was later upgraded to second-degree murder and three officers on the scene who failed to help Floyd were also fired and later charged with aiding and abetting second-degree murder. Political leaders elsewhere were just as reluctant to use the necessary force to quell the violence. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio called on police to use a “light touch” in response. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo coolly predicted on Sunday, during his now absurdly irrelevant daily coronavirus press conference, that the violence would continue. “The explosion we saw last night we’ll probably see again tonight,” Cuomo said –obviously confident in his own physical safety, if not the safety of the rest of the state’s residents. The attacks on local law enforcement were already happening out of sight of TV cameras before the most photogenic scenes of arson and the stomping of squad cars started showing up on network and cable news. On May 26, and May 27, Chicago residents surrounded and threw bottles at Chicago police trying to arrest gun suspects. One suspect was the likely perpetrator of a shooting that had just hit a five-year-old girl and two teenage boys. The other had just thrown his gun under a car; the cop-haters tried to free him from the squad car. No surprise that Saturday night, downtown Chicago was plundered. This pandemic of civil violence is more widespread than anything seen during the Black Lives Matter movement of the Obama years, and it will likely have an even deadlier toll on law enforcement officers than the targeted assassinations we saw from 2014 onward. On Tuesday, for example, four St. Louis officers were shot, and a police captain was killed, amid looting in the city. The next night, in Brooklyn, an officer was stabbed in the neck and two others were shot.  Even worse is to come, because since 2015, the country has absorbed another five years of academically inspired racial victimology. From Ta-Nehisi Coates to the New York Times’s 1619 project, the constant narrative about America’s endemic white supremacy and its deliberate destruction of the “black body” has been thoroughly injected into the political bloodstream. Facts don’t matter to the academic victimology narrative. One facts is that whites are the overwhelming target of interracial violence. Between 2012 and 2015, blacks committed 85.5 percent of all black-white interracial violent victimizations (excluding interracial homicide, which is also disproportionately black-on-white), according to the Bureau of Justice Statistics. That works out to 540,360 felonious assaults on whites. Whites committed 14.4 percent of all interracial violent victimization, or 91,470 felonious assaults on blacks. Blacks are less than 13 percent of the national population. If white mobs were rampaging through black business districts, assaulting passersby and looting stores, we would have heard about it on the national news every night. But it is not happening. The national media have been insisting on the theme of the allegedly brutal Minneapolis Police Department. They said nothing as black-on-white robberies rose in downtown Minneapolis late last year, along with savage assaults on passersby. Why are the Minneapolis police in black neighborhoods? Because that’s where violent crime is happening, including shootings of two-year-olds and lethal beatings of 75-year-olds. Just as during the Obama years, the discussion of the allegedly oppressive police is being conducted in the complete absence of any recognition of street crime and the breakdown of the black family that drives it. Once the violence began, any effort to “understand” it should have stopped, since that understanding is inevitably exculpatory. The looters are not grieving over the stomach-churning arrest and death of George Floyd; they are having the time of their lives. You don’t protest or mourn a victim by stealing Oxycontin, electronics, jewelry and sneakers. Fittingly, the ideological handmaiden of this violence – academia – has already sprung into action. The chancellors and presidents of Harvard, the University of Arizona, the University of Pennsylvania and Yale – among others – released statements last weekend assuring their black students of their schools’ commitment to racial equity, in light of the George Floyd death – an event wholly unrelated to academic institutions. No college leader denounced the violence. UCLA Chancellor Gene Block – as well as the school’s $400,000 a year vice chancellor for equity, diversity and inclusion and a parade of deans – announced that the Office of Equity, Diversity and Inclusion and the school’s legions of equity advisers would be coming up with new programs for “virtual reflection spaces” in which to “humbly acknowledge the pain.” The school’s resources for racial trauma would be beefed up. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER The academic diversity bureaucracy has now been given a whole new excuse for existence and can be assured that it will escape the cost-cutting chopping block, even as universities beg the federal government for more coronavirus bailout money. The great philosophers and poets of the West – from Aeschylus and Euripides, to Shakespeare, Hobbes and the American founders – understood the chaos and lust for power that lurk beneath civilization. Thanks to the magnificent infrastructure of the rule of law, we now take stability and social trust for granted. We assume that violence, once unleashed in the name of justice, can easily be put back in the bottle. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP It cannot. It was a signal accomplishment of both politics and science to banish humanity’s millennia-long fear of darkness. That city dwellers are now re-experiencing that fear with each fall of night is a measure of how rapidly we are losing our hard-won progress. Adapted from a column that first appeared in City Journal. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY HEATHER MAC DONALD

 All Americans have been shocked by the death of George Floyd while in police custody. This sickening act has set off more than a week of unrest. But was it the sole cause? Or was it the match that ignited dry timber? More likely the latter. History has yet to be written. But discussions over the coming weeks are sure to look increasingly at the role of the COVID-19 lockdown in putting the nation’s nerves on edge and inflaming these days of rage. We should ask the politicians – especially the governors, mayors and others seeking to place blame for the violence – what did you expect? You created a historic economic crisis throwing 40 million people out of work. GOV. KRISTI NOEM: GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS – THEY SERVED THEIR PURPOSE. NOW LET'S DO THIS TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM Forty million people. Did any of you who enjoyed appearing on TV every day telling Americans what they could and could not do — did you fully comprehend the full implications of pushing 40 million Americans into joblessness? You meant to save lives with your response to the pandemic. We get that. But then you went way, way too far, creating mass unemployment at levels approaching the equivalent of the Great Depression. Did you ever stop to consider that a job is not only a paycheck, but also a provider of dignity and purpose? Author and commentator Arthur Brooks has written eloquently about how work satisfies a primary human need to be needed. Politicians who see employers as greedy overlords and businesses as soulless generators of profit can’t or won’t understand this. For many people, a job is not just about money. It provides a connection to the community, sometimes even a substitute for family. Have you ever considered what happens to people when this vital connection is severed?  We’ve been seeing it this past week.  It’s no surprise that the Molotov cocktail-throwing Princeton educated-lawyer whose arrest made headlines in New York City had been “furloughed” from his firm. One wonders if he would have been driving his van around distributing homemade incendiaries if he had to be in the office the next day. Yet, from the very beginning, the “woke” mainstream media have been largely asleep to the pandemic’s potential to foment widespread unrest. And what of the millions of teenagers — many from single-parent families — who suddenly found themselves grounded at home after COVID school closings, often with little structure and purpose? Is it any surprise that some would take to the streets, perhaps with criminals released from prisons during the crisis by pandering, fear-mongering politicians? Yet, from the very beginning, the “woke” mainstream media have been largely asleep to the pandemic’s potential to foment widespread unrest. Few considered how month after month of “social distancing” could ultimately undermine social cohesion. Did any of those reporters, writing ad nauseum about Donald Trump’s fondness for hydroxychloroquine, ever consider probing the pressures building in low-income neighborhoods hit by lockdown-caused unemployment — where much of the rioting is currently taking place? CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER Did they ever consider asking residents of these communities how they felt being thrown out of jobs and confined at home, unable to pay bills, subjected to the seemingly unending uncertainty of ever-extended lockdowns — while enduring an incessant drumbeat of bad news? The lockdowns no doubt also helped stoke rage among middle-class members of Antifa,  providing them with more time on their hands to organize their unprecedented national assault. Yet so far the relation of the present unrest to government-imposed COVID confinement has been largely ignored. The media have covered the pandemic’s impact on low-income unemployment mainly as a statistic. COVID stories have focused on data-driven reports of job losses, virus cases and death rates, the latest Donald Trump outrage, and pieces aimed at anxious elites. Two recent NY Times Editors’ picks: “Do Runners Need to Wear Masks?” and “Is it Safe to Keep Employing a Cleaner?” CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP No question George Floyd’s death drove people into the streets.  And there needs to be an honest discussion of the lessons learned from this terrible tragedy. Already there is the predictable chest-beating as the political class seeks to explain the violent response as justifiable frustration over “white privilege.” However, if there is any “privilege” to be blamed, it is that of overreaching politicians who used the power of their offices to deprive 40 million people of their dignity as working Americans. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY ELIZABETH AMES

 The police officers responsible for the senseless and heartbreaking death of George Floyd must be held accountable to the fullest extent of the law. Like an overwhelming majority of Americans, I want to see justice served. It must be served. Unfortunately, outside agitators and professional anarchists have hijacked the protests to honor Floyd in order to push their radical goal of toppling the American way of life in favor of complete chaos. To make matters worse, Democrat politicians at the local and state level refuse to do their job and come down hard on looters, rioters and thieves. Whether it’s because they simply can’t handle the pressure or don’t want to, the inaction of Democrat leaders diminishes the message of the peaceful protesters, costing lives, millions of dollars in property damage and the dreams of hardworking American entrepreneurs. GOV. KRISTI NOEM: GEORGE FLOYD PROTESTS – THEY SERVED THEIR PURPOSE. NOW LET'S DO THIS TO SOLVE THE PROBLEM Take the local firefighter and [now former — hopefully temporarily] owner of a sports bar in Minnesota. Korboi Balla, who is black, poured his entire life savings into his dream of opening a sports bar in Minneapolis that was set to open Monday. Instead, violent criminals ransacked his business, completely demolishing it. There are now countless stories of human suffering and property damage. Meanwhile, many in the mainstream media are ignoring, even condoning, the vicious behavior and destruction of minority-owned small businesses. Some in the mainstream media, particularly liberal-activists disguised as cable news hosts on CNN and MSNBC, have refused to cover the violent unrest in an intellectually honest manner. While an overwhelming majority of Americans demand justice for George Floyd, they pretend we can’t respect the rule of law AND stand with the black community. Unfortunately, likely Democrat party nominee for president Joe Biden, and today’s Democrat Party, are choosing to crank up the tension by using inflammatory rhetoric and pandering to the radical left. “Americans must be more than bystanders as the country struggles to address centuries of systemic racism,” Biden said Friday in a stunning display of a lack of self-awareness. Rank-and-file Democrat Party leaders have been slow to react, choosing instead to use the unrest as another opportunity to “get Trump.” The fact is Biden has been one of the most influential politicians in America for the past 50 years. In fact, he was the driving force behind mass incarceration policies in America. In the age of social media, where one of the nation’s two major political parties is refusing to even acknowledge the threat, it is as imperative as ever to come down fast and hard on the Antifa instigators and outside agitators. In fact, rank-and-file Democrat Party leaders have been slow to react, choosing instead to use the unrest as another opportunity to “get Trump.” Their failure to act with early, decisive action led to mass looting and assaults against businesses, large and small. Biden, as he has done consistently throughout his career, is attempting to play identity politics by blaming Trump despite the fact Biden has been a part of the permanent Washington political class for 50 years. President Trump has said, “We will stand with the family of George Floyd, with the peaceful protesters, and with every law-abiding citizen who wants decency, civility, safety and security." On Monday, he reminded the nation that his first and highest duty is to defend the country and the American people. He swore an oath to uphold the laws of the nation, an absolute necessity if we are to continue the great American experiment called Democracy. We can believe in America and what it stands for — as most Americans do — while also acknowledging and working to fix systemic injustices faced by the black community and other groups of Americans who feel the system doesn’t represent their interests. CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER America is the greatest experiment ever conceived because our Constitution secures our God-given rights regardless of race. It’s America’s constant striving to do better, and be better, that makes the American experiment unique. The professional anarchists and Antifa want to decimate this great experiment in favor of mob rule. We must quash it now, and that’s exactly what President Trump is doing.  CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP After almost a week of inaction by Democrat leaders across America, President Trump made it unequivocally clear Monday — he will not allow professional provocateurs and violent mobs to drown out peaceful protesters and sully the legacy of George Floyd, his family and millions of Americans who stand with them. President Trump understands the importance of protecting every American’s right to protest, and he will do everything in his power to keep Americans safe. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE FROM MATTHEW WHITAKER

Philanthropist and New York Mission Society Board Member Jean Shafiroff joins Fox News to discuss how she’s helping her community and raising awareness to help curb the growing numbers of food-insecure Americans Skyrocketing unemployment due to the coronavirus pandemic has been forcing a growing number of Americans to turn to charitable services for assistance as food insecurity among families with children grows. Philanthropist and New York Mission Society board member Jean Shafiroff joined Fox News to discuss how she’s helping her community and raising awareness to help curb the growing numbers of food-insecure Americans. New York City Mission Society has been serving the city’s most underserved children since 1812. Recently, it has been making food and utility baskets for the children it serves and delivering them during the pandemic. “I can't tell you how desperately these food baskets are needed...In the New York tri-state area, we have a very serious situation because so many residents live at or below the poverty level,” Shafiroff told Fox News. “The food pantries across the area are very helpful...but the supply and the demand are not working the way they should right now. There is massive demand all over the country --39 million Americans out of work, and this translates into no food on the table.” Shafiroff noted that a major issue during the pandemic has been getting food to the actual pantries, especially amid the shuttering of multiple meat processing plants across the country. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has even temporarily loosened its food labeling policies during the coronavirus pandemic to curtail supply chain disruptions and give producers more flexibility amid food shortages. According to a Brookings analysis, almost 35 percent of households with children said they did not have sufficient food, that's 14 percent higher than during the recession. Amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Shafiroff is encouraging those who can afford it to make donations to their local food pantry. “I know my husband and I recently donated 10,000 meals to Heart of the Hamptons, which is a food pantry in the Hamptons, because we feel so strongly about providing food and being part of the solution,” said Shafiroff, who is also the author of "Successful Philanthropy: How to Make a Life By What You Give," which explores the meaning of giving back in today’s era. "And of course, 10,000 meals really doesn't mean much when you look at a country with 39 million people out of work, but if we all work together, I believe we can solve this problem.” For more with Philanthropist and New York Mission Society Board Member Jean Shafiroff watch the full video above. Emily DeCiccio is a reporter and video producer for Fox News Digital Originals. Tweet her @EmilyDeCiccio.

Alissa Hogan, a mother of three, speaks out about the unemployment system failing her and seeking assistance from a food bank. Get all the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. A widowed mother of three in New Jersey is hoping to reduce the "stigma" surrounding food bank assistance after she was furloughed from her job and left without options amid the coronavirus pandemic. Alissa Hogan told "The Daily Briefing" Tuesday she had reached out to the state's unemployment office multiple times after she was furloughed from her restaurant job, but her requests went unanswered. "Right now, it's like you're at the mercy of a computer system, and there is just no way of getting through to anyone. There's no one to talk to you," she said. "I can write multiple emails, and you are just not getting the responses that you need." DRIVE-THROUGH FOOD PANTRY OPENS UP IN SAN FRANCISCO AMID CORONAVIRUS After exhausting all other options, Hogan turned to a local food bank for help. "I really think that food banks are an amazing resource that unfortunately, people are embarrassed to use," Hogan told host Dana Perino. "I actually was very unknowledgeable, and I thought that food banks were for people who were homeless. I didn't realize that any family could go there." "I actually was very unknowledgeable, and I thought that food banks were for people who were homeless," she explained. "I didn't realize that any family could go there." Hogan said she chose to speak out to let others who are struggling to feed their families know that food banks are "there for this time of need." CLICK HERE FOR COMPLETE CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE "There really is a stigma ... behind the whole thing of food banks. But for me going, it was very discreet," she said. "The people don't ask any questions. You drive up in your car, grab a box, and drive away."


          This illustration by French artist Jean Jullien, released by Jullien to Fox News, was created to spotlight the work of iPads to Hospitals, a volunteer group that collects used tablets and donates them to hospitals and nursing homes in underserved communities. 
          (Jean Jullien) Hours after the 2015 terror attacks in Paris, French illustrator Jean Jullien spontaneously took to his sketchbook with simple brush strokes of ink to create a peace symbol with the Eiffel tower – known as “Peace for Paris” – which quickly became an iconic image of the world’s solidarity with France. His latest work is equally powerful. In a minimalist black-and-green illustration, the artist captures two people embracing through the frame of an iPad, a device that has become the new doorway to communication during the deadly COVID-19 pandemic. The 37-year-old Jullien created the image to spotlight the work of iPads to Hospitals, a New York-based volunteer group that is collecting used iPads and donating them to hospitals and nursing homes in underserved communities – allowing those in isolation to connect with loved ones. “My idea was to focus on the embrace, the warmth of bringing people closer,” Jullien said of his work, released exclusively to Fox News. “The tablet has become a digital gateway, a frame for this moment,” he said in an email. The effort by the group – founded by Amy Johnson and Jeff Arace, medical students at SUNY Downstate in Brooklyn – is making an impact. iPads to Hospitals has so far received 1,000 used tablets from 35 states and has nearly reached its $50,000 fundraising goal. The organization, which Fox News profiled last month, is now expanding its reach from hospitals to nursing homes, enabling the elderly to virtually connect with family members who are restricted from visiting due to the outbreak. “The elderly are a population susceptible to infection, so many homes have strict visitor restrictions, while individuals in hospice care and long-term rehabilitation hospitals have chronic or terminal illnesses that prevent them from being able to leave the medical care setting,” said Shenara Musthaq, a 26-year-old medical student at SUNY Downstate and one of the group’s volunteers. “Unfortunately, these are individuals that remain at a higher risk of infection than the general population so we hope to provide a stronger means of communication with loved ones until the safety measures are in place for in-person visits,” Musthaq said. “They stepped into a void that none of us knew even existed" As soon as used iPads are received by mail, volunteers, like 29-year-old Ian Kaplan, work to ensure the devices are properly reset and fit for donation. Sometimes the tablets arrive with handwritten notes, which exemplify the humanity of everyday Americans wanting to help from the confines of their homes. One woman from Los Angeles wrote about her father, who died from lung disease last July after falling ill in 2017 and spending months in a hospital – living longer than doctors expected. “This iPad was a hand-me-down given to me with love by my late father,” she wrote. “My family and I were very privileged to spend every day by his side. I believe that it made all the difference … My heart is breaking for patients and loved ones who cannot be together right now. My prayer is that even one more family might be able to beat the odds – and this will provide some comfort during dark times,” she said. “It’s not every day that someone receives a handwritten letter in the mail anymore,” Kaplan said of the notes he finds tucked away in boxes and wrapped around devices, some written by children. “The letters we received have just been incredibly powerful and touching. Some have brought me closer to the hearts of the donors writing them, as they share the deeply impactful stories behind their own personal motivation to get involved in our cause,” he said. 
      Medical staff at Bronx HealthCare System are seen holding iPads that were donated to the hospital by the volunteer group, iPads to Hospitals.
      (Bronx HealthCare System) Hospitals receiving the used iPads from across the five boroughs of New York include Jacobi Medical Center, New York-Presbyterian Brooklyn Methodist Hospital, Calvary Hospital and Maimonides Medical Center. Dr. Douglas Reich, chairman of Family Medicine at Bronx HealthCare System, which received another batch of iPads from the group on Friday, described the impact of the donations as “event changing.” “They stepped into a void that none of us knew even existed,” Reich said of the group and its focus on the critical use of iPads during the pandemic. Reich said the hospital’s IT department worked from the beginning of the outbreak to use technology as a way to connect families with COVID-19 patients isolated in their rooms. “We had a limited numbers of iPads within our own institution. We’d have a patient’s family member arrive and we’d give them an iPad in the lobby and then run upstairs to give one to the patient. It was somewhat cumbersome,” he said. “The help from this group has now made it so much more efficient and has streamlined the process,” Reich said. “We’re now connecting 50 to 75 patients a day with iPads. So many more people are able to communicate with their family members.” Reich recounted one day in late afternoon when a COVID patient, speaking in Spanish, told him he had not seen or heard from anyone since doctors attended to him that morning. Reich promptly grabbed an iPad and dialed up the patient’s wife and three daughters, who were able to FaceTime with their father from his hospital bed. “It was a beautiful moment to witness,” he said. “At the end of it, one of my colleagues called back the family to ask if they had any questions or concerns and they were sobbing on the other end of the phone.” “They were so grateful for the experience to be able to see their dad,” he said.

Survivor Corps founder Diana Berrent on the launching her group to help find a coronavirus cure. Get the latest news on coronavirus and more delivered daily to your inbox. Sign up here. Recovered COVID-19 patient Diana Berrent opened up to the "Fox News Rundown" podcast Wednesday about her experience as one of New York state's first confirmed coronavirus cases. "I was at a meeting on Monday, March 9, where ... I later found out, several of the people who were at that meeting had been at a conference in the previous days, in very early March in the city at the Sheraton Hotel, where there had been an outbreak," Long Island resident Berrent recalled. SUBSCRIBE AND DOWNLOAD THE FOX NEWS RUNDOWN "No one went into the meeting intentionally knowing at that point they weren't symptomatic. But everyone at the meeting did get infected," she continued. "There were only eight of us, which is under the 10 recommended [by the CDC], just important to keep in mind. And there were people who I had only met a couple of times before. So [it] wasn't social. There was no sharing of food or anything else.  "But everyone did contract it. And one person has since died a couple of weeks ago." Unaware that she had been infected, Berrent returned home to her family. Four days later, she began to feel symptomatic. "I woke up on the morning of Friday the 13th ... and there was nothing subtle about it. I had blisters in the back of my throat. I had at least 102[-degree] fever and I had a respiratory infection. I felt like I had an anvil on my chest," she said. "The first thing I did, and I thank goodness for this every day, is within 15 minutes of waking up with those symptoms, I grabbed my laptop and a couple of other things and I went into my bedroom and I stayed in self-isolation. NY MOTHER HOPES TO CONNECT FELLOW COROANVIRUS SURVIVORS WITH RESEARCHERS "Other than leaving to go get tested, I didn't leave the four corners of my bedroom for 18 days," said Berrent, who added to host Dave Anthony: "I think that there's an overriding civic duty to make sure that if you are infected, the infection stops at you so that you're not responsible for the continued spread." Berrent was initially unable to secure a coroanvirus test due to lack of availability, and required the help of Democratic Congressman Tom Suozzi. After testing positive, she saw a window of opportunity and spent her time in isolation launching an organization to help others affected by the virus. "They had this sort of 'Ah-ha!' moment realizing that... I'd be one of the first survivors. And with that came both the responsibility, but also an incredible opportunity." "They had this sort of 'Ah-ha!' moment realizing that ... if all went well, I'd be one of the first survivors," Berrent said. "And with that came both the responsibility, but also an incredible opportunity. "I have no science background, no public health background, but I remember just enough of my 10th-grade biology to realize that I would come out with antibodies and those antibodies could potentially provide immunity. And if we could gather together, you know, I might have an individual sort of superpower in my blood at the end of this virus. But there were going to be thousands to come after me. And if we could mobilize as a massive movement, that we could have incredible power," explained Berrent. Berrent launched Survivor Corps to rally recovered COVID-19 patients and those still fighting the illness to donate their blood plasma to academic and medical studies "What Survivor Corps really has done is we have issued a call to arms, literally arms, because inside the arm of every COVID-19 survivor is the antibody with plasma that will help lead us to a cure," she explained. "And so we are mobilizing an army of volunteers to go out, to donate their plasma, to donate their blood, to participate in every research trial program that is going on from the scientific, medical and academic community." CLICK HERE FOR FULL CORONAVIRUS COVERAGE Berrent has already donated plasma four times since contracting the virus and now has "standing weekly appointments." "We're seeing [that] the more virus you are exposed to, it looks like the sicker you get," she explained. "So, if we can inoculate those individuals with a boost of antibodies, it could really protect them in the long run." "It really has the direct potential to save, they say, three to four lives per donation." To hear the full interview, subscribe and download The FOX News Rundown on your favorite podcast player. The FOX NEWS RUNDOWN is a news-based daily morning podcast delivering a deep dive into the major and controversial stories of the day.

 Foreign policy doesn’t stop for turmoil here at home. The U.S. can’t afford attention deficit disorder overseas. That is doubly true for meeting the challenge of China, the most consequential test this generation could see in its lifetime. Last Friday, President Trump rolled out a number of punitive measures designed to discourage the increasingly aggressive and threatening Chinese Communist regime. The action fully comports with the administration’s recently published China strategy, a document that explains the rationale for how the U.S. has dealt with Beijing over the last three years. Last week’s sanctions were just more of the same — and were absolutely the right move. ARTHUR HERMAN: US CORONAVIRUS LOCKDOWN — CHINA SEIZES CHANCE TO FULFILL THESE GLOBAL AMBITIONS Going forward, we need to stick with what we know works. No. 1: Don’t play games Diplomats often talk about “linkage,” where countries trade-off concessions on one issue to gain an advantage in another. That kind of barter won’t work in the complex relations between Washington and Beijing. The U.S., for example, was wise not to compromise with Beijing on trade in hopes the regime would help out with North Korea or the South China Seas.  It wouldn’t. Washington was right to handle each disagreement on its own merits. Last week, regardless of what else is going on between the two countries, even as we implement the trade deal, the president was right to threaten Chinese leaders with human rights sanctions. No. 2: Pursue the Harder Right   Predictably, last week the president was criticized for revoking the special trade privileges that Hong Kong had enjoyed with U.S. because of its status as an autonomous region of China. The administration, however, was just following U.S. law; it requires the administration to review Beijing’s breeches of its commitments to respect the political and economic freedom of the Hong Kong people. This action may lead Beijing to think twice about the scope of the new security law it is drafting to punish freedom-loving Hong Kongers. If the government insists on depriving them of their rights, the only party responsible for hurting Hong Kong is the Chinese Communist Party, which had committed to respect the guarantees made to the people of Hong Kong. The U.S. can’t ignore such tough choices. In the end, holding China accountable for its misdeeds is always the best policy. Otherwise, Beijing will regard Washington as nothing more than a speed bump to its global ambitions. To get — and keep — Beijing’s attention, Washington needs to target the regime with meaningful measures. That includes hitting them where it hurts the most: in the pocketbook … repeatedly.  No. 3: Keep Your Friends Close  There is a free world. If it doesn’t hang together to push back on Chinese malfeasance, the future of those freedoms will be in doubt. Critics may disagree on the president’s decision to withdraw from the World Health Organization (WHO), but there is no question that U.S. criticisms have galvanized the international community in demanding more transparency and accountability from the organization. We need now more of the same. The U.S. needs to lead the free world post-COVID economic recovery, regardless of Chinese meddling. A G-7 plus meeting is a good format to do that, although there should be no place there for Russia. Russia has nothing to offer on free-market economic recovery and will only obstruct an honest discussion among democracies on how to deal with China. No. 4: Stick with It for the Long Haul  To get — and keep — Beijing’s attention, Washington needs to target the regime with meaningful measures. That includes hitting them where it hurts the most: in the pocketbook … repeatedly. CLICK HERE TO GET THE OPINION NEWSLETTER The administration is looking into whether Chinese firms are complying with requirements to list stocks on U.S. exchanges. This comes in the wake of reports that the Chinese company Luckin Coffee falsified reporting on business activities. China needs access to U.S. financial markets; a consistent campaign punishing them for abuses will definitely get their attention. No. 5: No Self-inflicted Wounds  Job one is to get America up and running again. Policies have to protect our freedom, prosperity and security as effectively as they deal with China. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP The president’s announcement on restricting Chinese students at American universities and research institutes is a good example. Well over 300,000 Chinese students study in the U.S. each year. Many have engaged in spying, intellectual property theft and political activity on behalf of the Chinese Communist Party. The administration is right to start to crack down on this illicit activity. It sends a powerful warning to China that it could lose access to the American university system if the regime does not curb its worse abuses. This is the kind of prudent policy that strikes the right balance. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY JAMES CARAFANO

 Former Defense Secretary James Mattis boasts some 7,000 books in his library. This makes the unbearable lightness of his public attack on President Trump that much more mysterious. Had Mattis done some reading first, he might not have penned his vacuous anti-Trump broadside in The Atlantic. “I have watched this week’s unfolding events, angry and appalled,” Mattis wrote Wednesday. He aligned himself with the thousands of Americans protesting the atrocious killing of George Floyd at the knee of fired Minneapolis cop Derek Chauvin and three sacked colleagues May 25. All four have been arrested and charged for causing or allowing Floyd’s appalling death as Chauvin knelt on the neck of the handcuffed black man who was pinned and helpless on the ground, threating nobody. The other three officers did nothing to stop Chauvin from killing Floyd, as Floyd cried out desperately, "I can't breathe." TRUMP TOUTS LETTER FROM EX-ATTORNEY DOWD ATTACKING MATTIS: 'YOU NEED TO BONE UP ON YOUR HOMEWORK' According to Mattis, people demonstrating to protest the killing of Floyd share “a wholesome and unifying demand,” specifically, “Equal Justice Under Law.” These words, chiseled above the entrance to the United States Supreme Court, are central to the American creed. And then Mattis marched into a ditch. He wrote: “We must not be distracted by a small number of lawbreakers.” That’s just what I thought as riot-fueled smoke filled my Manhattan apartment last Saturday night. “Don’t cough too hard,” I told myself. “And don’t be distracted by a small number of lawbreakers.” Mattis’ words are almost touchingly naïve, as if the cause of justice for Floyd has been tarnished by a stolen police car hubcap here or a toppled trash can there. Mattis may be right. Let’s stay cool and not be distracted by such lawbreaking as: The defacement of the Lincoln Memorial (honoring the president who crushed slavery), the defilement of the anti-fascist World War II Memorial, and the desecration of New York City’s St. Patrick’s Cathedral, Los Angeles’ Congregation Beth Israel Synagogue, and other houses of worship. The bricks, stones, and other projectiles that rioters have hurled into storefront windows and the skulls and faces of police officers. Palettes of bricks and boxes of rocks mysteriously have materialized along protest march routes. They have taken flight and damaged objects and people. The widespread looting of retail establishments, from Target to Macy’s to Rolex. Some of these attacks are organized crimes, with choreographed mobs tearing down plywood, smashing the underlying windows, and then prying open metal security gates before slithering in to clean house. In Philadelphia, domestic terrorists have used dynamite to blast ATMs open and swipe the cash inside. The arson that has turned buildings into ashes and piles of rubble, including minority-owned businesses. Minneapolis rioters incinerated a 190-unit low-income-housing complex, under construction. Rioters in Washington, D.C., ignited St. John’s Episcopal Church, where every president since James Madison has worshipped. Luckily, it was damaged, but not torched. The plight of Minneapolis’ Third Precinct, which barbarians breached, occupied, and cremated, as police officers ran away. This signaled every criminal that civilization had surrendered, and it was open season on society. America still is paying the high price for this calamitous capitulation. The scores of police officers who have been targeted from coast to coast. Thursday morning, the Drug Enforcement Administration warned law enforcement officers to inspect their vehicles for sabotage after a Brooklyn cop found that the lug nuts on his personal car’s tires had been loosened. Hours earlier, two NYPD officers were shot, and a third was stabbed in the neck. They are among roughly 350 law enforcement personnel wounded in the disorder so far. And retired St. Louis Police Capt. David Dorn, 77 – whose black life mattered as much as George Floyd’s – was shot fatally in the head while shielding a friend’s pawn shop. This preying Matiss then tried to chew Trump’s head off via this unfiltered slander: “Donald Trump is the first president in my lifetime who does not try to unite the American people – does not even pretend to try,” Mattis fumed. “Instead he tries to divide us. We are witnessing the consequences of three years of this deliberate effort.” This total lie ignores the president’s ongoing efforts at national unity, most overlooked by the Trump-hating media, so that they can claim he never tries to unite the country. But Mattis cannot blame media malpractice for his refusal to acknowledge Trump’s unifying remarks in his first State of the Union address in January 2018. Mattis was in the front row, with the rest of the Cabinet, when President Trump said: “Tonight, I want to talk about what kind of future we are going to have, and what kind of nation we are going to be. All of us, together, as one team, one people, and one American family.” Trump added: “Americans love their country. And they deserve a government that shows them the same love and loyalty in return.” In his first month in office, President Trump welcomed some three dozen presidents of Historically Black Colleges and Universities to the Oval Office. He energetically has championed these schools, provided them a steady stream of federal funds, and found them corporate partners for student apprenticeships. Trump signed and repeatedly promotes Opportunity Zones to bring economic vitality to low-income neighborhoods, many black and Hispanic. Trump signed the First Step Act, making criminal justice reform a reality and reducing mass incarceration of non-violent offenders, something for which Black Lives Matter militated, and which the eight-year Obama-Biden administration failed to deliver. The president has championed Israel, signed measures to fight anti-Semitism, and emceed two Hanukkah receptions at the White House last December. He also has hosted Iftar dinners with Muslim employees and diplomats to celebrate the end of Ramadan. Before COVID-19 torpedoed the economy, Trump trumpeted the record-high black and Hispanic employment that his pro-growth policies helped create. “The memory of George Floyd is being dishonored by rioters, looters and anarchists,” Trump said in Cape Canaveral, Fla., on Saturday, in a soothing, unifying speech. “Healing, not hatred; justice, not chaos are the mission at hand…. Right now, America needs creation, not destruction; cooperation, not contempt; security, not anarchy.” These comments also appear in a deeply moving Trump-Pence 2020 ad. This 3:45 video, produced the same day as Mattis' smearfest, disembowel's his "Trump-does-not-try-to-unite-America" disinformation. This beautiful spot is a must-see for every American. Even amid deadly turmoil, the Big Three networks’ newscasts that evening shortchanged Trump’s reassuring message. ABC broadcast 13 seconds of Trump’s remarks, the Media Research Center reports. Among his 830 relevant words, they aired 35 or 4.2 percent. CBS gave the president five seconds, 13 words, and 1.6 percent. NBC: 11 seconds, 24 words, and 2.9 percent CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP FOR OUR OPINION NEWSLETTER Mattis then slammed President Trump’s statement that Trump might instruct the military to restore order in Washington after rioters set blazes near the White House, injured at least 60 Secret Service members, and reportedly forced the commander-in-chief into a secure bunker. “At home, we should use our military only when requested to do so, on very rare occasions, by state governors,” (versus federal governors?) Mattis scolded. Mattis should condemn the 12 previous presidents, from Thomas Jefferson to George H.W. Bush, who have invoked the Insurrection Act of 1807 on 19 separate occasions to quell unrest. CLICK HERE TO GET THE FOX NEWS APP Without consulting governors, Republican Ulysses S. Grant used this law in 1872, to dispatch soldiers to South Carolina to stymie the Ku Klux Klan. Democratic deity John F. Kennedy cited this statute to stop instability in Mississippi in 1962. Democratic hero Lyndon Johnson mobilized troops under this authority in 1968. Why? To suppress riots in Washington, D.C.! For a reputedly well-read man, James Mattis has humiliated himself by not doing a few minutes of research before composing his flimsy, nasty screed against an embattled commander-in-chief who needs such petty sniping as much as another trip to the White House bunker. CLICK HERE TO READ MORE BY DEROY MURDOCK

