Pierre, South Dakota — The coronavirus crisis hasn’t been kind to the reputations of many governors. New York’s Andrew Cuomo held effective news conferences that at first burnished his image, but he’s now ducking responsibility for sending virus patients back into nursing homes where the disease promptly spread. Michigan’s Gretchen Whitmer is now seen as a scold who on the one hand has kept pot dispensaries open but, on the other, last week told residents who’ve gone three months without hair care to just “Google how to do a haircut.”  Among the governors whose reputation has clearly been enhanced is South Dakota’s Kristi Noem. The 48-year-old Republican, who still ranches her family’s land, didn’t issue a shelter-in-place lockdown order for her state. “The people themselves are primarily responsible for their safety,” she said in a public statement in April. She added that the state and national constitutions “prevent us from taking draconian measures much like the Chinese government has done.” But that didn’t mean South Dakota didn’t take clear steps to control the virus. Noem issued an executive order in March urging the elderly and those with preexisting conditions to stay home and encouraging employees to practice social distancing and to telework if possible. “We do follow Center for Disease Control guidance,” Noem told Greg Kelly of Newsmax TV. “But we also made decisions that were best for South Dakota. South Dakota is not New York City.” Indeed, per square mile, New York has more than 26,000 residents per square mile, while South Dakota has only 12.   One place where social distancing wasn’t easily possible was the Smithfield Foods pork-processing plant in Sioux Falls. It was declared part of essential infrastructure by President Trump because it alone accounted for between 4 and 5 percent of pork production in America. As Bret Schundler wrote in the Wall Street Journal: “Even states with lockdowns have exempted food production as essential, and with good reason. If governors shut down food plants, disease today would be followed by hunger tomorrow.” 
 But the plant’s workers did become part of a large coronavirus cluster in April, with more than 300 workers falling ill and two eventually dying. That prompted MSNBC’s Rachel Maddow to pounce on South Dakota for not issuing a stay-at-home order. At one point, Maddow addressed the camera mockingly, as if speaking directly to the governor, stating, “You are aware that it’s infectious, right? That it’s a communicable disease?” But Noem kept calm. South Dakota had had 5,438 COVID-19 cases in all so far (1,038 are active) and a total of 65 deaths. “I always tried to be dispassionate and follow the science, facts, and data,” she told me in an interview last month. “One-liners on social media or TV don’t contribute to any solutions.”  Most recently, Noem has acted to reduce tensions over the killing of George Floyd and the resulting protests. The local protests in South Dakota have been peaceful, and the governor says they were “legitimate and raised important concerns.” But in other places people were perpetrating violence in an effort “to shortcut public debates through fear,” she warned. “They want people scared.” She made clear that such behavior wouldn’t be tolerated in South Dakota.  Noem’s steady approach is attracting more national attention. Of course, her critics are still there. Stu Whitney, the media columnist of the Sioux Falls Argus-Leader, dismisses her policy on the virus as “mired in many of the strategies of President Trump” but concedes it has also made her “a darling of right-wing media icons.” Many Republicans see a future in national politics for her. J. J. Cafaro, a shopping-center developer from Ohio who is a large political donor, is a big fan and says her down-to-earth approach make her a natural. “I’m rarely so impressed with an elected official,” he told me last year. “Newt Gingrich was one, Kristi is another.” Noem has “remarkable future potential,” Corey Lewandowski, who was Donald Trump’s campaign manager for much of 2016, told me. “People will be noticing her.”  For her part, Noem responds to such speculation by noting that she is focused on being a good governor and has turned down opportunities with the Trump administration “on more than one occasion.” But even if Kristi Noem stays in South Dakota, I predict you’ll continue to hear from her as one of the governors who exercised clear leadership during the coronavirus crisis. 

Since the onset of COVID-19, the word “hero” has been used far too often to describe people who may or may not be heroic in any sense. Displays of heroism can make for redundant advertisements and slogans, not to mention aggrandizing social-media posts. As the idea of heroism is diluted and thinly spread, everyone could very well be a hero, and in the era of pandemic and protest, the American media cheer on all essential workers and protestors as such, no matter their occupation, their actions, or their virtues.  Are we forgetting what the label “hero” means? For whom it should be reserved? For the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the hero is foremost a “mythological or legendary figure often of divine descent endowed with great strength or ability,” or an “illustrious warrior” — truly people few and far between, at least in the reality outside books and movies. Most would settle on this definition: “a person admired for achievement and noble qualities; one who shows great courage.” A graduating high-school senior may consider her favorite teacher a bona fide hero for driving by her house with a festooned minivan. But should that teacher be depicted as a hero in our culture? Is a thoughtful deed a noble one? What about the Grubhub driver? Cue triumphant music. Greasy paper bag in hand, our protagonist strides up the path to the front door, gallant; rings doorbell; delivers food. Family is happy. Family is safe. The courageous Grubhub driver spared the family a visit to the grocery store, and we are told he is a hero, making the world a safer place. What about the nurses, doctors, and first responders? Many of these people are heroes, unquestionably. Some, however, are not. My sister works as a nurse in Richmond, Virginia, and by the tired rationale of local and national media, she is the most heroic of unsung humans to have emerged from the crisis — decked out in PPE, serving on the front lines of war, and fighting the invisible enemy. But my sister is the first to admit: She is no hero, and she hasn’t acted heroically, either. Even during her stint in the COVID unit, the risk was low. And although there is a stark difference between the VCU Medical Center and, say, New York-Presbyterian Lower Manhattan Hospital, the media’s blanket gesture for health-care workers in particular does not, and never will, distinguish the ordinary from the extraordinary. But on June 6, we remember indisputable heroes. We remember, and honor, the men who stormed the beaches of Normandy seventy-six years ago. From S. L. A. Marshall’s account of Omaha Beach, published in the November 1960 issue of The Atlantic: Already the sea runs red. Even among some of the lightly wounded who jumped into shallow water the hits prove fatal. Knocked down by a bullet in the arm or weakened by fear and shock, they are unable to rise again and are drowned by the onrushing tide. Other wounded men drag themselves ashore and, on finding the sands, lie quiet from total exhaustion, only to be overtaken and killed by the water. A few move safely through the bullet swarm to the beach, then find that they cannot hold there. They return to the water to use it for body cover. Faces turned upward, so that their nostrils are out of water, they creep toward the land at the same rate as the tide. Their actions and sacrifice, their heroism—it is beyond our modern understanding.  

Today’s rally in the market is, of course, all about the jobs number, but it is only the latest move upward in what by any standard has been a remarkable recovery. There are plenty of reasons for that recovery, but I cannot help remembering a witty remark made recently by a shrewd market participant. He quipped that he’d decided to stop researching companies and instead start investing by acting on signals from the cover stories of prominent magazines. He would sell when the cover was exuberantly bullish and buy when it was all doom and gloom.  He was alluding to a whimsical, and long-standing, theory that by the time the media get sufficiently excited about a stock or investment theme to put it on the cover, that stock or theme has already played itself out in the market and is therefore on the verge of reversing itself. Examples abound. In February 2000, weeks before the beginning of the three-year bear market, a BusinessWeek cover screamed “The Boom,” cheering on the stratospheric dotcom bubble. In June 2013, Barron’s chose to worry on its cover about “Trouble Ahead at Tesla” — but the stock nearly doubled that summer. In September 2009, Fast Company celebrated “Nokia’s Plan to Rule the World,” adding, combatively, a subtitle on its “bold plan to trounce Apple.” Kindness compels us not to dwell on what happened next. So the financial media is not the best guide to identifying major turning points in the markets, although it can be a useful reverse indicator. This year, The Economist clocked with Swiss precision not only the top of the market in February but also the bottom in March. Its February 20 cover featured five charging robotic bulls (the five technology giants) with a headline in exquisite, bold letters: “Big Tech’s $2trn Bull Run.” Bad luck, perhaps (the pandemic seems to have come as something of a surprise); but then on March 19, it marked the depth of virus depression with an image of a “Closed” sign superimposed on poor planet Earth. Regrettable timing, as these dates were each within one to four days of the peak and low, respectively.  Since March 23, the stock market has, as noted above, come back with a vengeance. As of midday on June 5, the S&P 500 and the Nasdaq Composite had rallied 43 percent from their March lows. The Nasdaq is within 1 percent of making a new all-time high, and the S&P 500 is only 5 percent behind.  
 Sector Performance  So what is going on? First, it is important to understand what sort of companies are rallying. Although The Economist’s tech bulls lost 30 percent of their value in the March crash, the magazine was vindicated by their swift recovery in April and May, when these stocks rallied to new, or close to new, highs. This is significant because these five companies, Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Alphabet/Google, and Microsoft, together weigh as much as 20.4 percent in the S&P 500 index. The index is weighted by market capitalization, meaning that if a company with a market value of $500 billion moves by 2 percent, its impact on the index is five times as large as that of a $100 billion company moving 2 percent. In fact, because other large companies have not performed as well in this rally, the aggregate weighting of the five technology giants is now even greater than it was before the pandemic. For more context, consider that the smallest 340 companies in the index together also add up to a weighting of 20 percent in the index. Five companies weigh as much as 340 companies. And the 165 smallest companies together weigh as much as the largest of them all, Microsoft. Lest you think that these are minnows that you have never heard of, they include names such as Hewlett-Packard, Viacom, Expedia, and Tiffany.   Other sectors and companies have also contributed to the rally, notably home-improvement giants The Home Depot and Lowe’s, credit-card issuer Visa, and biopharma firms (such as Gilead Sciences and Regeneron) considered to be on the cutting edge of antiviral R&D. Also logging big gains are brave-new-world companies such as Tesla (which has more than doubled since the start of the year), Beyond Meat, and Peloton. The market has been less kind to other sectors. Energy crashed because of the virus and crashed again because of the Russia–Saudi Arabia rift on production limits. Exxon, for example, fell 56 percent from its January 6 level (and 70 percent from its 2014 all-time high) to its March 23 low. Although it has rebounded 68 percent, it remains 25 percent short of its 2020 high. (All data as of midday on June 5.)  Travel, retail, and hospitality have been devastated and have barely started to recover. After falling 69 percent from January 17 to March 19, Delta Airlines has recovered 85 percent but remains 43 percent below its Q1 high. Gap is 34 percent lower than it was on February 5, and Darden Restaurants (which includes such brands as Olive Garden and LongHorn Steakhouse) 27 percent below its February 12 level. (Again, all data as of midday on June 5.)  Finally (and obviously), the general market thrust was greatly assisted by the trillions of dollars of stimulus. Without this and the signals it sent to investors, it is a certainty that the market would not have performed nearly as well as it has. The Outlook The rally in technology names was fully justified given the increased demand that stay-at-home orders placed on web-based communications: the need to work, learn, shop, socialize, and be entertained from home. Purer plays such as Netflix, Zoom, and Electronic Arts have all fared well. Zoom has doubled from its February high despite having some privacy issues, which it now seems to have addressed. At the other extreme, airlines’ load factors (passengers per available seats) were below 20 percent in April (8 percent for Southwest), and this on reduced capacity. Cruise and hotel operators have been devastated while restaurants did their best to mitigate the hit by offering takeout services.  Given the rally, the question now is what comes next. Not everyone is a believer. Some deem the rally the “most hated” in history, while others find it “befuddling.” Several high-profile investors remain bearish and have either missed the recovery or are reducing their equity exposure. We are not yet halfway through what is likely to continue to be a very eventful year. Here are the variables that will direct the market in the remaining seven months: Some observers are resolutely bearish because of market valuations that are now well above historical averages. But this situation can persist for years while interest rates are at rock bottom. For example, in the early 1990s, in the aftermath of the first Gulf war and the savings and loan crisis, the price-to-earnings ratio of the market hovered over 20x for years while equities moved mainly sideways. We know what happened next, starting in late 1994 and continuing until early 2000. 

1. 15 People Died In the Protests And Riots Following George Floyd’s Death. Here’s Who they Are 2. Assyrian Christians fear for their future in Turkey 3. Michael Toscano: Continued Isolation Will Kill More Elderly: Endless isolation is inhumane and deadly. It is a method of torture. A punishment inflicted upon the most depraved. It dehumanizes and is the essence of monstrosity.” 4. Christine Rousselle: Burying a loved one during a pandemic: Depending on the diocese you live in, you may or may not have access to last rites. The hospital may push back against family members who request that you receive the sacraments one last time. Your daughter will insist on it because it is important to her. She will be overcome with relief when she is told that it happened. 5. Wisconsin officials have a change of heart after Catholic Church stands up for religious rights: “We’re glad that Madison and Dane County came to their senses, but it shouldn’t have taken so long,” said Eric Rassbach, vice president and senior counsel at Becket. “The First Amendment protects both prayer and protest. Putting an arbitrary numerical cap on worship services while allowing thousands to protest makes no sense from a legal or public health perspective. Most other governments nationwide have already lifted their COVID-related restrictions on worship. The few remaining holdouts should take note and come into compliance with the First Amendment.” 6. Wall Street Journal Editorial Board: Who the Looting Ruins 7. There is a an irony, here. Edmund Burke, friend of the American Revolution, asked to be buried in an unmarked grave, so that Jacobins couldn't desecrate his remains. https://t.co/ljVMVb2ZUp — Matt Lewis (@mattklewis) June 5, 2020  8. Why Conservatives Should Be Leading the Civil Rights Movement   Kay James: What we need to understand is that to point out our flaws and say, “Let’s, together, fix them” does not mean we hate America or we distrust our leaders or that we are not supportive of our institutions. And that’s why I’m so passionate about this. I believe that we, as conservatives, have the keys to all of the issues that are so important to those people out on the streets, and we have to step up and tell them, guide them, lead them. 9. Naomi Schaefer Riley and Jim Piereson: Pandemic philanthropy and its critics 10. City Journal: Midtown, Repurposed: New York’s strained public spaces are performing a new role: Mid-Manhattan, usually the center of wealth for a tristate region with a radius of 100 miles, is indefinitely crippled. It will be months, if not until next year, before white-collar workers crowd back onto public transportation to come to their offices, and they may do so in a permanently changed way—say, working on-site three days a week instead of five. Tourists are likely to stay away, too. Government restrictions on global travel hinder overseas visitors, and with theaters and museums still closed, there is not much to do besides walk around. But midtown’s well-designed public spaces are working. Without Times Square and Rockefeller Center, more people would crowd the parks or leave town. 11. Philos Project promotes positive Christian engagement in Near East 12. Online course, “Pro-Life Ethics in a Throwaway Culture,” offered by Charlie Camosy  

Dr. Anthony Fauci warned in an interview with local D.C. radio station WTOP on Friday that protests could spread the coronavirus: The congregation of large crowds at a time and in a … geographic area where there is clearly active infection transmission—it’s a perfect set up for further spread of the virus in the sense of creating these blips which might turn into some surges. So I get very concerned as my colleagues in public health [do]…. Obviously, not only are they congregating physically close to each other but often when they start screaming and demonstrating—which part of the process of demonstrating, I’m not criticizing that—but I’m saying what it’s going to be leading to is the likelihood that you might have situations where you will foster the spread of the infection, and that’s really of concern. “It’s a delicate balance because the reasons for demonstrating are valid,” Fauci added. “If you are going to go out, please make sure you wear a mask and you keep the mask on at all times.” Two questions: Why did the federal government’s top epidemiologist wait until Friday to issue this warning about protests that have been going on for a week, and why did he do it on a local radio program?  

Remember when we were told that the administration of Donald J. Trump posed a pernicious threat to science and medicine? In an attempt to sharpshoot Trump’s most famous scientific claim, one of the world’s leading medical journals just blew off its own foot. What other possible explanation can there be for the catastrophic failure of The Lancet’s thunderously hyped anti-hydroxychloroquine article, which this week was retracted after it was revealed to be unsubstantiated, if not a full-on hoax?  On May 22, the hugely influential medical journal published an article on the most talked-about drug of the coronavirus pandemic. In the midst of a public-health crisis, when one particular treatment is receiving inordinate attention, it is critically important for The Lancet and other medical journals to guide us with facts rather than add to the political noise. Lives were, and are, on the line. Doctors who had some anecdotal evidence, but no clinical proof, that hydroxychloroquine might be part of an effective treatment for COVID-19 sufferers were desperate to learn whether the drug works, doesn’t work, or is downright harmful to such patients. The Lancet in effect constructed a flashing red neon stop sign warning the medical profession that the drug was worse than useless. This matters. The New York Times and virtually every other media outlet took the study at face value; the Times ran the alarming headline, “Malaria Drug Taken by Trump Is Tied to Increased Risk of Heart Problems and Death in New Study.” The Washington Post ran this headline: “Antimalarial drug touted by President Trump is linked to increased risk of death in coronavirus patients, study says.” The World Health Organization and several other health organizations halted clinical trials of HCQ and several national governments altered policy for the same reason.   And all of this happened because the Lancet published a peer-reviewed “observational study” that had more red flags than May Day. Its shoddy, embarrassing, instantly debunked “study” comes from a strange source that not only does not have a gold-standard reputation in the medical-research field but looks highly dubious. What good is The Lancet if it’s going to publish any fool thing that comes across its desk? In publishing this “study,” The Lancet acted about as responsibly as the New York Times would have been if it published a story saying, “Government chemicals in the water are turning the frogs gay, says expert observer.” 
 The Lancet article was based on the claims of a tiny, previously obscure Chicago-area firm called Surgisphere, founded by Dr. Sapan Desai, who has been named in three medical malpractice suits unrelated to the latest controversy and also left his hospital job in February. Desai has said Surgisphere has eleven employees. As of last week, the firm had six employees listed on LinkedIn, and as the Guardian reported, these employees included a sci-fi writer and an “adult model.” Great: The world’s most important medical study is coming to you from Stephen King and a pinup girl. Among the other tasty nuggets unearthed by the Guardian’s investigation were that, until a few days ago, the “get in touch” link on Surgisphere’s homepage sent users to a template for a cryptocurrency website.  The Lancet gave its imprimatur to a shadowy group, which before May had never published in any peer-reviewed journal, has almost no past Internet history, and most of whose employees appear to have joined the firm just this year. It apparently did not wonder how a tiny company beat all of its more established competitors and managed, at an astonishing speed, to carry out a massive clinical trial involving 96,000 patients and 1,200 hospitals around the world. The study didn’t even identify which hospitals it supposedly got data from.  Where the underlying information is, nobody knows, because Surgisphere won’t tell us. It claimed, for instance, to have collected detailed health records from more than 4,000 patients from hospitals in Africa, though other professionals in the field say it’s especially difficult to get good data from that continent.  “This is a pretty important topic. Can we see the details behind these data please?” is a question you would ask. The Lancet didn’t. It just said, “Looks good to us, fellas!” And somebody hit ‘publish.’ Retracting the article on Thursday, The Lancet sheepishly told us, “Our independent peer reviewers informed us that Surgisphere would not transfer the full dataset, client contracts, and the full ISO audit report to their servers for analysis as such transfer would violate client agreements and confidentiality requirements.” We can’t show you our data because it’s a secret? The Lancet went along with this? “We can no longer vouch for the veracity of the primary data sources,” the journal added, raising the question of why it vouched for this unseen data in the first place. Surgisphere’s only other study published in a peer-reviewed journal, another COVID-19 paper published May 1 in the New England Journal of Medicine, was also retracted this week. The two doctors who co-signed the study with Surgisphere’s Desai essentially shrugged and said, Hey, this is what they told us. Even now the editor of The Lancet, Richard Horton, is blasé about bungling a study about the most-discussed treatment for the worst public-health crisis in a century. He responded to a tweet saying there should be consequences for those who perpetuated this shambolic work by saying meekly, “Lessons not consequences I hope.”   I can’t think of any explanation for why The Lancet would make such a catastrophic mistake except that it was reading the study through the political equivalent of beer goggles. When you’re fired up with righteous rage about Donald Trump, and a paper comes across your desk that supports your priors about his being a dangerous ignoramus, you are capable of overlooking the most egregious, spectacular flaws. What The Lancet published is looking more and more like fiction. The Lancet’s revulsion toward all things Trump is undisguised; last month it took the highly unusual step of publishing a blatantly political editorial calling for Trump’s ouster. This follows the politicizing of its pages for the purpose of damaging the reputation of the previous Republican president, George W. Bush: Its 2006 survey estimating the Iraq War led to some 650,000 excess deaths was widely questioned, including by the government of Iraq itself, whose spokesman said the study had no basis in reality. Leading experts in the scientific and medical communities are supposed to be rigorous thinkers. The Lancet episode is damning evidence that some of them, at the very highest levels, are allowing themselves to be steered by their political passions rather than by their reason. 

Did you know there is a giant loophole to the legally enforceable social-distancing guidelines of the COVID-19 pandemic? New York City mayor Bill de Blasio was reminded by a reporter earlier this week that retail stores and houses of worship had been closed for months. All public gatherings were limited by law to ten people. Yet thousands were gathered close together, with his encouragement, protesting. “You’ve expressed solidarity with this particular protest cause. Is that why it’s been given dispensation to disregard epidemic guidelines?” the reporter asked.  “Anyone who thinks there’s different rules for different people, again, is not trying very hard to see the reality,” de Blasio hemmed and hawed. “When you see a nation — an entire nation — simultaneously grappling with an extraordinary crisis seeded in 400 years of American racism, I’m sorry, that is not the same question as the understandably aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person who wants to go back to services. This is something that’s not about which side of the spectrum you’re on. It’s about a deep, deep American crisis.” Pennsylvania’s health secretary, Dr. Rachel Levine, explained that the government guidelines for parties or concerts remained in place, but since “there are obviously significant social issues that are present, people feel they need to have a voice,” protests could continue.  It’s not just America either. In Dublin, a crowd estimated to be 5,000 strong gathered under the auspices of Black Lives Matter. In the current phase of reopening no more than ten people are allowed to gather for a funeral. For other gatherings, “Up to 4 people who don’t live together can meet outdoors while keeping at least 2 metres apart.” Yet Ireland’s government seemed to tacitly endorse the plainly illegal protest. Taoiseach Leo Varadkar tweeted that “racism is a virus that we have been fighting for millennia. . . . We need to show solidarity as people of all races & backgrounds around the world come together to stop its spread and defeat it.” The next day, the government’s health minister announced that grandparents and grandchildren could soon meet again, but not hug.  
 In the United Kingdom, police forces have publicly shamed their own citizens by posting pictures of those who failed to comply with social-distancing guidelines. The lockdown measures have been enforced vindictively, with legal exercise scrutinized. The government was thrown into a virtual crisis when Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s senior adviser, Dominic Cummings, pushed the boundaries of lockdown rules by driving to a family member’s house to seek child-care help as he and his wife came down with the virus. Yet as George Floyd–inspired protests grew in the U.K., Johnson’s government endorsed the right to demonstrate “while” adhering to social-distancing guidelines that limit public gatherings to just five people, ignoring the reality that the guidelines were already being violated with impunity.  Back in the U.S., hundreds of public-health workers signed an open letter. “Staying at home, social distancing, and public masking are effective at minimizing the spread of COVID-19,” they wrote. “However, as public health advocates, we do not condemn these [protests] as risky for COVID-19 transmission.” The message is clear: Public-health experts and elected officials either don’t take their own dire warnings about the virus seriously, or they don’t take our rights seriously. Their fatuous little retorts to criticism have been that protests — at least the ones they like — are an urgent exception; anyone else who wants to break lockdown rules is demeaned as a selfish prig who “just wants a haircut.”   But, in fact, it’s not just a haircut. If you booked a wedding venue for this summer in New York or Connecticut, that venue cannot give you an answer about whether and how the event might proceed. In many school districts, if you want your child to receive the state-provided developmental therapy that all qualifying children are entitled to, it has to be done via “Telehealth” — that is, it must be done poorly, because a child meeting a speech therapist is deemed a risk to public health. The governors of New York and Pennsylvania have both encouraged the protests, saying that they don’t want to interfere with First Amendment rights. But the social-distancing rules they have both also heartily endorsed already interfere with the First Amendment; even in a giant cathedral it is illegal to gather more than ten people for a church service. How can any decent government give an endorsement to crowded protests featuring long periods of shoulder-to-shoulder chanting but still enforce rules excluding household members and close family from a funeral?  If public-health officials have quietly come around to the idea that outdoor transmission of the coronavirus is rare, and protests are safe, then they must inform the public of this fact, and urge governors to immediately reprioritize opening up the outdoors for larger gatherings. That they haven’t done so speaks volumes. With their endorsement of a protest they approve of as a legal exception — one imagines nationwide pro-life protests would not have been treated with the same kid gloves — they’ve made our governors and mayors into arbitrary tyrants. For months, they’ve been demanding previously unimaginable sacrifices of all of us. And it turns out, many of them didn’t even believe their own message. They have made a mockery of public health, revealing themselves as arbitrary, shallow, and ultimately tyrannical. 

Prophecies of American decline are almost as old as America itself. Until now, the United States has had a stubborn and inconvenient habit of defying such predictions. But in the wake of the American response to the coronavirus pandemic, proclamations of national doom have accelerated and intensified. The most recent such missive comes from British war reporter and international-relations student Aris Roussinos, who declared earlier this week that the pandemic “has exposed America as a failed state.” And while Roussinos does offer some worthwhile observations about the challenges America faces, his analysis betrays a regime-centered view of America that mischaracterizes its attributes, understates its strengths, and overestimates its challenges and its challengers. It’s worth starting with what Roussinos gets right: America faces a significant challenge from the rise of China. He is also right, to some extent, that “China’s rise is as much a direct product [of] as it is a challenge” to the global order that America helped to create. It seems hard to deny now that many people failed to anticipate what would happen when a nation that openly rejected the principles on which this order depended became thoroughly enmeshed in it. Roussinos begins to go off track, however, in identifying why this happened. He variously describes the people responsible for the decision as a “blob” incapable of effective action and a ruthlessly efficient cabal acting in the service of billionaire paymasters, the only beneficiaries of a globalization that he claims was “never real.” There have been costs to globalization, to be sure. But it is definitely “real,” and if it were a completely deleterious enterprise, even the thickest “blob” would have had trouble justifying it in the first place, much less keeping it going for decades. The tricky thing about globalization, particularly as it pertains to China, is that it has a complex matrix of costs and benefits; if one is intellectually honest, it doesn’t lend itself well to Manichaean analysis. As Nicholas Eberstadt and Daniel Blumenthal write in the current issue of National Review: If the current arrangements were overwhelmingly disadvantageous for the U.S., it would be a straightforward matter (albeit painful and unpleasant) just to end them. But this is not the case. Instead we find ourselves in a tableau mainly painted in shades of gray. Careful discrimination and informed judgment will be required to determine whether each of the myriad cords that bind us to China today is actually in the American interest. That process of “careful discrimination and informed judgement,” in turn, requires a proper accounting of America’s own strengths and weaknesses. This is something Roussinos does not provide. He is instead content to attribute America’s ills to its “civic religion of liberalism,” which has been with it from the beginning and is today manifesting itself in a disastrous foreign policy and the spectacle “of American states forming regional blocs to counteract the incompetence and total incapacity of its central government to save lives.” Roussinos believes that America is characterized by “its epidemics of death by drug overdose . . . its collapsing middle class, its worsening health outcomes and declining life expectancies, the capture of the state and economy by rapacious oligarchs, and . . . the occasional bouts of interethnic violence leading to demonstrations, riots and broader political dysfunction.” This analysis bears the mark of someone who has read what he is “supposed” to have read about America, but does not have much actual knowledge of the country. Our coronavirus response has been imperfect, and its deficiencies are not fully excused by the similar deficiencies seen in most other Western countries’ responses, nor by the fact that we are the West’s largest and most disparate nation. Yet it is a curious endemic flaw that takes more than two centuries of incredible prosperity and accomplishment to manifest fully, and does so by producing a decentralized response largely in keeping with the nation’s original design.  
 Indeed, the system that Roussinos derides as fatally flawed has given the United States “an economy [that] dwarfs that of any other nation, save China,” with an “empire [that] is still intact, and [a] military [that] spans the globe more powerfully than any single challenger,” as he himself admits. Whatever America’s flaws, its military power and economic might speak for themselves. Even manufacturing, the sector cited most frequently as damaged by globalization and Chinese competition, remains a considerable part of the American economy. And while the nation has serious economic and social problems, such as the opioid epidemic and the current racial tensions, it is nowhere near the postindustrial hellscape that Roussinos and those he cites seem to think it is. It still has ample resources to meet the very real challenges it faces. Roussinos is blinded by his (understandable and even somewhat merited) contempt for America’s governing class. America’s leaders can facilitate the nation’s greatness, but it has never entirely depended on them. For that matter, for as much widespread scorn as they rightfully attract, Roussinos is sometimes too hard on America’s elite — that is, when he is not citing former diplomats and professors who happen to agree with him: Only a couple of months ago, warning about dependence on China and the fragility of our supply chains, and urging decoupling from the aspiring hegemon, was viewed as the preserve of cranks of Right and Left, considered romantic at best and xenophobic at worst. When Trump urged the same thing for the United States, China’s autocrat Xi was treated to a standing ovation at Davos, and hailed as the new champion of the global liberal order. But now Larry Summers, the high priest of globalisation and of America’s offshoring to China, is warning us against fragile supply chains and the urgency of decoupling with no reference at all his long and glittering career midwifing this catastrophe. Later in the same piece, however, he muses that “it is hard to imagine an American governing class scandalised at calling Covid a Chinese virus waging an existential conflict against China to a successful conclusion.” If the people he considers the facilitators of China’s rise to prominence are capable of such an about-face, maybe others are as well? Indeed, from the very heart of the “blob,” courtesy of the American Enterprise Institute (where, full disclosure, I used to work), National Review itself has published Eberstadt and Blumenthal, who provide a more clear-headed analysis of the challenges China presents to the world order than Roussinos’s. Some of Roussinos’s misunderstandings proceed from a specific kind of analysis that, by its very nature, views America and its leaders in a harsher light than China and its leaders. It’s a kind of grudging admiration of totalitarian states, a longing for a system in which leaders needn’t let democratic niceties stop them from getting things done. You see this in his contempt for an electoral system that has produced a choice between “two gerontocrats of dubious mental acuity against each other,” a contest with echoes of “the late Soviet era, before the regime collapsed under its own absurdities.” You see it when he writes that: In a manner we can safely assume is not replicated in China, the architects of America’s endless policy failures, like the Iraq War, are not punished by the system, but awarded further sinecures and promotions by an establishment which rewards failure and hobbles success. Defeat is baked in from the outset: the rot is now so widespread it will likely become terminal. Yet Roussinos also asserts that “an America may throw up a more competent caudillo than Trump in time.” He seems to believe that America is simultaneously paralyzed by diffuse chaos and ripe for tyranny, hamstrung by its political system and yet already descended into a kind of despotism. The implication is that China does autocracy right, because its system has the functionality to clear out those who hamper its success. In fact, what Roussinos perceives as China’s strength could end up being a fatal defect, and what he perceives as America’s weakness is actually its strength.  The United States is a divided nation, though it has been even more divided before. It has made many mistakes recently, though it has made worse ones before. But the nation is stronger than its government; indeed, much of its prosperity results from the kind of entrepreneurial innovation that government is just as apt to stifle as to foster. America can react to errors, form a consensus about how to correct them, and, through that same government, put the resulting solutions into action. Indeed, there are signs that this may already be happening where China is concerned: Witness the otherwise unthinkable alliance between Senator Ted Cruz and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez against Beijing, reflective of broad bipartisan skepticism of Xi’s regime, which 72 percent of Republicans and 62 percent of Democrats oppose, according to a recent Pew poll.  China’s strength, meanwhile, is its main weakness: It is a totalitarian system. Its consensus is determined unilaterally without the consent of the governed, insulated from blowback and prone by design to groupthink. Its top-down decision-making process channels dissent into potentially even more destructive forms of discontent. Its regime’s success depends considerably on the stifling coercion of its own people, and mimicry of and theft from other nations. This can render it vulnerable both to unpredictability and to systemic errors, such as its one-child policy, its brutal suppression of restive ethnic and religious minorities, a foreign policy that has left it virtually without allies except those forced ruefully into financial reliance upon it, and a dependence upon ever-increasing material prosperity to keep its populace docile. The United States faces many challenges, China perhaps chief among them. But it has faced down other dangers before, under even more dire circumstances. Roussinos argues that America is now simply a “cautionary tale, a burning city on a hill,” and that the notion that it could be “a viable model of governance to follow is now patently absurd.” To write this is to be ignorant of all that our nation has achieved in its short history. It would be one thing to harp on America’s defects and to write it off as a lost cause. But Roussinos seems to place his hope in . . . Europe, with its “older traditions on which to draw.” Setting aside the historical problems of such a view, the idea that a Western order anchored on a continent with massive geopolitical challenges of its own — a continent that has been, if anything, even weaker than the U.S. in checking China’s ambitions — would do better than a Western order led by America is dubious at best.  Washington, and the West, do need to think seriously about the rise of China. But Roussinos should hope that the United States proves its doubters wrong once more. 

Contra Costa County in California updated its shelter-in-place orders yesterday. Residents of the county must keep the number of people in attendance at funerals to ten or fewer. Playgrounds, gym equipment, climbing walls, picnic areas, dog parks, pools, spas, and barbecue areas — prohibited outside of residences — will remain closed.  Also, residents of Contra Costa County may hold “protests of up to 100 people.” County lawmakers do not see any contradiction there.  

White House Economic Adviser Stephen Moore said Friday that the unexpectedly positive May jobs report makes approving a “phase four” coronavirus relief package unnecessary. “It takes a lot of the wind out of the sails of any phase four. We don’t need it now,” Moore said. “There’s no reason to have a major spending bill. The sense of urgent crisis is very greatly dissipated by the report,” he added.  The economy added 2.5 million jobs in May as states lifted lockdown and stay at home orders put in place to combat the spread of the coronavirus and businesses reopened, according to numbers released Friday by the Labor Department. The jump marks the largest jobs increase in the country in over 80 years. The jobless rate meanwhile sank to 13.3 percent, down from 14.7 percent in April.  Economists had projected another 8.33 million job losses and expected the unemployment rate to tick up to 19.5 percent, approaching Great Depression levels. The stock market soared following the release of the jobs numbers, the Dow Jones Industrial Average climbing 800 points by 11 a.m. on Friday. The federal government has approved $1.25 trillion in aid for the economy since the pandemic began, causing some economists to warn that the apparent recovery may be the result of government stimulus funding set to run out in the coming months. President Trump, who has predicted a speedy recovery since the beginning of the pandemic in March, when economic activity slowed to a crawl, hailed Friday’s jobs report as “outstanding” for the country.  The president added that the economy’s recovery would be a boon for race relations as the nation reels from protests and riots over the death of George Floyd, a black man who died in police custody after a white Minneapolis police officer knelt on his neck for about nine minutes, including after Floyd passed out. “It’s the greatest thing that can happen for race relations, for the African-American community, for the Asian American, for the Hispanic-American community, for women, for everything,” Trump said. “Because our country is so strong. And that’s what my plan is. We’re going to have the strongest economy in the world.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

As the stock market rallied in April and May, there was a great deal of handwringing about the apparent disconnect between financial markets and the real economy. With soaring unemployment claims and mass business closures, the S&P’s upward march appeared preposterous. “Have the Record Number of Investors in the Stock Market Lost Their Minds?” asked John Cassidy at The New Yorker. Cassidy and others attributed the rally to a spike in retail volume. People bored at home injected a bunch of “dumb money” into the market, pushing up the prices of high-profile tech stocks like Tesla.  Seasoned market hands suggested the rally was driven by irrational exuberance. Legendary macro investor Stanley Druckenmiller said that “the risk-reward for equity is maybe as bad as I’ve seen it in my career,” and Warren Buffett sold stocks during the rally in April. One theory was the financial markets had become disconnected from the real economy entirely. Tech stock have led market returns for years, and a consumer at home is still a consumer. He still makes Amazon orders and goes on Facebook, and the congressional stimulus drove incomes up during the economic shutdowns, so socially distanced consumers still had money to spend. Meanwhile, the Fed’s massive bond-buying program shored up corporate balance sheets, even for some risky high-yield companies. These lending facilities precluded the mass bankruptcies that some market watchers had predicted. Loan programs also buoyed employment. As of May 30, banks had disbursed $510 billion in loans as part of the Paycheck Protection Program. Companies receiving PPP loans are required to spend 75 percent of the funds on payroll, and qualify for loan forgiveness if they retain 90 percent of their workers. The Fed’s corporate-lending facilities include similar provisions on workforce retention.   Which brings us to today’s Bureau of Labor Statistics employment report showing a 2.5 million increase in jobs. Given the unprecedented stimulus, it makes sense that employment did not continue to nosedive. But it wasn’t just the government bolstering the economy. As states reopened in May, temporarily furloughed leisure and hospitality workers went back to work. It remains to be seen whether the summer will bring more good news. The pandemic could very well alter consumption patterns, and loan forbearance has generated a short-term liability overhang that could put a drag on economic growth. But the past few months have shown that markets are smart.  

Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer violated her own executive order on social distancing while participating in a civil rights march with hundreds of demonstrators. Whitmer’s order, which she signed on Monday, states that participants in public gatherings should remain six feet apart at all times. “The governor took precautions for engaging in an outdoor activity, including wearing a mask even though it is not required outdoors under the order,” Whitmer spokeswoman Tiffany Brown told the Detroit News. Brown said Whitmer did not violate the order, which states “Nothing in this order shall be taken to abridge protections guaranteed by the state or federal constitution,” including the right to protest.  However, an FAQ page on the Michigan state government website states, “Persons may engage in expressive activities protected by the First Amendment within the State of Michigan, but must adhere to social distancing measures recommended by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, including remaining at least six feet from people from outside the person’s household.” Whitmer drew national scrutiny in March for imposing some of the strictest lockdown measures in the country, including prohibitions against the purchasing of certain consumer goods in big box stores. In April, Whitmer compared anti-lockdown protesters to Americans who refused to work in factories during the World War II production effort.  Whitmer also faced backlash from constituents after her husband, Marc Mallory, allegedly tried to use her position to coerce a marina worker into putting their boat in the water ahead of Memorial Day weekend, rather than waiting in the queue.  “I am the husband to the governor, will this make a difference?” Mallory asked when Dowker said it wouldn’t be possible to put out the boat by Memorial Day, according to a since-deleted Facebook post by dock owner Todd Dowker. Whitmer described her husband’s statement as a “failed attempt at humor.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Nearly all colleges sent students home back in March, and the big question they now face is whether to resume normal operations in August. Quite a few voices have argued that it’s just too risky to do so. College leaders who reopen will be responsible for a lot of illness and death. Do the safe thing — stay closed. Taking the opposite side in this argument is professor Rob Jenkins. In today’s Martin Center article, he argues in favor of reopening, with sensible precautions. Responding to the “Don’t Reopen!” crowd, Jenkins writes: Attempts to portray those of us who favor reopening as insensitive, uncaring, or mercenary are uncivil and unjust. We, too, are concerned about students and others on campus, not just in the short term but also over the long haul. We believe the health — nay, the very survival — of our campuses is vital to the long-term health and well-being of all concerned. Jenkins points out that COVID-19 poses minimal risk for most people in the age range we find on college campuses. Older faculty and staff can be protected against possible exposure. And what if colleges stay closed? Many won’t survive much longer. Continuing with online courses won’t do. Jenkins writes: Those who think we can simply hold all our classes online again this fall are deluding themselves. Students tolerated that in the spring because they had to. But study after study shows that a clear majority favor returning to campus; short of that, many do not intend to return at all. Can our campuses survive that intact? Can our higher education system? Can our students?  

The unemployment rate dropped over the past month as the economy added 2.5 million jobs, defying predictions of additional layoffs in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Unemployment now sits at 13.3 percent, falling from 14.7 percent in April. Many economists had expected the unemployment rate to reach 20 percent or higher.  The Bureau of Labor Statistics said that the unemployment rate fell partly because states have begun to reopen businesses that were shuttered to enforce social distancing measures. Businesses that saw job gains included restaurants, construction, healthcare and retail, while airline and hotel jobs continued to fall. The job numbers report the largest monthly increase in employment since 1939. It “suggests that the US economy is more resilient than expected,” Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors, told CNBC. “Barring a second surge of Covid-19, the overall U.S. economy may have turned a corner, as evidenced by the surprise job gains today, even though it still remains to be seen exactly what the new normal will look like,” said Citizens Bank head of global markets Tony Bedikian.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A New York judge has ruled that looters and peaceful protesters who violate curfew may be detained by police for more than 24 hours even if they are not arraigned before a court, citing the coronavirus pandemic and current civil unrest in New York City. New York law typically requires that arrested suspects be released if they cannot be arraigned within 24 hours. Because of the pandemic, New York courts must hold arraignments via video conference. Holding facilities in New York City have seen a sharp increase in suspects arrested either for looting or peacefully protesting after an 8 p.m. curfew, and the legal system has been unable to speedily process their arraignments.  “I…find that there is a crisis within a crisis specifically a civil unrest crisis within the overarching COVID-19 crisis,” acting Manhattan Supreme Court Justice James Burke said at a hearing on Thursday. “To that end, the entire police department has been deployed and the entire Manhattan DA’s office is ‘all hands on deck’ and working to relieve the system.” Burke said that delays in processing arraignments were justified given the dual crises. “The NYPD has no excuses with its 38,000 police officers and the best technology in the world, with all the money they are being given, they have no excuse to not process them in a timely manner,” countered Marlen Bodden, an attorney for the group Legal Aid that had petitioned for the release of suspects in George Floyd demonstrations. Over the past week, looters have taken advantage of the demonstrations to pillage stores in various New York City neighborhoods, with some concentrating on the wealthy neighborhoods of Soho and Midtown Manhattan.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					N
				ever trust a socialist. And never trust an idiot. But never, never, never trust a socialist who is such an idiot that he seems harmless. Nicolás Maduro is the paradigm: A guy who is allergic to big books and claims that Chávez talks to him through a little bird (as Maduro himself claimed) seemed too dumb to be dangerous. But years go by, and in the Helicoide prison in Caracas, opposition leaders are still tortured with electric shocks to the testicles.  In Spain, the social-Communist government of Sánchez-Iglesias has yet to send dissident citizens to prison, but it is treating them with (figuratively speaking, thank God) extended electroshock therapy to the balls. The coronavirus is of Communist origin. Perhaps that is why it immediately allied itself with the Spanish government. Under the pretext of national security, the government has kept Spain in an unnecessary and illegitimate state of alarm for months, an exceptional arrangement allowed by our Constitution that permits the extreme and arbitrary limitation of fundamental rights and freedoms. It cannot be denied that the government is working hard on this pandemic. In fact, it would be better if they would just stay put for at least five minutes. Every day new measures are taken: They have a problem for every solution! The recent approval of a guaranteed minimum income seems destined to discourage employment, encourage fraud, and feed the underground economy. As if that were not enough, they have announced the repeal of the labor reform with which former president Mariano Rajoy managed to save the Spanish economy. Pablo Iglesias, the second deputy prime minister, before he even dreamed of coming to power, when he was nothing but a loudspeaker for Chávez, used to say in his university that only by taking advantage of an exceptional situation will Communists rise to power in Spain. And that situation is the pandemic. Well, the pandemic, and Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez. When the first State of Alarm was declared, in March this year, Sánchez showed his true colors, taking advantage and modifying the National Intelligence Center (CNI) laws to allow Iglesias a seat on the supervisory body of the Spanish espionage service. It seems unlikely that the plan was to spy on a coronavirus. So we can conclude that Iglesias demanded that Sánchez let him into the CNI. (What self-respecting Communist doesn’t have secret services?) After all, Iglesias had previously requested control of the Spanish public television station, TVE, which has subsequently become such an immense propaganda machine that it makes Fidel Castro’s six-hour speeches on Cuban TV look like child’s play. Socialists think they are talented in the art of propaganda until they put a Communist in the cabinet and let him play with his junk for a while. In Spain, silent coup-makers don’t leave loose ends. They put the director of a socialist magazine in charge of the government’s Center of Sociological Investigation (CIS) and published a study claiming that eight out of ten Spaniards want the other parties to praise the current government for everything and avoid issuing any kind of criticism. And we should probably be grateful that our government is a modest one and that it was not actually 15 out of ten Spaniards wanting to dissolve all political opposition. They also use the CIS to advance their totalitarian obsession. A month ago, a CIS survey by the highest sociological authority of the Government of Spain included a question that was quite the Communist manifesto: Do you think that in these times, the dissemination of fake news, misleading and unsubstantiated information on social networks and media should be prohibited, with all information about the pandemic coming from official sources, or do you think that total freedom should be maintained for the dissemination of news and information? While Trump is trying to ensure social networks’ political neutrality, Sánchez and Iglesias are working hard to avoid social-network neutrality. Recently, in a controversial government press conference, the head of the Civil Guard said that the police were working on the Internet to “minimize the adverse climate toward the government’s management of the crisis.” One of Sánchez’s ministers said the same thing a few days later on Spanish public television: “We cannot accept negative messages.” That day also saw the launch of a campaign against the two main opposition parties, PP and VOX. The government is using the same tactic that Maduro used in Venezuela: They claim that the opposition, in this case VOX, is preparing a coup d’état. But what is it that bothers the Sánchez administration so much about criticism in general and social networks in particular? The gradual leaking of documents proving their incompetence and negligence in the face of the coronavirus crisis — the reason that relatives of some victims are trying to hold the government accountable in court. Let me pause briefly here to highlight three dates:  
 On February 10, the Centre for the Coordination of Health Alerts and Emergencies gave the government a report warning of the deadly spread of the coronavirus.   On March 8, the government encouraged massive feminist rallies throughout the country. On March 14, the Spanish government declared the State of Alarm. Might they have concealed the alert of February 10 because the upcoming feminist demonstrations on March 8 were central to their political agenda? They did not want to suspend them, even though chaos was already breaking out inside hospitals. Just 24 hours earlier, on February 9, the top government official in charge of health alerts had told reporters with a chuckle: “If my son asks me if he can go to the March 8 rally, I’ll tell him to do whatever he wants.” Meanwhile, Carmen Calvo, the first deputy prime minister, accidentally told the truth. Encouraging women to participate in the feminist marches, she exclaimed, “You must go to the march, it’s your life on the line!” And indeed, 239,000 infected with COVID-19 and more than 27,000 deaths give us reason to suspect that yes, their lives were “on the line.” The minister of equality, Irene Montero, is Pablo Iglesias’s wife, and I’m not suggesting that the two facts are related. In a TV appearance before the demonstration, Montero endorsed a strange March 8 slogan for female empowerment: “Alone and drunk, I want to get home.” But I suspect that if you’re out drinking, going home alone is the last thing on your mind. Anyway, after seeing that all the government ministers who participated in the March 8 rallies tested positive for the coronavirus, Twitter rehashed the slogan: “Alone, drunk, and with coronavirus, I want to get home.” By the way, “borracha” (drunk) and “casa” (home) rhymes in Spanish, although it is the sort of rhyme that Hunter Biden could write at dawn, floating through the front door on the fumes from his night on the town.   In the end, the problem with the Left is that they spend the day talking about conscience — environmental, class, race, gender — but they lack an individual conscience of their own, having bent it to fit their principles, which you can read, if you were so inclined, on any blank sheet of paper. This makes lying easy for them. It doesn’t weigh too heavily on their conscience, because, for leftists, the ends always justifies the means. We are seeing proof of this once again with the radical Left’s instigation of violence in protests and riots across the United States, and the moderate left’s justification of the violence. They are two sides of the same coin. They each need the other. Spain today is governed by a man who seems dangerously aroused by power — like a mixture of the Marquis de Sade and the World Cup winner Diego Armando Maradona. Sánchez’s first scandal was using a private ministerial Falcon jet to attend his favorite music festival. His only reasonable line of defense would have been to push the fact that the festival wasn’t bloody reggaeton, but for reasons I can’t quite grasp, it’s the only defense he didn’t use. When the opposition asked him for detailed information about this blatant waste of public funds, the government, without so much as blushing, declared that the trip was an “official secret.”  And that is the sum of Pedro Sánchez’s political credo. The rest is empty. This is someone who has probably never read a lengthy book in his life. So it is the Communist Iglesias who fills the gap, as I explained in another article in these pages — Spaniards are suffering a government that we did not vote for. Unlike Sánchez, Iglesias does have something in the space between his ears. The bad news is that that “something” is sinister. Sánchez, who plagiarized his doctoral thesis to obtain a cum laude, is known over here as Dr. Fraud or President “Cum Fraude.” To list his lies would take hundreds of pages. It is easier to talk about the one time he told the truth. It was when he returned to politics in 2015, after being kicked out of his own party for trying to rig the primaries: He told the newspaper El Mundo, “I’ve returned to politics to shake things up.” And indeed, he is causing more havoc than a monkey with a gun at a party for gas canisters.  As I write these lines, Sánchez is addressing the nation. He does it every weekend at news time. Here they already call it “Aló Presidente,” in reference to the propaganda program with which Chávez tortured Venezuelan viewers for hours every Sunday. Sánchez is announcing that he wants to extend the State of Alarm until June 21 — for our security, he says, trying once again to make his audience believe that the State of Alarm has something to do with health measures against the pandemic. On hearing this, I’m reminded of something H. L. Mencken said that, in light of what we’ve seen, seems to be a prophecy regarding the Spanish government: “The whole aim of practical politics is to keep the populace alarmed (and hence clamorous to be led to safety) by an endless series of hobgoblins, most of them imaginary.” Translated by Joel Dalmau 

1. Diverse religious groups, 76 Members of Congress and 16 States support foster families at the High Court 2. WSJ: Child-Abuse Reports Are Falling, and That’s Bad News for Children 3. This is courage.https://t.co/Z7r5ynMpdW — Jillian Kay Melchior (@JillianKayM) June 4, 2020  4. Mississippi pastor: My Church was burned down because we want to worship in person: On Easter Sunday, police officers with the city of Holly Springs interrupted our service and issued me a citation for violating an unconstitutional stay at home order. Ten days later, our peaceful Bible study was shut down although we were following all social distancing guidelines. But the nightmare wasn’t over. Last Wednesday, someone burned down our church, leaving only a smoldering mass of debris and our dreams. They left graffiti, trying to shame us for worshiping together in our church. 5. Sohrab Ahmari: Worse than war: My night besieged by looters and thugs in NYC 6. Bill Legalizing Assisted Suicide Remains Dangerous, Targets the Vulnerable: Anita Cameron, Director of Minority Outreach for Not Dead Yet, said “I am utterly disgusted that as COVID-19 ravages the Black community due to the results of racial disparities in healthcare, the Public Health Committee has decided to try to slip this bill through. COVID-19 has disproportionately affected the Black community; we are dying at frightening rates. This bill promotes death over life, and by pushing it, the legislature is sending a clear message to us Blacks that we are burdens and should die by suicide.” 7. Crux: Syrian archbishop says he can still find happiness, despite destruction 8. WSJ: Save Your Kids From Covid’s Digital Deluge  9. How one Catholic priest responded to the ’92 LA riots  10. Crux: London archbishop says opening churches a matter of ‘basic equality’: For Catholics, access to church buildings is spiritually essential, something recognized by other governments internationally. Respectfully, I believe that it is now time for churches to be allowed to open for individual visits for private prayer — Archbishop John Wilson of Southwark, in a letter to Prime Minister Boris Johnson 11. Charlie Camosy talks to Shannon Bream about our throwaway society 12. In northern Iraq, hope that the pandemic will boost spirit of love 13. Lyman Stone: The Rise of Childless America 14. The Dispatch: Ben’s Chili Bowl Founder on Civil Unrest— in 1968 and Today: When I see what’s going on today—and I so appreciate those demonstrators and those protesters that do that peacefully—but I get very upset with the agitators that create the problems and cause the violence and the looting and all of that,” she said with force. “We definitely should not destroy our communities and our neighborhoods. For me, that’s just not the way to go.” 15. Can incense at church help in Coronavirus times? 16. Wall Street Journal: Last Person to Receive Civil War-Era Pension Dies  17. Amid coronavirus, new parents face scary choices. Expanded family leave could ease fears.  18. Karen MacPherson: How to encourage teenagers— especially boys— to read this summer 19. How Shakespeare Paperbacks Made Me Want to Be a Writer 20. What does it require to build a common life of shared dignity and friendship? Does the church, specifically, have anything to say or do? Please join us tomorrow from 7 to 8 p.m. ET for a conversation exploring old and new questions.  Register today: https://t.co/nnzqIw4bcl pic.twitter.com/K5lcksN9l5 — Breaking Ground (@BrkngGround) June 3, 2020     

Amid all the momentous events that have defined the coronavirus pandemic, the decision by both the Trump administration and, in near-unanimous votes, both houses of Congress to institute a “stimulus” program — an element of which amounts to a de facto universal basic income (UBI) — is perhaps the least appreciated.  Paying individuals a flat check of $1,200, is, effectively, a one-time UBI. Legislators are already considering a second round. The long-term import of this is significant. At a time when the two parties can agree on almost nothing, they came together to support a policy that up until recently was restricted largely (but certainly not exclusively) to the Silicon Valley Left. Watching this go through brought to mind Rudyard Kipling’s 1919 poem “The Gods of the Copybook Headings.” Kipling contrasts the Gods of the Marketplace, meaning the socially acceptable wishful thinking, with the Gods of the Copybook Headings, who remind us of the eternal truths we routinely abandon for a more fashionable pantheon. He concludes with these lines: And that after this is accomplished, and the brave new world begins
When all men are paid for existing and no man must pay for his sins,
As surely as Water will wet us, as surely as Fire will burn,
The Gods of the Copybook Headings with terror and slaughter return! Sound familiar? In a few short months, we went from UBI (the idea of giving almost every adult citizen a check) being an idea favored only at the margins to its being the official policy of a Republican administration backed by a Republican-controlled Senate. The counterargument is clear. These are extreme times. This is not UBI but merely a temporary support measure for working families in exceptional circumstances. It is an argument that might have more force had not conservative political parties in the Western world found it so difficult to rein in an expanding welfare state that can no longer be afforded, something that became all too obvious in the battles over “austerity” after the European debt crisis.  
 Since America’s current “UBI” was promoted as an essential element in a stimulus program, it seems reasonable to assume that, whatever is being said to the contrary, it will be more difficult to end it until the economy gets strong enough to no longer need stimulus. The list of temporary spending programs instituted during a crisis but later discontinued is distressingly short.  Fearing the electoral consequences of challenging this regime, many conservative parties of the Western world seem to have given up on the task of decreasing the size of government. In the United Kingdom, Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s Conservative Party has made protecting the U.K.’s public health-care system one of the cornerstones of his government. The Trump administration has signed relief plans totaling over $2 trillion, in an environment where were already spending $4.45 trillion a year. The small-government that once defined conservative politics appears to have fallen out of fashion.  “UBI” programs such as the individual $1,200 checks are simply the next step in the evolution of the welfare state. The preexisting welfare systems (whatever their faults) are designed to act as safety nets, but the checks in this case are universal — they go to people who haven’t fallen into the safety net as well as to those who have. It isn’t an unemployment benefit, federal jobs guarantee, work-for-welfare regime, or any other welfare system. Those at least maintain the pretense of encouraging the recipient to be self-reliant.  An expansion of the welfare state of the type represented by these checks would have once kept conservatives awake at night. But we’d put our emphasis on the “used to,” as conservative parties have been on their current path for years; it just took an excuse, provided now by the pandemic and accompanying shutdowns, to push them off the cliff. We might look back on the societal consequences of the pandemic not as revolutionary but as acceleratory. Unfortunately, we have been doing the bidding of Kipling’s Gods of the Marketplace for quite some time now, by acting as though we can infinitely expand the federal government and suffer no consequences. Had the Western world not abused monetary and fiscal policy during our past crises and recoveries, we would have had more margin, more room for error in dealing with this one. But we treated peacetime like wartime, and now that a true war is here, we find our swords are dull.  The United States is straining against the limits of sound policy and relying on the credulity of bond investors after decades of growth of the federal government in a way and to a size that now threatens our fiscal stability. Even if this first draft of UBI does not last past the pandemic, the Trump administration has normalized the practice of giving every American a check solely for existing. Don’t be surprised if 2022 and 2024 feature politicians far more prominent than former Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang running campaigns on Universal Basic Income.  If a Republican president can do it, why not a Democratic one?  A pandemic should prompt some introspection, if nothing else. While it is far from clear how things will turn out and how severe the consequences of our policies will be, the coronavirus and its repercussions have demonstrated once again that we are not invincible. The laws of economics are not suspended just because there’s a crisis. Jerry Bowyer is the president of Bowyer Research and editor of Townhall Finance. Charles Bowyer is a risk analyst for Bowyer Research and a writer for Townhall Finance. 

Ramesh alluded to an open letter signed by over 1,000 “public health professionals, infectious diseases professionals, and community stakeholders.” The letter argues that it’s okay if the current protests/riots spread COVID-19 because racism is itself a public-health issue that needs to be addressed. Let’s take that argument seriously for a moment and ask a follow-up question: Why, then, was there so much criticism of the anti-lockdown protests? The premise of those protests was that continuing lockdowns caused far more economic damage than was necessary. If anything is a public-health issue, surely record unemployment, social isolation, and bans on people going to hospitals for non-urgent care should count. Well, here is how the letter distinguishes between anti-racism protests and anti-lockdown protests: . . . [W]e do not condemn these [anti-racism] gatherings as risky for COVID-19 transmission. We support them as vital to the national public health and to the threatened health specifically of Black people in the United States . . . . This should not be confused with a permissive stance on all gatherings, particularly protests against stay-home orders. Those actions not only oppose public health interventions, but are also rooted in white nationalism and run contrary to respect for Black lives. It’s difficult to understand how any reasonable person could have committed those words to print. Even just, “Yeah, we’re hypocrites, so what?” would have been a more satisfying response. Ironically, the signatories do say they have “privately mourned the widening rift between leaders in science and a subset of the communities that they serve.” That rift is now a chasm. If these leaders do have any real expertise, how sad that it’s been lost within the all-consuming political correctness of our age.  

Religious leaders in Madison, Wis., have written to local officials, calling its reopening policy unconstitutional and a “discriminatory restriction.” The letter asks that the City of Madison and Dane County COVID-19 regulations be revised to apply to houses of worship the same way they apply to other organizations and businesses. In a letter on behalf of the Catholic Diocese of Madison, several attorneys outline how local authorities are applying reopening rules unequally in the wake of COVID-19 shutdowns, targeting places of worship with stricter policies than those applied to other public activities. This, they argue, “treats religious interests unequally and unfairly.” The letter notes that the local reopening plan subjects “the routine operations of houses of worship—and of no other category of organization—to a ‘Mass Gathering’ limit of 50 persons.” Meanwhile, retail stores, shopping malls, restaurants, bars, offices, factories, gyms, salons, tattoo parlors, spas, dog parks, contact sports, trampoline parks, movie theaters, museums, hotels, community centers, car washes—the list goes on—are all permitted to open and conduct “everyday operations” at 25 percent of their certified occupancy but without a generally applicable and blanket numerical cap. In an initial emergency order, city officials treated religious groups in the same way as other essential businesses, declaring that “faithbased services, religious entities, and places of worship (indoor)” would be permitted to operate at 25-percent capacity. But shortly thereafter, President Trump called on state and local governments to permit houses of worship to begin reopening. “Later that afternoon,” the letter continues, “in a seemingly targeted and hostile response to the Federal government’s calls for religious equality, [officials] abruptly reversed course and ‘revised’ the Forward Dane plan to cap all religious gatherings at 50 persons with future limits ‘to be determined.’” Despite the fact that the local Catholic diocese released detailed plans for conducting church services at 25 percent capacity — allowing for groups larger than 50 people in the diocese’s larger churches — and enforcing social-distancing measures, the city continues to impose unnecessary restrictions by designating every worship service a “mass gathering.” Officials have gone as far as calling church leaders directly, threatening to send officers to monitor compliance with the regulation and hand out citations for violations.  “Thousands of people may shop together at a mall; hundreds of employees may arrive at an office or factory every morning to conduct the business’s everyday operations; and hundreds of children may spend a few hours bouncing off each other at trampoline parks. But, because religious services have uniformly been deemed ‘Mass Gatherings,’ no more than 50 of the 1,225 seats in Saint Maria Goretti Church may be filled,” the letter states.  

New York City mayor Bill de Blasio has become a convenient punching bag for both the Right and the Left. But if nothing else, de Blasio deserves credit for candor in offering an explanation for a glaring contradiction in his enforcement of coronavirus pandemic restrictions. The mayor has been a zealous enforcer of lockdown regulations, with a particular emphasis on targeting ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities in Brooklyn. Though Jews were far from the only ones accused of violating social-distancing rules, in April de Blasio tweeted out a warning to “the Jewish community” in which he threatened to send the police to arrest all those who gathered in groups, a reference to instances of Jews attending weddings, funerals, and religious services.  After several days of mass protests against police brutality (with some simply supporting the abolition of police), followed by nights in which crowds of rioters rampaged through parts of the city looting iconic stores, such as the Macy’s in Herald Square, it was clear that stopping people from gathering “in large numbers” was no longer a priority. Yet even as the NYPD stood by as huge crowds marched against racism, the police were rousting Orthodox families out of Brooklyn parks and breaking up religious study sessions that were not in compliance with social-distancing regulations. On Tuesday, a reporter for Hamodia, an ultra-Orthodox Jewish publication, asked de Blasio about this discrepancy. His reply spoke volumes about liberal contempt for religious freedom.  The reporter asked how it was possible for the city to tolerate mass demonstrations over George Floyd’s murder when the police were still enforcing pandemic restrictions on small businesses as well as churches, synagogues, and mosques.  
 The mayor’s answer was that “the extraordinary crisis seated in 400 years of racism” was “not the same question as the understandably aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person who wants to go back to services.” In other words, because he approved of the motives of some protesters and of the content of their protest, their demonstrations are uniquely privileged in a way that those seeking to exercise their right to religious liberty were not. While de Blasio was more outspoken about this policy, his pronouncement appeared to reflect the way other states and cities were prepared to wink at protests against the police while insisting on pretending that the pandemic prevented other activities. Perhaps this is just a function of the identity politics that governs many on the left, or the plain fact that cities and states don’t have the ability to enforce the law, let alone pandemic restrictions, when so many people are determined to ignore them.   But coming as it did just a few days after the Supreme Court case of South Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Gavin Newsom, Governor of California, in which Chief Justice John Roberts joined with the court’s four liberal members to rule that California’s restrictions on religious services during the COVID-19 outbreak were not unconstitutional, it seems like a bad joke. There, the majority held that the Constitution gives officials of the states the duty “to guard and protect” the “safety and the health of the people,” meaning California had the right to issue pandemic restrictions on houses of worship and other mass gatherings alike. Then, Roberts wrote that “similar or more severe restrictions” as those applied to churches “apply to comparable secular gatherings.” Only a few days later, the same mainstream media and governmental-establishment consensus that viewed religious services and other public gatherings during a pandemic as irresponsible has disappeared. The brutal killing of George Floyd rightly outraged most Americans. But lost amid the debate is the question of whether selective enforcement of the law has fundamentally undermined religious liberty.  Mayor de Blasio’s blithe assertion that he has the right to pick and choose which kinds of constitutionally protected behavior to respect and which he may trample may have been unique in its candor. But it is indicative of the way states and cities are treating the issue. If some citizens can break pandemic rules with impunity because they are protesting racism while others can have their right to worship or to go to work taken away by the government because of fears about the spread of disease, that is more than merely a legal conundrum or hypocrisy. It is a sign that big-government liberals view respect for basic constitutional freedoms as dependent on whether they approve of the intent of those seeking to exercise their rights. It’s one thing if supermarkets are allowed to stay open while churches or synagogues are not. It’s quite another when the right to freely assemble to allege that America is a racist nation is considered more important than upholding the First Amendment rights of other Americans to practice their faith or to express opinions that are not favored by the editors of the New York Times.  There’s no real debate in this country about whether George Floyd’s murderer should be punished. But if coronavirus restrictions don’t apply to the right of one group to assemble — peacefully or not — how can they legally, logically, or morally be imposed on others who want to exercise the same right? They can’t. If states and municipalities are going to turn a blind eye to the way mass gatherings of people with fashionable opinions violate pandemic restrictions, then they must also drop their efforts to restrict religious services and other constitutionally protected activities. This selective enforcement as well as the seeming inability of our leaders to defend the lives and property of citizens is the death of the rule of law and faith in our democratic institutions. Editor’s Note: This article originally claimed that California had prohibited religious gatherings entirely. In fact it has imposed capacity restrictions on religious gatherings. 

If a vaccine is ever developed for COVID-19, it looks like we are going to have one hell of a fight in this country over whether the inoculation should be made mandatory. A New York State Bar Committee just issued a report recommending that the influential legal organization endorse passing laws forcing everyone in the country — unless medically inappropriate — to receive the vaccine regardless of their own desires. From the Law.com story: Citing a robust collection of federal and state case law, a New York State Bar Association task-force group on Thursday said it should be mandatory for all Americans to have a COVID-19 vaccination, when one is available, including those who won’t want it for “religious, philosophical or personal reasons.” . . . Making a legally backed argument on pages 60-63 of a newly released report on the “unique” legal and ethical issues brought forward by the global pandemic, the Health Law Section of the bar association writes that “some Americans may push back on the COVID-19 vaccination for religious, philosophical or personal reasons,” but “for the sake of public health, mandatory vaccinations for COVID-19 should be required in the United States as soon as it is available.” “Mandatory vaccinations are supported by the authority of the state police power when the vaccinations are necessary to protect the health of the community,” the group writes in the report, while citing the 1905 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Jacobson v. Massachusetts. I wish I could report that the committee’s opinion was a fringe idea. President Trump wants any vaccine to be voluntary. But mandating the vaccine seems to be gaining significant establishment traction.  Alan Dershowitz also supports such an authoritarian move, on the basis of Jacobson. (The case is not nearly as sweeping as some suggest, involving the city of Cambridge and smallpox — which had a 30 percent mortality rate for adults and 80 percent for children!)  Joe Biden’s chief health-care adviser — and potential secretary of health and human services — has not taken a position on this issue of which I am aware. But it is easy to predict his likely take. He has opined that all children should be required by law to receive a flu shot every year (also citing Jacobson) and that everyone should be forced now to wear a mask. Other notable bioethicists have similarly argued that we should be forced to use a contact-tracing phone app and receive a COVID jab. This idea seems unprecedented. There is no law requiring all adults to be vaccinated against any disease. And even a health emergency does not just allow the government to enact any law it wants. Laws have to be reasonable. I think that courts would be loath to force 330 million people to be vaccinated when we know that those at most risk are the frail elderly and those with comorbidities, people we can protect with proper distancing and hygiene practices, not to mention the vaccine if one is developed.  Moreover, is it reasonable to force everyone in Montana or South Dakota — where the damage from the illness has been low — to receive a vaccination because New York and New Jersey suffered a catastrophe (in part, because their governors forced nursing homes to accept infected patients)? I doubt the people in those states would think so. Technocrats sure do love their mandates. If the vaccine comes, I have little doubt that powerful forces will work very hard to make it mandatory, creating another issue perfectly positioned to tear us apart.  

Anonymous members of New Jersey’s Pandemic Response Team have sent a letter to state lawmakers to inform them that Governor Phil Murphy and Health Commissioner Judith Persichilli have ignored expert advice in dealing with coronavirus, especially in handling the state’s nursing homes. In the letter, which was leaked to NJ Advance Media, the whistleblowers allege that Murphy’s administration has refused to consult the science to make policy decisions, and is instead “making things up as they proceed, or making decisions and justifying them on the back end.” Murphy has decided “to open several aspects of the economy without the data to back it up,” the health officials state.  They also claim that Persichilli and “members of the Governor’s cabinet” ignored their warnings about protecting the state’s vulnerable population in nursing homes with widespread testing. “To completely ignore long-term care testing until late April, when at that point, tens of thousands of tests had been offered to only mildly symptomatic New Jersey residents (again, remember that one has to be well enough to drive or be in a car to get the test at these centers), is a clear failure,” they write. The letter slams the administration’s directive for nursing homes to allow Covid patients to return regardless of whether they were still infectious, saying the decision-making ultimately led to “preventable deaths.”  “Very few of these nursing homes were tangibly ready to take these residents back based on the Commissioner’s criteria because the state failed to allocate enough PPE and staffing resources to them to do so,” they explained.  Nearly 6,000 residents of New Jersey facilities died from the virus — nearly half of the state’s coronavirus deaths. The situation mirrors that of New York, where Governor Andrew Cuomo has been criticized for a similar policy. Murphy responded to news of the letter by saying he had “no time for that.” The New Jersey Ethics Commission has opened an investigation into leaks after documents were leaked to NJ Advance Media showing that nursing homes had shortages of personal protective equipment.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A boy in my neighborhood committed suicide a few weeks ago. It’s possible that the teen’s preexisting problems were exacerbated by the seclusion, tediousness, and helplessness of a national lockdown. Maybe not. I didn’t really know him. I do know that locals were forced to pay respects by sitting parked cars in the local Catholic church’s parking lot. Friends of the devastated family couldn’t hug the aggrieved parents. They couldn’t enter the church and pray together for their community. Scenes like this play out across the country.  At first, most Americans self-quarantined without being forced because, in large part, we’re a conscientious people and the argument for flattening the curve was a rational one. Soon, however, we were being told that wandering into the non-essential part of a local grocery store to buy vegetable seeds put every American life in mortal danger. Irrational and platitudinous arguments — “If we can save one life, we should!” — began making an appearance. Next we were being forced to comply with the diktats of mayors and governors. No legislatures. No votes. No questions. Those who spoke up were stifled by social media or smeared by normal media as a death cult — even as virtually every prediction offered by alleged experts and journalists about the consequences of reopening turned out to be wrong. I’ve yet to hear a coherent explanation as to why a governor can act like a dictator over 100,000 deaths, but not 60,000 or 30,000 or 5,000?  Last week, the media, politicians, and many experts decided that every argument they made for destroying the lives of millions of people in America could be deferred to advance a preferred political cause. It is worth remembering that the same people who now claim that clearing out Lafayette Park is tantamount to the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre were championing the closing down of churches across the entire country only a week ago. Not a single governor or mayor has tried to shut down protests themselves, even though BLM marchers are breaking the very edicts they signed. Nay, many of these officials march themselves, and invite others to participate. The despicable mayor of New York who threatened to sic the police on a dozen peaceful Yeshiva students only a couple of weeks ago now invites people to march by thousands.  Indeed, the same politicians who destroyed your business and livelihood — and the pundits and reporters who called you murderers for wanting to save it — are now making value judgments on when and where you should be allowed to practice your freedoms. By fiat, they decide who has rights based on skin color or ideology, and who is not worthy of them. It is a massive scandal.  

Willingly, most nations in the West entered into a kind of voluntary home imprisonment in March. The term for it was “lockdown.” Normally a lockdown is used to end a prison riot. But in this global pandemic, the Western world is going through the reverse process. Mass protests against American police brutality and racism have erupted in Dublin, London, and Paris. London and Paris have already seen riotous scenes. Downing Street is being trashed in daylight as I write. This is happening despite social-distancing guidelines and lockdown measures that are stricter and more punitively enforced than those in the United States. Boris Johnson’s government has reaffirmed the right to protest, while cautioning that protesters must still adhere to the pandemic-control guidelines, which limit public group gatherings to six people. In Ireland, such gatherings are legally limited to four people. Yet thousands-strong crowds persist in both cities.  The spectacle would be hard to put into a novel: Huge throngs of protesters chanting “I can’t breathe” during a global pandemic that targets the human respiratory system. It’s not enough to say that American politics have gone global. Just as an astonishing amount of entertainment media from America is pumped abroad, an astounding amount of foreign news media is little more than rewrites of American media. But that doesn’t explain the global protests and riots. The first thing to note is the mind-bending surreality of it all. After months of hysterical denunciations of beachgoers, parkgoers, churchgoers, and conservative protesters, suddenly governors and even epidemiologists are endorsing mass gatherings that go against the current strictures they imposed on the rest of us. The strictures, which prohibited not just normal business but also weddings and funerals, are dismissed as merely the denial of a hairdresser appointment. Want to hold an Orthodox Jewish prayer service in Brooklyn? Mayor Bill de Blasio will bring the police crashing down on you. But his own daughter is out there at the much larger George Floyd protests.   The second and perhaps more important thing to note is that it’s now abundantly clear the lockdowns created a giant social vacuum. Many people trapped in this vacuum are suffering. Anecdotally, my EMT friends in New York say they are responding to many more times the calls for suicide and overdoses now than for COVID-19. But our streets suffer from the social vacuum as well. 
 Left-wing writers belittled lockdown protesters in Marxoid terms: as tyrannical agents of capital demanding personal service from the working class. But in fact it is not so easy to distinguish what these writers take as vulgar commercial behavior from healthy social behavior. Meeting friends and family for dinners or cookouts is a social activity that has commercial implications. Ditto talking to shopkeepers, deli workers, or your hairdresser. Many schools are also commercial enterprises of a sort. Taking engagement photos on Fifth Avenue near Rockefeller Center is a form of commercialized personal service; it’s also a touchstone moment in the lives of the two principals. Our social behavior endows these spaces with a kind of grace.  And the absence of this grace turns out to be an absence of protection. Social behavior is a kind of prophylactic against anti-social behavior like rioting and arson. A closed business doesn’t just lose the security guards who protect it by day, but the shoppers, clerks, and passersby whose presences also protect our streets.  Social-distancing regimens have made our cities empty of the behavior that redeems their occasional ugliness and sometimes oppressive scale. Cities have been emptied of many of their most conscientious citizens — the folks who, just by going about their business, were a defense against anarchy.  As a matter of justice, the rioting must be ended. As a matter of fairness and equality before the law, the mass protests must also be ended in the name of public health — or else the lockdowns on our schools, camps, weddings, funerals, civic organizations, and businesses need to be lifted too. 

• At least the rioters are wearing masks. • One of the little hot-air speech balloons released during the George Floyd riots compares them to the Boston Tea Party. The United States began in riots, what’s the matter with these? As it happens, the Declaration of Independence addresses this question, briefly but thoroughly (Jefferson at his best was a poetical aphorist). Prudence dictates that revolutions should not happen for reasons that are light or passing, since people put up with a lot. But when government shows a design to crush them under absolute despotism, they should throw it off, forming a new one that will serve their happiness and security. Good manners also require them to tell the world why. If you think that is what is going on in smashing windows, cleaning out stores, burning cop cars and random buildings, and mugging passersby who disagree with you, you do not understand the patriots you claim to emulate, and are a good deal less serious.  • MISSING: Social Distancing. DESCRIPTION: Not much to see, especially in stadiums, theaters, restaurants, bars, shops, office buildings, and houses of worship. Small numbers of people sometimes visible, six feet apart and masked, in grocery stores and walking the occasional beach. LAST SEEN: May 25, the day of the death of George Floyd. Since then, Social Distancing has been replaced by protests and riots, in which crowds of people, masked and otherwise, march, kneel, sing, chant, set fire to police precincts, and loot stores, accompanied by smaller but still large crowds of police and National Guardsmen. If found, please return Social Distancing to Dr. Anthony Fauci.  • There were many victims of the lawlessness that consumed the nation following George Floyd’s death. Two of those victims were sacred landmarks of American Christianity. Both St. Patrick’s Cathedral in New York and St. John’s Episcopal Church in Washington, D.C., were desecrated by rioters in the heat of ostensibly anti-racist protests. Vandals defaced the New York cathedral with profanity-ridden graffiti and nearly burned the parish house of the historic St. John’s — a church visited by every sitting president from Madison onward — to the ground. All ought to be outraged by Floyd’s death, but none ought to withhold their contempt from those, no matter their motives, who attack our sacred landmarks. • At the conclusion of a rally in support of the Second Amendment outside the Kentucky State Capitol in Frankfort, a man hung a crude dummy from a tree, with the face of Democratic governor Andy Beshear and the motto Sic semper tyrannis attached. Kentucky has seen worse: In 1900, Governor-elect William Goebel was assassinated, possibly with the connivance of his predecessor in office, William S. Taylor. Goebel himself had shot a political opponent in the head a few years earlier. This year’s story had a better ending. A rally-goer quickly cut the effigy down, saying, “This has no place at this rally. We’re trying to be peaceful.” We don’t mind political partisans “targeting” or “firing broadsides at” each other; “campaign” is itself originally a military term. We prefer dead metaphors to dead politicians, and effigies blur the two categories too much.   • Oregon Republicans chose Jo Rae Perkins as the GOP nominee for U.S. Senate. The state party says it will support her candidacy notwithstanding her associations with, and support for, the “QAnon” movement. That’s a mistake. QAnon is a conspiracy theory that posits the existence of a sinister cabal of cannibalistic pedophiles led by Democrats and elite business figures, which the Trump administration and possibly Robert Mueller are heroically trying to combat. It has attracted tens of thousands of adherents and crossed that fateful threshold past which absence of evidence for a claim becomes proof of a coverup. On the night of the GOP primary, Perkins uploaded a video to Twitter in which she held up a sticker bearing a QAnon slogan and said, “I stand with Q and the team. Thank you Anons, and thank you patriots. And together, we can save our republic.” Her campaign removed the video; now she says she regrets the removal. She is an unreconstructed exponent of a batty and corrosive conspiracy theory running a longshot campaign that does not deserve conservative support. • Conservatives for a long time gave Representative Steve King (R., Iowa) the benefit of the doubt as he made racially provocative comments, and especially discounted those critics who treated his opposition to immigration as per se racist. But the congressman kept chipping away at the doubt. He called Mexicans coming to the U.S. “dirt,” denied it, and then was shown to have said it on tape. He endorsed a mayoral candidate — in Toronto — who had recited the white supremacists’ 14-word motto on the radio. He hobnobbed with a budding Alt-Right Internationale in Europe. These antics got him censured by Congress, repudiated by his party, and — finally, in a June 2 primary — defeated for reelection. Randy Feenstra, the mainstream conservative who won, should not find it hard to do a better job of advancing the priorities of the fourth district of Iowa.  • Groping for adequate responses to the violence on the streets and the insurrectionists behind it, President Trump announced that he would “designate” Antifa, the loosely knit interstate anarchist group, as a terrorist organization. That this was either a misunderstanding of law or a confusing use of the word “designate” became clear when, simultaneously, Attorney General Barr announced that the Justice Department regards the tactics of Antifa and similar radical groups as domestic terrorism and will prosecute them accordingly. There is no legal-designation process for domestic terrorism. We have a process for designating foreign terrorists, a process created in the mid Nineties to enable the federal government to freeze assets, bar aliens who’ve attended jihadist training camps from entering the U.S., and so on. There is no such necessity where domestic terrorists are concerned because they operate within our jurisdiction, and a wide array of laws, federal and state, enable our agencies to investigate and prosecute them, seize their assets, and interrupt their operations. Still, to the extent “designation” is simply the administration’s rhetorical device for announcing its intention and resolve to treat criminal conspiracies as such, it is a welcome development, and needs to be followed up with action.   • Joe Biden says that he will not raise taxes on households making less than $400,000. Like similar pledges from previous Democratic presidential candidates, this one should be received skeptically. Bill Clinton raised gas taxes, Barack Obama imposed the individual mandate, and Biden himself has endorsed a carbon tax. But these pledges have nonetheless acted as constraints. Clinton and Obama didn’t try to raise income or payroll taxes except on the rich — and the definition of the rich has kept shrinking as the Democratic base has gotten more upscale. Congress has not raised taxes on wages since 1993. Biden’s pledge reflects a political reality with which Democratic legislators also have to contend, and that political reality is a major accomplishment of two generations of conservatives.  • Congress enacted the Paycheck Protection Program to help small businesses, especially, through the coronavirus pandemic by giving them forgivable loans. But some red tape added by Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin is constricting it. His rule says that 75 percent of the forgiven loan has to be spent on payroll. Never mind that many businesses have fixed costs, including rent and utilities, that they have to pay if they are going to stay alive to employ anyone. The House has voted 417–1 to relax this rule. But it would be quicker, and more economically productive, if Mnuchin simply complied with the law as written. • When Congress created this program, Planned Parenthood complained that it had been designed to make them ineligible. But then more than three dozen of its affiliates applied for the loans anyway. They received a total of $80 million. Once this news became public knowledge, Planned Parenthood argued that they had been eligible. Two dozen Republican senators are calling for a swift federal investigation of what seems by all accounts to have been loan fraud. We can’t expect an organization that confuses abortion and health care to be sticklers about “eligibility.”  • To listen to the media just a few weeks ago was to hear that Republican governors who sought to reopen their states were endangering the lives of their constituents to save Big Business. A headline in The Atlantic that spoke of “Georgia’s Experiment in Human Sacrifice” was as hysterical as the article it adorned. (“Georgians are now the largely unwilling canaries in an invisible coal mine, sent to find out just how many individuals need to lose their job or their life for a state to work through a plague.”) Never mind that such talk has abated just as dense crowds of hundreds of thousands of people protest in cities. Never mind, too, that nearly all states have been easing restrictions, not just the Republican-governed ones. In most states (including Georgia) the COVID-19 new-case count has plateaued, and in nearly all states (including Georgia) the ratio of positive cases to tests has steadily declined. We should not ignore the possibility of a second wave, but nobody is trying to bring one about, or succeeding. • Instead of simply saying, “I was wrong,” many of those who predicted that the State of Florida was destined to become ground zero for the American coronavirus outbreak have decided to invent absurd conspiracies to cover their tracks. It cannot possibly have been the case that Governor DeSantis got it right, or that he was not, in fact, eager to see his constituents die. Instead, he must be hiding something: bodies, data, nursing-home records, you name it. Thus far, Florida has been accused of having fired a data scientist because she objected to the suppression of data (she wasn’t a data scientist, nothing was suppressed, and she was fired for insubordination and sexual harassment); of having inflated its pneumonia numbers to hide the proximate cause of death (it didn’t, the critics misread the CDC’s numbers); and of flat-out lying about the numbers to make the state look better (in the six weeks since it was first suggested, no evidence of this has come to light). “Follow the science,” cried the most fervent advocates of the lockdowns. Unless, it seems, the science leads south. • Our friend and sometime contributor Kevin Hassett, now the special adviser to the president for economic issues, is quite capable of looking after himself, but we still feel obliged to defend him against one of the silliest charges he has ever had to endure. Hassett told CNN that with quarantine regulations being rolled back, “our human-capital stock is ready to get back to work,” and from the Left’s reaction, you would have thought he had called for a return to serfdom. One critic called the phrase “absurd and heartless”; another said it was “a racially charged, dehumanizing turn of phrase that conjured up images of livestock.” Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez (who has referred to “human capital” herself at least once) said the phrase “had its roots in slavery.” For the record, “human capital” and “human-capital stock” are standard terms in economics, and in any case, there’s no reason either one should be more offensive than the ubiquitous and universally accepted “human resources” (which used to be “personnel,” until that was deemed unacceptable for some reason). The only conclusion we can draw from all this is that to a committed leftist, any phrase that includes the word “capital” is automatically offensive.  • The University of California has since 1996 been barred by popular referendum from discriminating among applicants on the basis of race. That prohibition has inhibited administrators from achieving the racial balance they desire. While standardized tests are good at predicting success in college, they do not further the racial goal. It is in this light that we view the university system’s decision to junk the tests. John Perez, the UC Board of Regents chair, described the decision as “an incredible step in the right direction toward aligning our admissions policy with the broad-based values of the University.” We suspect the value in question consists of racial preferences. • The Department of Education’s restoration of basic due process to the federal Title IX rules passed its first test in court. Three Third Circuit judges, a mix of Trump and Obama appointees, unanimously held that if a private university vows in its contract that students accused of sexual misconduct will receive “fair” and “equitable” treatment, it must at the very least hold a “real, live, and adversarial hearing” and provide “the opportunity for the accused student or his or her representative to cross-examine witnesses — including his or her accusers.” The court accepted that there are some questions that are “uniquely” the province of a university, but rejected the idea that the “investigation and fair adjudication of alleged criminal activity like sexual assault” is among them. Since DeVos announced the implementation of her changes, the Democratic Party has treated the move as a radical departure from American norms. As the Third Circuit showed, the truth is quite the opposite. • DeVos’s department also decided that the State of Connecticut’s athletic association violated Title IX in allowing male high-school athletes to participate in girls’ sports. The Office of Civil Rights wrote that allowing athletes to compete according to “gender identity” alone “denied female student-athletes benefits and opportunities, including advancing to the finals in events, higher level competitions, awards, medals, recognition, and the possibility of greater visibility to colleges and other benefits.” Connecticut must now bring its policy in compliance with the department’s findings. A related lawsuit, waged by three of the female athletes, is separate and ongoing — as women’s sports should also be. • China’s National People’s Congress has imposed a national-security law on Hong Kong banning “all seditious activity.” The security law effectively nullifies the Hong Kong Basic Law, according to which the territory is guaranteed autonomy from the mainland until 2047, and flatly violates Beijing’s obligations under the 1984 Sino–British Joint Declaration. In response, U.S. secretary of state Mike Pompeo decertified Hong Kong’s status as an independent region of China. Trump followed up Pompeo’s announcement by stating that he would “begin the process of eliminating policy exemptions that give Hong Kong different and special treatment” — including its preferential trade status, visa exemptions, and flexible foreign-exchange regime. While the move will harm Hong Kong’s economy, the millions of Hong Kongers who have taken to the streets in protest have demonstrated in no uncertain terms that they value freedom over GDP growth. The short-term harms from reduced trade and investment pale in comparison with the disaster of mainland dominance of Hong Kong. That being said, the White House neglected to specify the exact measures it would take, despite announcing the decertification a week after China proposed the new law. Too often, Trump’s bluster on China amounts to precious little in the policy realm. One hopes this time is different. • Trump also announced that Washington would sever ties to the World Health Organization. When the White House halted funding to the WHO in May, pending an investigation of Chinese influence on the agency, we considered it a salutary push for reform. Under the leadership of director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the organization misled the world about the coronavirus at Beijing’s behest. But a month after halting funding, the White House gave the WHO 30 days to commit to reforms. Predictably, it didn’t. While the withdrawal may be warranted, the White House risks unilateral disarmament against Beijing’s effort to expand its influence over multilateral institutions.  • President Trump has blown hot and cold about canceling his trade agreement with China. And after Trump condemned China’s repression of Hong Kong, Beijing suspended its state-owned firms’ promised purchases of U.S. agricultural products. Trump is left without good choices. Either he makes good on the threats of additional tariffs that he had made before the deal, hurting the stock market and the economy in the run-up to the election, or he accepts a deal that looks more and more like a sham. It is getting late to try a different path — coordinating an international campaign against Chinese mercantilism — but it is not too late. • The Chinese government has been mounting aggressive shows of strength to its neighbors, and it is now India’s turn to come under threat and make what it can of this. The two countries have a common border several thousand miles long. Territorial claims and counter-claims on either side have led to a so-called Line of Actual Control, which in plain language means no agreed demarcation and a permanent reason to go to battle. The People’s Liberation Army reinforced their presence with three heavily armed brigades and India then posted comparable forces. Army chief of staff General Manoj Mukund Naravane followed with a firm defensive statement. By accident or design, the rival soldiers met at several points and started fistfights and brawls. They used wooden clubs and rocks. The wounded were helicoptered away. The U.S. should help make it clear that if it comes to worse, China will have miscalculated badly. • Russia belonged to the G-8. In 2014, however, it invaded a sovereign country, Ukraine, and launched a war there, resulting in a G-7. The facts behind Russia’s suspension have not changed: Crimea remains a Russian possession; war grinds on in the Donbass, where approximately 11,000 people have been killed. President Trump has long pressed for Russia’s readmission to the group, with no changes on the ground. He has done it again, signaling that he will invite Vladimir Putin to a group meeting in the United States this coming September. He should be welcomed, so long as he leaves Ukraine first. • “Let’s light this candle,” said Doug Hurley. “The trampoline is working!” said Elon Musk. Hurley is one of the two astronauts who have just been launched to the International Space Station. (The other is Bob Behnken.) Hurley was echoing the words of Alan Shepard, the first American in space, in 1961. Musk is the founder and CEO of SpaceX, the company that cooperated with NASA to light and launch the latest “candle.” What did he mean by the trampoline remark? For a few years, Americans rode on Russian spacecraft to the ISS. In 2014, however, the United States sanctioned Russia over that country’s aggression against Ukraine. The deputy prime minister, Dmitry Rogozin — who is now the head of the Russian space agency — cracked that, henceforth, America could get its astronauts to the ISS by trampoline. And the “trampoline,” as Musk noted, worked. All in all, the launch on May 30 was thrilling: a shot in the arm for a country that needed one. • Major League Baseball remains on hold. Owners and players are locked in a salary dispute. MLB has proposed a shortened, 82-game season along with several measures to mitigate the risk of spreading the coronavirus. Each team would play half its games in its home ballpark but without spectators. The loss of revenue from concessions and ticket sales would be significant. Owners have offered player compensation in the form of half of revenue. The union is holding out for proration, so that players would be paid approximately half the salary stipulated in their contracts. The fans’ interest is in a compromise: While some of them take sides in the rivalry between billionaires and millionaires, most prefer the one between their home team and whichever MLB franchise figures as the Evil Empire in their local lore. • The ATP and the WTA — the men’s and women’s professional tennis tours, respectively — have been suspended since March because of the COVID-19 pandemic and are not scheduled to return until at least August. While tennis stars such as Novak Djokovic have taken the initiative in creating a relief fund for financially challenged players, not every top-ranked athlete shares the same willingness to contribute. Dominic Thiem, the male world No. 3 from Austria, came out early against the fund: “No tennis player is fighting to survive, even those who are much lower-ranked. No tennis player is going to starve. . . . I would rather give money to people or organizations that really need it.” Unsurprisingly, Mr. Thiem faced an almost immediate backlash, as tennis personalities ranging from Nick Kyrgios to Dustin Brown censured his “tone-deaf” remarks. As is often the case, “tone-deaf” in this instance means distressingly true.  • Troubled in life, Norma McCorvey is having an unsettled afterlife. The Jane Roe of Roe v. Wade famously became a pro-life Catholic in her last decades. A new documentary suggests that it was all an act: McCorvey said on camera that she had no problem with anyone’s decision to abort, that pro-lifers had used her and that she had used them for money. Pro-lifers who knew McCorvey said, however, that she expressed opposition to abortion right to the end. Our conclusions: We cannot treat McCorvey as a reliable narrator, even of her own views; and the pro-life movement is rooted in the sound conviction that unborn children have a right to life, regardless of what anyone thinks about them. • “Yeah, he is kind of a miserable guy,” Wally says to his little brother Beaver, who has just declared his hatred for Eddie Haskell. “You know, I wouldn’t like him at all if he wasn’t my best friend.” The scriptwriters wrote Wally’s oleaginous pal into an early episode of Leave It to Beaver and hired child actor Ken Osmond for the part. He clicked and was invited back. For seven golden years in the late 1950s and early ’60s, Eddie Haskell slinked across the TV screens of America, chewing gum, picking on Beaver, planning mischief, evading the consequences (while Wally landed in trouble), and then toadying to their parents, with a knowing smirk that the elders never quite caught on to, though you the viewer did: “That’s a lovely dress you’re wearing, Mrs. Cleaver.” Osmond portrayed the character too well not to be typecast after the show ended. His acting career narrowed. In 1970, newly married, he joined the Los Angeles Police Department. He did a little TV again in the 1980s, but it was never the same. “I’m not complaining,” he said in 2008. “Eddie’s been too good to me.” Dead at 76. R.I.P. • The ink on his diploma from Southern Methodist University was still moist when Sam Johnson flew to Korea. There he served as a U.S. Air Force pilot on 62 combat missions. In 1966, on his 25th mission in Vietnam, he was shot down and captured. His arm and back were broken. For more than six years he was repeatedly tortured as a prisoner of war at the Hanoi Hilton, where he shared a cell with John McCain. Johnson called the homecoming parade for him in Plano, Texas, “one of my most treasured memories, encapsulating all that I love about America.” He entered politics and was in his fourth term in the Texas legislature when he won a special election to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1991. In his 28-year career in Congress, he fought for tax reform and against pork-barrel spending. He belonged to the Republican Study Committee and helped found its precursor, established to make House Republicans a force for conservatism. In 2015, he defended McCain against Donald Trump’s disparagement of the senator and war hero. “We seldom agreed on anything,” said Representative Lloyd Doggett, a liberal Democrat, remembering Johnson. “I had immense respect for him.” Sam Johnson, patriot, dead at 89. R.I.P. • Richard Gilder was a billionaire benefactor of conservative politics, New York City, and American history. He was a founder of the Club for Growth, which has backed pro-free-market candidates for decades, and of the Manhattan Institute, which inspired the reformist urbanism of Rudy Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg. His beloved hometown wears his largesse in the restored beauty of Central Park, the revitalization of the New-York Historical Society, and major-league donations to the Museum of Natural History. Most important for the country was his devotion to its past. The Gilder Lehrman Institute, founded with his friend Lewis Lehrman, has amassed a world-class collection of documents, and provides instruction in the form of seminars and teaching materials to tens of thousands of middle- and high-school teachers and students. Young people who know better than Howard Zinn probably know it thanks to Dick Gilder. Dead at 87. R.I.P. Doing evil in the service of a just cause does not change either side of the moral equation: Evil remains evil, and the just cause remains just — neither consideration cancels out the other or transmutes it. When riots and violence convulsed American cities after the horrifying death of George Floyd at the hands of Minneapolis police, that principle bore particular consideration. Protests are a normal and healthy part of democracy. Looting and arson are not. What is particularly vexing here is that the looting and arson have taken place while the gears of justice have been turning — the police officers in question were dismissed and the principal malefactor charged with third-degree murder. Things have not moved as quickly as many would have liked, but this has been a matter of days, not weeks or months, and it is good that matters of this gravity are not approached in a panic with excessive haste, which is more likely to lead to injustice than to swift justice. Also, quite often snippets of video can be misleading, which is why it’s important to carefully review all the facts, even in a case that seems as clear-cut as this one.  The riots have only layered another injustice on top of the one done to George Floyd. Police officers have been killed or assaulted, looters and protesters killed or injured, and much property destroyed — including the property of many black-owned businesses at the heart of the very communities whose interests the protesters purport to represent. The moment has called for calm and leadership, but President Trump, finding himself in possession of both rhetorical gasoline and a raging fire, apparently couldn’t help making things worse. Early on, he tweeted, “When the looting starts, the shooting starts,” a phrase associated with some of the worst figures of the 1960s, George Wallace prominent among them. Later, after brief remarks in the Rose Garden on the unrest, he walked across the street to historic St. John’s Church. He understandably wanted to show the flag after the church had been set on fire the night before. But protesters had to be cleared out of his way, in a petty and foolish use of government authority, and he didn’t make any remarks or meaningful gestures at the church, merely waving around a Bible. Trump has talked of “dominating” the streets, an inflammatory way to put a basic and important point: In such a situation, restoring order has to be the first priority. The dynamic of riots is always that if the police don’t show up, if they hold back, or worse, if they retreat, the disorder gets more intense and destructive. Violence must be met with overwhelming (and, obviously, lawful) force. Authorities in Minnesota finally figured this out after a couple of nights of letting things spin out of control and implausibly blaming outside agitators for the mayhem. As Minneapolis calmed down, parts of New York City were sacked by marauding bands, in a disgraceful failure of municipal governance.  It’s certainly true that Antifa extremists have taken a hand in the destruction around the country (and sometimes been rebuked by black protesters opposed to their tactics), but there are plenty of others who have been breaking things and looting who clearly are local residents and not members of any ideological splinter groups. Regardless of the argument over who is most responsible for the riots, state and municipal authorities must resolve to keep the peace, with the assistance of the National Guard as warranted. Trump has talked of invoking the Insurrection Act to call out federal troops, something that he has the authority to do in theory, but would be impractical without the cooperation of state and local officials that he’s unlikely to get. As for the matter underlying all the protest and chaos: Police work involves violence, and there is no getting around that. Americans have for a long time understood this and made allowances for it, which is why a questionable police shooting is investigated differently from a questionable shooting that doesn’t involve the police. But it is worth exploring the protections bad cops get from union rules, and the level of deference that prosecutors afford the police in questionable cases, among other things. It’s not true that the police are a racist, occupying force in American cities (last year, according to a Washington Post database, nine unarmed black people were shot and killed by the police and 19 unarmed white people), but we have to be cognizant of the fact that they have lost the confidence of many of the communities they serve. At the heart of the protests is the sense that the necessity of such reform is felt with an urgency in black America while white America thinks of it as a kind of desirable abstraction. But the burning and stealing will not only leave vulnerable communities worse off in material terms — they will leave these communities worse off in political terms, too, as well-intentioned Americans understandably recoil from the violence and disorder. Protests can be heard, but violence can only be suppressed. It is notable that the police action leading to the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis has not in itself produced a polarizing national disagreement: In fact, there has been broad agreement — broadly shared horror — across the political spectrum, because Americans are a generally decent and fair-minded people who are perfectly capable of understanding what they see with their own eyes, in this case a fellow American who died an unjust death at the hands of American police. We see the injustice in this just as we see the injustice of a small-business owner being ruined by directionless malice and opportunism, because we understand ourselves as a single people and a single national community, an understanding that strengthens the cause of justice. American political rhetoric can be pretty high-flown at times, but here we might dwell on the imperfectly realized principle that we are all in this together, and must act like it. Whether social media have been good or bad for society is an open question. Whether social media have been good or bad for President Trump isn’t as difficult to discern. For even the most sober-minded and introspective figures, Twitter can serve as a dangerous temptation. For a man as capricious and mercurial as our 45th president, it is an irresistible invitation to say things unworthy of his office. It is said that President Lincoln would place letters written in anger in a locked drawer so that he could decide the next morning whether the opprobrium he had meted out was deserved. President Trump, by unhappy contrast, does not so much as wait to spell-check his missives. This habit has now hit its nadir, with his ongoing series of disgraceful tweets insinuating that MSNBC’s Joe Scarborough murdered a young woman working in one of his Florida offices when he was a congressman two decades ago. As is often the case with this president, Trump’s follies have ignited a series of counter-follies that have made the situation even worse. In an attempt to mollify its critics without setting a precedent for expulsion that it may come eventually to regret, Twitter announced that it would begin to publicly “fact-check” statements that Trump has made on other topics, and thereby take on a role to which it is in no way suited. In response, Trump rolled out another of his “l’Internet, c’est moi” threats, promising to “strongly regulate” or “close down” any “Social Media Platforms” that “silence conservatives voices.” Which, in turn, prompted Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) to ask why Twitter enjoys a “special subsidy from the federal government while it censors @realDonaldTrump and also Americans who are critical of #ChineseCommunistParty?” Not one of these courses of action is desirable. Twitter is a medium, not a message, and it should decline to inject itself into the middle of America’s political debates. President Trump cannot “close down” social media, and he should not idly threaten to do so. And, pace Senator Hawley, user-driven websites are not being “subsidized” by Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act, which protects the “provider or user of an interactive computer service” from being treated as the “publisher” of opinions whether or not he has reviewed them. It is Section 230, by way of example, that prevents Joe Scarborough from being able to sue Twitter when one of its members engages in a libel. Section 230 has been maligned lately, but we have yet to see any proposal that would be likely to improve it. Trump’s hastily issued executive order attempting to reinterpret Section 230 is likely to prove toothless and may be unconstitutional. Time was when the obvious response to reprehensible behavior was admonition. The root cause of the mess we are witnessing today is not Twitter’s bias or legislative favoritism, and it is most certainly not that the president lacks the power to suspend the First Amendment. Rather, it is that the president lacks the power to control his own urges. What needs changing is the behavior of the man who sits at the heart of all of our national conversations, both good and ill.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

The COVID-19 pandemic is the single greatest global peacetime catastrophe that humanity has suffered since the end of the Second World War. Barely months into what promises to be a multiyear disaster, the pandemic has already cost America alone over 100,000 lives, tens of millions of jobs, and trillions of dollars in lost output, income, and wealth. The ultimate toll for the world as a whole from this pandemic — both the direct and the indirect consequences — may still lie beyond imagining.  How did such a terrible calamity befall humanity? This grave question is not only an epidemiological puzzle. It is also a political one. As is increasingly understood in the United States and abroad, the Chinese government and its agents bear a terrible and immediate responsibility for conduct that turned a localized contagion into a global pandemic. But the COVID-19 disaster could not have devastated America and the world as it is now doing if China were still an impoverished, isolated Maoist outpost, with scant global contact, involvement, or influence. The world is suffering a planetary plague because China today is deeply integrated into the world economy, and into the institutions of global governance as well — even though it is ruled by a dictatorship whose values, priorities, and objectives are fundamentally incompatible with those of the liberal international order. It was not by accident or happenstance that China became a major player in the world economy and, more broadly, in the liberal international order that the United States was instrumental in fashioning. That outcome, rather, is largely a result of concerted American policy.  For four decades, the United States has pursued a deliberate and explicit strategy, reaffirmed by innumerable public and private decisions under both Democratic and Republican administrations and Congresses, to “engage China” and enmesh that enormous country in “globalization,” the free world’s great webs of commerce, communications, travel, education, research, and culture.  For many long years, this strategy, though not without critics, was widely regarded as a triumph of American statecraft. For a generation and more, the policy of “engaging” China paid handsome and obvious dividends, both financial and geopolitical. Indeed, the engagement policy appeared to be a monumental win-win. Not only did China turn away from the revolutionary hostility that had characterized its international conduct in the Maoist era, but its outward-oriented economic policies and more pragmatic domestic practices unleashed an extraordinary domestic boom. China’s remarkable economic transformation not only dramatically reduced poverty at home. It also generated prosperity for trading partners around the world. While policymakers accurately assessed the upside for America from engaging China, they missed a whole dimension of downside in the righthand column of the ledger. They gave virtually no consideration to the unintended ramifications of promoting global “interdependence” with an increasingly powerful actor that does not share Western liberal values — that is, indeed, implacably hostile to them. An entire class of hazards inherent in our grand strategy for “managing China” were left, by America’s chief risk officers, priced effectively at zero — even as our “globalization” policies exposed our society, economy, and political system to huge new vulnerabilities at the hands of the Chinese Communist Party.  The coronavirus crisis constitutes a “strategic surprise.” It exposes a horrendous blind spot in our China policy and highlights its unintended consequences. The COVID-19 explosion was a “made in China” export: distinctive handiwork of the CCP. It is quite impossible to imagine such a disaster being authored by an open, accountable polity — for example, Taiwan.  Moreover, horrific as it is, there is no reason to regard this disaster as a once-only black swan. More likely it is a harbinger, a foretaste of perils yet in store. For the CCP is loose in our system, potent and unquarantined. And we have not even begun to assess the risks that America and the world consequently face, much less how to protect against them.  The carnage of the coronavirus crisis casts glaring light not only on CCP malfeasance but also on a long chain of U.S. policy errors and miscalculations. They now subject our own population, our allies, and the entire international community to pandemic devastation of indefinite duration. (More on that particular fiasco later.) But the worldwide COVID-19 plague also casts the past half century of Sino–American relations into a new and much sharper relief — and this makes for painful recounting. What lies plainly exposed today is Washington’s long-standing failure to come to terms with the true nature of its “engagement partner” in Beijing: the Chinese Communist Party. It is that partner — not the CCP’s subject population, not the CCP’s clerks and servants in the Chinese government’s administrative apparatus — that determines the regime’s objectives and priorities, sets its strategy, and commands its movements at home and abroad.  Superficially, both party and state in China are vastly different nowadays from when the monster Mao Zedong was at the helm. The regime no longer revels in upheaval; its conduct at home and abroad is no longer avowedly revolutionary. For nearly two decades the CCP has confuted its own founding precepts by extending party membership to entrepreneurs (known as “capitalists” elsewhere). Indeed, approximately 100 members of each recent annual CCP National People’s Congress were reportedly billionaires (in U.S. dollars, that is, not renminbi). And despite a major reversal of actual economic and other policy reforms, the Chinese government has officially embraced “reform and opening up” (market-based reform of the economy and opening China to trade and investment) for over four decades — ever since Deng Xiaoping issued his bold, world-turning declaration in late 1978.  Unfortunately, trapped in the confines of our own mentality and the limits of our self-referential imaginations, we children of the Enlightenment (or perhaps of postmodernism) have failed to take the proper measure of these admittedly immense Chinese political changes. China’s regime has evolved: It has modernized and ingeniously adapted to changing times. But that does not mean that the control system has liberalized. The maglev from “Cultural Revolution” to “Chinese Dream” does not make stops at Locke Junction or Tocqueville Town, and it has no connections to Planet Davos. China’s great civilization has a long and storied heritage. But it also has an extraordinarily long political tradition of despotic imperial rule, which is in the main a saga of exquisitely perfecting mass tyranny, even when antique premodern technologies were the only instruments available for enforcing such repression. (Though born over 2,000 years before Lenin, Qin Shi Huangdi, the first emperor of a unified Chinese state, might still have taught Vladimir Ilyich a thing or two about the administration of terror and the concentration of unchallenged absolutist state power.)  Thus, trashing Marxism, and the people’s communes, and much of the previous Soviet-style central-planning system as well — as the CCP has done in recent decades — does not in fact set Chinese autocracy adrift. Hardly. The CCP has deep historical muscle memory to draw on as it develops its own updated rendition of “autocracy with Chinese characteristics,” one that harnesses market mechanisms and highly sophisticated networks to strengthen the foundations of the regime — and extend its thrall. Some would argue that we should have known all along that the CCP had never abandoned its claim to totalitarian power, even in the heyday of the Deng Xiaoping–Jiang Zemin era of “reform and opening up.” Beijing’s economic experimentation in the 1980s and 1990s may have warmed the hearts of free-marketers around the globe, but the regime’s tilt toward more-competitive commercial and financial practices was accompanied by a horrific test drive into new uncharted realms of unfreedom: the gruesome one-child policy, history’s most ambitious adventure in population control, which insisted that the CCP, not parents, had the final say over the number of babies in China. The world marveled at China’s export boom and the rapidly growing urban engine that was powering it. What went largely unnoticed was that the peasants streaming to the cities for factory and construction work were in effect illegal aliens in their own land — thanks to the CCP’s heinous hukou system of identity-registration papers. Migrants found outside their designated locality were de facto lawbreakers who could be summarily deported at government whim. And, of course, Deng himself ordered the slaughter of those demanding more political freedoms in Tiananmen Square in 1989. It was then that the CCP started to view Washington as a potentially serious challenge to its rule. For years — some would say decades — warning lights have been flashing that “reform” as we understand the term is over in China and that the CCP policy is turning in a different and, from a Western standpoint, more ominous direction. The CCP is methodically transforming the existing Chinese police state into an even more intrusive and aggressive “surveillance superstate.” Beijing’s “Great Firewall” subjects the populace of the People’s Republic of China (PRC) to best-in-class high-tech censorship and spying. Less compliant ethnic minorities face mass internment, with a million or more historically Muslim Uighurs recently herded into “reeducation” camps. Meanwhile, persecution of the world’s fastest-growing Christian population has become commonplace. With the coming of the regime’s vaunted “social-credit system,” its Great Leap Forward in “techno-tyranny,” artificial intelligence and big data will be used to analyze and evaluate the population’s every detectable action, so that the CCP might envelop every Chinese citizen in a customized and finely tailored mesh of rewards and penalties to bring mass behavior into consonance with the regime’s will.  This great Chinese regression is not the only thing we missed: Washington’s globalists and the globalist archipelago in universities, think tanks, and the media also stubbornly and even willfully ignored what the CCP had to say about us. Beijing identifies us as its main rival and is working tenaciously to neutralize the frightening “American threat.” Xi Jinping didn’t begin this strategy, but he perfected it. His acuity at moving the levers of power in China by ferocious purges of his internal enemies and by rigid enforcement of loyalty to the Communist Party has given him a freer hand to pursue it. According to readily available documents and speeches, Xi has followed a “CCP first” strategy that he claims will lead to the “Chinese dream of national rejuvenation.” If the party is healthy, Xi has said, China has a pathway to rejuvenation — after years of national humiliation at the hands of the West and Japan, China in this “new era” will march to “center stage.” The CCP will lead the country back to a 21st-century version of “Middle Kingdom centrality,” the geopolitical order that the regime regards as the natural way the world is to be structured. Since his ascendance to supreme power in 2012, Xi has announced that he would reshape international institutions to align with the CCP agenda, promote “socialist culture” abroad (exporting to other dictators high-tech authoritarian-control capabilities and an economic model dominated by the state), replace alliances (i.e., the U.S. international system) with a network of strategic partnerships with China at the center (the main motivation behind the One Belt, One Road initiative — Beijing’s scheme for a new, Sino-centric Eurasian political-economic order), build a military that would outpace the U.S. armed forces, and achieve technological dominance. The CCP is far more powerful today than it was in Mao’s time (in no small part thanks to our own doing). Much as it may have mutated, it still hates and fears American power and remains implacably hostile to the ideals and precepts of the liberal Western order. We should have known there would be hell to pay when we let this creature loose in our own house — that is to say, into the edifice of international commercial and financial arrangements and multilateral international institutions that the U.S. and her allies built over the past three generations to ensure prosperity and security in the post-war world. But let it loose in our house we did — not in a fit of absentmindedness, but as a deliberate matter of long-term national strategy. Letting the CCP loose in our house is part and parcel of America’s grand strategy and has been for decades. Until recently, this decision has enjoyed bipartisan support among political leaders and opinion-shapers and in business circles — although proponents of this course of action would never describe it in such terms. Their preferred formulation has been “engagement”: They regard their approach as “opening the PRC,” or “globalizing China,” or helping make China into a “responsible stakeholder” within the international community. Drawing the PRC into the world economy and the post-war multilateral project for transnational governance has been a centerpiece of America’s China policy ever since Washington and Beijing normalized diplomatic relations in 1979. The United States’ modern China policy began with Nixon’s famous Cold War overture to Beijing. Originally, economic engagement was impossible because Mao was alive, and, in any case, setting China as a geopolitical counterweight against Moscow served our national purposes well enough. But with Mao’s death came the end of Beijing’s self-isolation. Beijing opened its economy and adopted a more responsible, supportive stance toward the U.S.-led global order. Thus arose the enticing prospect of economic and geopolitical benefits from a deeper relationship with China. In this calculus, America would not only be safer by bringing China into our fold. We would be richer and therefore more powerful as well. Such thinking still informs our China policy, by the way, even under President Trump, who has accused China of taking “advantage of us like nobody in history,” enacted tariffs, allowed the U.S. military a freer hand to challenge China, and confronted such menacing corporate actors as Huawei. Still, his main interest is in exacting more-favorable terms from our now well-established commercial relationship — no one is filing for economic divorce.  Through tumultuous and dramatically changing geopolitical times, the Washington consensus for economic engagement with China has remained more or less constant. Its rationale is twofold: First, a more globalized China would have incentives to behave more responsibly in a U.S.-led international order; and second, the very process of integration into the global economy would generate domestic pressures in China that would temper and ultimately liberalize Beijing’s authoritarian regime. With the Soviet collapse, the resulting end of the Cold War, and the “end of history” vogue, that second rationale came to enjoy additional emphasis. It was only natural that China would become more like us — or so it seemed to a great many of America’s deciders and explainers. Thus, President Clinton in 2000: By joining the WTO [World Trade Organization], China is not simply agreeing to import more of our products. It is agreeing to import one of democracy’s most cherished values, economic freedom. The more China liberalizes its economy, the more fully it will liberate the potential of its people. . . . And when individuals have the power, not just to dream, but to realize their dreams, they will demand a greater say. . . . The genie of freedom will not go back into the bottle. So too Hank Paulson, Treasury secretary to George W. Bush, in 2006 explaining why he welcomed “China’s growth and integration into the world economy”: Our economy is . . . a model that others strive to emulate. . . . Greater economic freedom and more widely shared prosperity within a nation can lead to greater freedom in the political system as well. . . Countries that implement market-driven policies which provide their citizens greater economic freedoms find that those citizens also naturally seek a greater stake in their political system. Such quotations, we must emphasize, are not in any sense selective or unrepresentative. Quite the contrary: They precisely capture the reasoning that informed America’s China policy and continues to animate it. This globalist vision, furthermore, was not limited to U.S. policymakers — rather it was broadly affirmed throughout universities, think tanks, and leading business circles, repeated in countless op-eds and studies in the prestige press and leading American intellectual and foreign-policy journals, and ratified abroad in the corridors of enlightened globalism, such as the World Economic Forum, where it was steadily and approvingly echoed and endorsed. To be sure, Washington recognized that Beijing was every bit a great power, animated by great-power ambitions. As Beijing’s economic and military potential surged, Washington, under Clinton, George W. Bush, and Obama, shifted from Reagan-era alignment with China against Moscow to “engaging,” “hedging,” and “balancing” against China. But from Deng Xiaoping to Xi Jinping, China’s geostrategic disputes with America — over the South China Sea, Taiwan, Northeast Asia, and the rest — were regarded as manageable. Despite all the inevitable tensions and flashpoints, contentious security issues in the U.S.–Chinese relationship could seemingly be placed in a box. And with strategic competition compartmentalized, economic cooperation between the United States and China could extend out to an ever-expanding horizon, while also finding new avenues for possible international cooperation on “global commons” challenges — such as nuclear proliferation, terrorism, and climate change. (Indeed, great-power competition was thought by some to be anachronistic, given the cosmic nature of these other challenges.) This at least was the essence of the Washington consensus calculation. And so, for four decades, the United States not only acquiesced in but actively facilitated China’s integration into the world economy and the multilateral organizations that administer peace and prosperity in the American-designed global order. Almost immediately after the U.S. recognized China diplomatically in 1979, Washington’s “engagement” commenced. In 1980, Congress granted the PRC most-favored-nation status for trade on an annually renewable basis. That same year, with America’s assent, the PRC was granted membership in the “Bretton Woods” family: the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank group. The PRC joined the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in 1986 and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) in 1991 (two years after Tiananmen), once again with American approval. Beijing completed its long march into the international market economy around the turn of the century. In 1999, China joined the new G-20 organization — as a founding member at express invitation from the U.S. Treasury Department. In 2000, Congress authorized permanent “normal trade relations” with China, and PRC membership in the WTO followed in 2001. A parallel “normalizing” of the PRC was taking place in other parts of the formal and informal multilateral apparatus for transnational governance, too: By one estimate, China had already joined 50 international governmental organizations and 1,275 international nongovernmental organizations by the year 2000; in the years since then, China’s reach and influence in this multilateral construct has only grown. Meanwhile, the logic of the Washington consensus on China was often taken to mean that merely getting Beijing to sign on to global treaties was a “win.”  Modern China’s astonishing race to development is unprecedented and unparalleled. It is the most breathtakingly rapid record of economic growth and transformation in history. In 1980, China’s economy was, by some reckonings, smaller than Mexico’s; its merchandise exports were smaller than Norway’s and East Germany’s; its foreign-exchange reserves (excluding gold) ranked behind those of the Philippines and Trinidad. Today, it is the world’s largest goods exporter, has larger foreign-reserve holdings than any other country (with or without gold), and, depending on how we do the calculations, is either the world’s top economy or its second-largest in terms of sheer output. Part of this success story is actually catch-up growth, progress postponed by two generations of war, civil war, and Maoist upheaval. Much of it can be credited to an official shift to decidedly more pragmatic policies and practices, including a variant of the “outward orientation” that spurred material advance throughout so much of the rest of Asia. But Americanpolicy was also absolutely indispensable to modern China’s amazing economic ascent. There is no doubt whatever that China today would be both poorer and weaker if America had withheld the economic sponsorship our “engagement” policy bestowed on Beijing for nearly two generations. America is an unusual, not to say exceptional, country — and our policy of “engaging” China looks to be an exceptional experiment in the annals of international relations. It is (to say the least) a historical aberration for the established hegemon to enable, much less welcome, the rise of a challenger. The norm in power politics is always to contain and weaken would-be claimants to primacy. In earlier great-power contests — Athens versus Sparta, the Western alliance versus the Soviet bloc, even Victorian and Edwardian Britain versus Prussia — such a sustained outreach by the front-runner for cooperation with, and elevation of, the rival would have been utterly unthinkable. From “Nixon to China” through de facto alignment against Moscow under Reagan and George H. W. Bush, U.S. China policy helped dig the grave of the Soviet empire and usher in our “unipolar moment,” which continues to this day. Since the end of the Cold War, Washington and Beijing have had tense standoffs (Tiananmen, the Taiwan Strait showdown of 1996, the Kosovo Chinese-embassy bombing of 1999, the 2001 downing of the U.S. EP-3E intelligence plane, and more). But none of these spun into a Cuban missile crisis. Beijing was no longer in the “wars of national liberation” business, and it did not take up a white-knuckle nuclear-arms race against America where Moscow had left off. World War III — a very real concern for U.S. policymakers in the Nixon-to-China era — had been put on hold, seemingly indefinitely. And Beijing is constrained by its own enmeshment in Washington’s liberal order, at least for now. As for the benefits from integrating into the world economy: Here the U.S. and the international community gained too (though obviously not nearly as much as Beijing, at least in relative terms). A growing China offered new markets for exports of U.S. goods and services. No less important, inexpensive imports from China were boosting our national wealth as well. China was an engine for deflation in a rapidly expanding world economy, and thus a printing press for international profits. Further, China served as a willing, even eager, purchaser of U.S. Treasury securities, helping to underwrite modern America’s perennial current-account imbalance and to finance our federal budget deficit. There were even some glimmers that Beijing might have been getting ready to act like a “responsible stakeholder” in the international community, at least in economic affairs — for example, its stimulus commitment during the world economic crisis of 2008–09, undertaken in coordination with other leading economies, a spending jolt that not only put China back on the growth track but also buffered other economies against the global slump. But this assessment of America’s China strategy is critically incomplete. Like the policy itself, it does not consider a terrible miscalculation — a complete oversight, actually — at the very center of Washington’s policy toward Beijing. While U.S. statesmen paid great attention to how they might constrain and deter Beijing through the economic and multilateral enmeshment they were devising, they apparently devoted almost no consideration to our own potential vulnerabilities from that very same interdependence at the hand of an unreformed and increasingly adversarial CCP. We did not think through what would happen if a powerful force in the world economy and in the global system should happen to be playing by a very different set of rules and with a very different set of objectives from those upheld by Washington, her global allies, and her international friends. But this is exactly where we find ourselves today.  In 1967, in “Asia after Vietnam,” Richard Nixon wrote of the “extraordinary set of opportunities for a U.S. policy which must begin to look beyond Viet Nam.” This riveting treatise is prescient, even prophetic: arguably in the same league as George Kennan’s “Mr. X” essay (though it remains today largely forgotten, given Nixon’s peculiar status as a prophet without honor in his own country). In it, Nixon presents America with a long-range vision for dealing with China, urging U.S. policymakers to guide their course in accordance with two objectives: “containment without isolation” and “dynamic detoxification.” Regardless of its other accomplishments, our China policy has, to our immense peril, stood Nixon on his head. The CCP is no longer isolated — but neither is it contained. Quite the contrary, its reach in the global system extends further than ever before. Even worse, we neglected to draw off the CCP’s poison before we integrated with China economically. The coronavirus pandemic is a case study of the damage that a toxic CCP can wreak in our global system — and this may be only a foretaste of further disasters we may have invited on ourselves. The particulars of the COVID-19 crisis shine a blinding light on the failures of America’s great China gamble. The CCP did not behave as if the coronavirus outbreak were primarily a threat to public health. From the outset it instead treated the contagion mainly as a threat to party legitimacy and power. Epidemiological considerations were secondary: The regime’s first and foremost campaign was political, an assault launched against domestic and international enemies. Enemies were states, organizations, or individuals who demanded transparency about the nature of the new disease and about what the regime knew about it, or who insisted that the regime conform to international public-health and medical best practices for containing and controlling the epidemic. The CCP’s own anti-epidemic tool kit involved lies, coverups, internal censorship, intimidation and persecution of domestic truth-tellers, a global disinformation initiative, and manipulation of an international institution it had succeeded in corrupting at the highest levels, the World Health Organization (WHO). The CCP repertoire also included strategic denial of key medical supplies to Western governments, and explicit threats to smaller states against which it believed it had gained leverage thanks to their dependence on trade with China. Through such actions the CCP bears inescapable responsibility for immeasurably worsening today’s raging global plague. While the timeline of CCP misconduct is by now all too familiar, some points are worth revisiting. The first case of COVID-19 may have come to the attention of Wuhan doctors on December 1, 2019 (although some accounts suggest an even earlier date). Soon thereafter, multiple cases of the strange new illness had presented, and a Wuhan hospital was sending out samples for testing to special laboratories. By the end of December, a Guangzhou-based genomics company informed PRC health officials and doctors in Wuhan that it had determined that the pathogen was a dangerous SARS-like virus. Chinese officials ordered the company to cease further research and to get rid of all specimens of the pathogen. They then shut down the Wuhan seafood market associated with some (but not all) of the new infections and disinfected the entire location, destroying possible evidence and collecting none. On the last day of 2019, PRC Internet police swung into action, suppressing discussion of “Wuhan unknown pneumonia” on Chinese social media and blocking terms such as “Wuhan seafood market” and “SARS variation” from search engines. A now famous Wuhan doctor, the late Li Wenliang, was alarmed enough about the spread of a new “SARS-like virus” to post his concerns on a WeChat group in late December. Chinese public security detained him for spreading “false rumors” — a criminal infraction under the CCP — roughly meaning “telling the truth.” On January 1, 2020, at least seven other Wuhan doctors were reportedly detained and threatened for speaking out. On January 3 the National Health Commission issued a gag order. From January 5 through January 16, the China CDC (Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention) registered no new cases of the rapidly spreading epidemic — even though hospitals in Wuhan and other parts of China were being swamped with patients afflicted with the disease. On January 10, PRC health expert Wang Guangfa declared on official CCTV that the “Wuhan pneumonia” was “under control” and mainly a “mild condition.” Meanwhile, the Wuhan Health Commission insisted that there were no new cases of COVID-19. By this time the first cases had been reported abroad. And the cover-up continued. Four days after Wang assured the world that the virus was under control, Ma Xiaowei, head of the National Health Commission, confidentially alerted health officials through a secure videoconference that the epidemic was “likely to develop into a major public-health event” and that “clustered cases” suggested “human-to-human transmission.” The next day the head of the China CDC emergency center declared on state television that “the risk of human-to-human transmission is low.” Only on January 20 did China finally confirm human transmission officially. The PRC lied about the prevalence of the epidemic in China from the outset and lies about it to this day. According to official PRC numbers, at this writing (June 2, 2020), China has suffered fewer than 85,000 COVID-19 infections and fewer than 5,000 deaths. These low claims — which would imply that China has sustained fewer infections than Peru, fewer deaths than the Netherlands — cannot pass the laugh-out-loud test. They are clearly off by orders of magnitude. It may be that the CCP is not bothering to collect accurate information on the toll of the epidemic at home — or is deliberately preventing its collection. But researchers outside China have come up with vastly higher guesstimates. In March, in the United Kingdom, scientific advisers to Prime Minister Boris Johnson reportedly informed him that the Chinese reports of infections were “downplayed by a factor of 15 to 40 times.” U.S. intelligence likewise reportedly concluded that the Chinese government had drastically understated the spread of the virus. In April, Derek Scissors of the American Enterprise Institute calculated that a plausible figure for COVID-19 infections in China at that juncture might have been around 2.9 million — over 30 times the level Beijing has since admitted to — and his calculations refer only to estimated cases outside Hubei Province. Speedy containment of the epidemic was plainly not a regime priority. Six days passed between Ma’s secret warning to officials about the novel coronavirus and Xi Jinping’s first public pronouncement, on January 20, that the “outbreak must be taken seriously.” In Wuhan, Lunar New Year celebrations continued. And throughout the rest of China, no immediate effort was made to reduce the tremendous upsurge in travel that the Spring Festival always occasions. By January 23, when Beijing imposed a lockdown on Wuhan and other parts of surrounding Hubei Province, millions had already left on holiday, circulating through the rest of China and the world. Apparently, the regime’s concern in imposing travel bans was only domestic contagion, not the spread of the epidemic overseas. The day after travel to and from Wuhan was forbidden within China, Beijing forbade all domestic group tourism within China. While Beijing subjected its own citizens to internal travel restrictions, it criticized President Trump’s January 31 travel restrictions on visitors from China, saying the measures only “create and spread fear.” Historian Niall Ferguson of Stanford University estimates that over 1,300 flights from China and over 380,000 passengers landed in the United States in January 2020: a fateful measure of our current enmeshment. Indifference to the international consequences of the coronavirus also informed a secret operation that Beijing planned in the days after it privately recognized the seriousness of the pandemic risks but before it acknowledged them publicly. Around January 14 or 15, according to a Canadian report, the regime issued urgent worldwide guidance to Chinese consulates and their United Front Work Departments (or UFWD, CCP organs that mobilize like-minded overseas allies to work on Beijing’s behalf) “to prepare for and respond to a pandemic” by securing, on a massive scale, international supplies of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical equipment. (The broad outlines of this Canadian report were subsequently corroborated by a leaked U.S. Department of Homeland Security paper, according to the Associated Press.) In the six weeks following the alleged UFWD directive, China quietly managed to buy up much of the world’s available stockpiles of such gear as N95 masks. In all, as is now known from China Customs Statistics, the regime procured nearly 2.5 billion pieces of anti-epidemic equipment, including 2 billion masks, at a cost of over $1 billion. This covert scheme temporarily stripped the rest of the world of supplies needed to battle the pandemic and helps explain the otherwise inexplicable shortages other countries faced when their own outbreaks struck. China did later agree to sell back some of this equipment to the international community — but at extortionate prices. According to Jorge Guajardo, a former Mexican ambassador to China, the Chinese markups on resold surgical masks originally procured from Mexico’s own stockpiles ran about 2,000 to 3,000 percent. Beyond profiteering, the CCP’s approach to the pandemic internationally featured both political offensives and coercive diplomacy. America naturally was the target of a high-profile CCP disinformation campaign, with the spokesperson of the Chinese foreign ministry personally insinuating that the coronavirus had been brought to Wuhan by the U.S. military. China is also believed to have spread disinformation anonymously — for example, through text messages warning Americans that Trump was about to lock down the country, and through other memes intended to sow division or panic. But U.S. allies were also victims of official Chinese disinformation; regime mouthpieces implied that the coronavirus originated in Italy, a country hit especially hard by the pandemic. When Prime Minister Scott Morrison of Australia called for an impartial, transparent international inquiry into the origins of the pandemic, China countered with economic threats. Australia has become highly dependent on the Chinese market, which accounts for nearly a third of its merchandise exports. Beijing cut Australian beef imports, imposed 80 percent tariffs on Australian barley, and raised the specter of punishing tariffs on other products too. Chinese tourism and Chinese students are also important to Australia’s economy — and the Chinese ambassador to Canberra hinted that “ordinary people” in China might boycott Australian tours and schools if the inquiry went ahead. For the CCP, honest investigation of its conduct is taken to be a threat to national security. And then there is the World Health Organization, the international institution whose “primary role is to direct and coordinate international health within the United Nations system.” We can no longer count on the WHO for unbiased expert assessments, advice, and assistance in the COVID-19 crisis, for the CCP succeeded in perverting its leadership. In 2017, China successfully lobbied to promote its candidate, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus of Ethiopia, to director-general of WHO. Unlike all previous WHO chiefs, Tedros is not a medical doctor. He is, however, a thoroughly political creature. A veteran of the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, he rose through Ethiopia’s dictatorship despite a persistent cloud of scandals over him. Tedros’s gut instincts were revealed early in his Geneva posting when he nominated Robert Mugabe, Zimbabwe’s president for life, to be a WHO goodwill ambassador. The offer was withdrawn under international outcry. With the eruption of the COVID-19 epidemic, Tedros proved his worth as a willing accomplice to his Chinese sponsors. In the early weeks of the crisis he parroted the CCP’s line and shielded the Chinese regime against international scrutiny, stiff-arming international requests for access to local Chinese evidence and data. Perhaps the most comic moment of his tenure was when, on January 28, in Beijing with Xi, he lavished praise on the regime for its “transparency” in confronting the pandemic. There was more. The assistant director in charge of the WHO–China Joint Mission on COVID-19, Dr. Bruce Aylward, sang the praises of Beijing’s coronavirus response: “If I had COVID-19,” he insisted, “I’d want to be treated in China.” His mission to China to assess the epidemic was packed with PRC personnel, and the report extolled Beijing’s “exceptional” commitment to “collective action in the face of this common threat.” In an internationally televised interview he also clumsily avoided questions about Taiwan’s genuinely exceptional achievements in combating COVID-19. (Beijing relentlessly strives to isolate and ostracize Taiwan, which was expelled from the WHO at its behest, and it is incensed by anything that lends Taiwan legitimacy.) Aylward, a Canadian physician, has repeatedly refused to appear before Canada’s parliament on the coronavirus crisis; eventually Ottawa took the unusual step of voting to summon him, but WHO legal counsel is fighting to keep him from having to testify before his own government. It is impossible to assign a precise figure to the damage the CCP is responsible for in the current crisis. Relying on information available at the time, in March 2020, a team of epidemiologists from the University of Southampton in Britain simulated that the incidence of COVID-19 would have been reduced by 95 percent in China if Beijing had adopted “non-pharmaceutical interventions” (quarantine etc.) three weeks earlier, when the National Health Commission was attempting to suppress any information on the virus. But such a reckoning is both imperfect and incomplete, and it necessarily excludes the enormous social and economic havoc the CCP’s actions — and inactions — set in motion. No cover-up is large enough to hide the truth about the CCP’s role in the global coronavirus disaster. Throughout the drama, the Chinese regime has acted in bad faith. It has treated its purported partners in the international community as hostile powers. In other words, it has behaved exactly as we should have expected from a totalitarian state embedded in a liberal international order, gaming the rules to its own advantage while also harming its enemies to the extent opportunities afford. Embedding the CCP in the global order without prefigurement of potential consequences was a terrible miscalculation in its own right. One of those many consequences, furthermore, was to empower the CCP enormously. Economically and militarily, China is far stronger today than a generation ago, or even a decade ago. We have integrated an unfriendly government run by an unreformed and apparently unreformable political party into our domestic system as well as our global order. There is no reason to think that the COVID-19 disaster will be a once-only result from this great mis-integration. We are exposed to a whole new realm of uncatalogued risks to our well-being and security, entirely outside the military sphere that strategists ordinarily examine. We urgently need to take inventory of these risks. Washington’s national-security policymakers have always focused primarily on external threats to the safety and well-being of the United States — and naturally so. Over the course of our history, most threats to our national security have come from “hard power” deployed against us by hostile states located overseas. The overseas focus of our national-security planning has been reinforced both by our geography — the providence of the two oceans that have long afforded a measure of distance from our adversaries and competitors — and by our national preference for “bringing the fight” to the other guy’s home turf if shots must be fired in anger. There were, of course, exceptions. The Soviet Union funded agents of influence, political parties, and media organs and used disinformation against us, all on our home turf. But the CCP today poses a new and “unconventional” threat to our national security — and one for which established U.S. security doctrine offers virtually no guidance. This is a threat from within, by a hostile regime wielding “soft power” against us, our allies, and the international community. We are as yet almost completely unprepared even to think about this sort of threat, which makes it all the more potentially devastating. Having purposely integrated the CCP into our global system without heed of the unintended problems that could beset us, we are now in the awful position of suddenly realizing we must retrace our every step in the past 40 years of “engagement” with the PRC, with an eye to identifying vulnerabilities that we may have inadvertently inflicted on ourselves — knowing that these risks we are just now recognizing are, for the Chinese regime, opportunities, and ones to which they have already devoted lengthy consideration. It would not be possible to offer a comprehensive survey in this space of these unappreciated vulnerabilities, but we can start by flagging a few of them. i) Vulnerabilities from supply-chain dependence. We already know that the CCP is willing in principle to exploit for political objectives the vulnerabilities that foreign governments suffer because of their dependence on Chinese supply chains. In 2010, to punish Tokyo over an unrelated territorial dispute, Beijing without warning summarily suspended exports to Japan of rare earths, which are essential ingredients in the manufacture of electronics (including cellphones and defense equipment). At that time, China was the dominant global supplier of rare earths. In the intervening years, as China’s role in world trade has increased, the PRC has been allowed to gain a stronger position in other commodities that foreign states depend on as well — and is poised, should the CCP so choose, to threaten the economic or even national security of selected trade partners by withholding a wide range of products. Supply-chain vulnerabilities are a distinct problem within the much larger family of risks attendant to weaponization of trade by the CCP. We focus here only on the threats that importing societies face from CCP-controlled chokepoints, but many other problems for China’s trading partners could and do come from Beijing’s manipulation of commercial relationships for strategic or political advantage (about which more below). As China’s role in the world economy has grown, so has the scope of these problems. In 2019 the U.S. imported about $450 billion in goods directly from China — about a fifth of all merchandise purchased abroad. China is America’s No. 1 source of overseas products — and because of the globalization of commerce, a great part of the merchandise Americans buy from other countries also includes components made in China. But from a chokepoint perspective, most of this trade turnover lacks strategic significance, in the sense that a Chinese embargo of (say) umbrellas would not greatly inconvenience America, and likewise a PRC clampdown on (say) certain auto parts would just leave Detroit calling alternative subcontractors. That would not be the case with information technology, including personal computers, laptops, cellphones, and the like. According to a 2018 study for the United States–China Economic and Security Review Commission, slightly over half the total supply of products for major federal information-technology providers from 2012 through 2017 came from China. Dependence on this scale speaks to the risks only of supply disruption. It does not even begin to account for the risks from the spyware, trapdoors, special chips, and so on that Chinese suppliers routinely place in their products destined for overseas markets. America faces even more-acute vulnerabilities in pharmaceutical and medical products because U.S. firms outsourced most of the manufacture of critical elements in their supply chains to mainland China over the past generation. Yanzhong Huang of the Council on Foreign Relations notes that China now supplies 97 percent of the antibiotics Americans use, 95 percent of ibuprofen, 91 percent of hydrocortisone, 70 percent of acetaminophen, and a very large but as yet indeterminate share of “active pharmaceutical ingredients” (APIs), the basic building blocks in modern medications. China is also our top supplier of medical devices and our second-largest supplier of biologics. Well played, Big Pharma. What could go wrong with any of that? A recent study by Britain’s Henry Jackson Society attempted to quantify the “strategic dependence” on PRC supply chains of the U.S., Canada, the U.K., Australia, and New Zealand (the so-called Five Eyes). The assessment is necessarily somewhat arbitrary but informative nonetheless. It identified eleven industries as “critical” today (such as communications and energy) and nine others as vital for the future (such as quantum technology and synthetic biology). It determined that the Five Eyes countries imported almost 6,000 categories of goods from China in these sectors. “Dependence” was defined as the state of being a net importer. The study flagged over 400 categories of goods for which America was said to be “strategically dependent” on China — over a quarter of all categories of strategically important imports in the U.S. For Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, the degree of strategic dependence was found to be even higher. In April, the government of Prime Minister Shinzo Abe committed over $2 billion to support relocation of Japanese manufactures out of China, to protect Japan against both inadvertent and deliberate disruption of supply chains involving the PRC. But reducing reliance on Chinese supply chains is likely to be expensive and difficult — and therefore unattractive for corporate decision-makers. In many commercial areas, China already has ample pools of skilled labor and well-developed infrastructure. There is also a scale problem: Vietnam and other prospective venues for relocation cannot yet accommodate the demand that China can manage. Unless U.S. policy demands otherwise, even in areas where the U.S. could be strategically vulnerable, some businesses may decide that their comfort zone lies in maintaining reliance on Chinese supply chains.  ii) Further vulnerabilities from “trade with CCP characteristics.” Forgoing exhaustive itemization, we can highlight the general nature of other problems we face from our commercial enmeshment with the PRC by contrasting them with difficulties that America in an earlier generation experienced with Japan. Japan was a rising economic competitor in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s, gaining market share and making significant inroads in industries where the U.S. had enjoyed dominance. Many Americans at the time criticized Japanese trade practices — sometimes heatedly and harshly. But Japan was and remains an open society, a constitutional democracy, and a U.S. ally, while China remains ruled by a party-state that controls much of the national economy. Large portions of the Japanese corporate sector had what we considered unfair and ultimately unhealthy relationships with the Japanese state. Large portions of the Chinese corporate sector are owned by the Chinese state, and the rest have no choice but to accept CCP dictates. One major difference between China’s “economic engagement” with the U.S. and that of Japan concerns intellectual-property theft. Japan was accused of violations on occasion, but wholesale pillaging is part and parcel of the CCP’s “business model.” In 2017 the Intellectual Property Commission, an independent think tank, estimated that IP theft by China cost the U.S. economy more than $255 billion annually and could run as high as $600 billion per year. (Such costs are intrinsically difficult to calculate, but even a much lower cost of, say, $60 billion annually would weigh heavily in any assessment of the net economic benefits of America’s engagement with the PRC.) While China was by no means the only bad international actor identified, the IP Commission concluded that the PRC alone was responsible for 50 to 80 percent of all global IP theft (e.g., counterfeited goods, pirated software, and theft of trade secrets). Directly related is the problem of espionage, both economic and noneconomic. High-profile examples of Chinese industrial espionage targeting U.S. businesses abound. According to a 2015 estimate by the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, economic espionage through hacking alone may have cost the U.S. $400 billion per year in 2012–15, with China reportedly responsible for 90 percent of it. Though by definition it is impossible to know the true magnitude of China’s undetected espionage operations against the United States, Andrew E. Lelling, the U.S. attorney for the District of Massachusetts, estimates that there were thousands. Note that such indications of the scope of PRC commercial and other espionage do not include the built-in surveillance capabilities of Huawei’s 5G network, for example, or of Zoom, the virtual-meeting app that the COVID crisis made so famous, nearly a third of whose employees work in China. Last month Toronto Citizenlab detected Zoom routing encrypted data from international users back to servers in Beijing (by mistake, Zoom says). Perhaps most portentous, however, is the CCP’s approach to cultivating interest groups within the U.S., with an eye toward influencing American behavior and policy by pressure from within. This dates back to Mao Zedong’s use of “magic weapons” to influence foreign opinion in ways that might advance his struggle. Today Beijing has a large institutional apparatus to support such efforts, starting with but by no means limited to the United Front Work Department. With the allure of its large domestic market, and its thick network of economic relations in the U.S., the CCP is positioned to gain ever more from “magic weapons.” Making common cause is the essence of politicking in open societies, and identifying kindred interest groups in other countries is integral to international diplomacy and negotiations among democratic societies. What sets the CCP apart is its use of these tactics as war by other means against countries it regards as hostile. It may not have taken much strategic gardening for Beijing to exact groveling apologies last year from the National Basketball Association for a single tweet, by the general manager of the Houston Rockets, in vague support of Hong Kong democracy activists. Such is the economic leverage inherent in threatening to withhold TV revenue based on a potential viewership of 1.4 billion people. Perhaps the same holds for the paradox of the decision by Google, a U.S. giant, to decline collaboration in projects with the Pentagon even as it was operating in China’s police state. But now that a great many of America’s largest and most profitable businesses rely on China one way or another for their sales and profits, it is hard even for apolitical managers in corporate leadership to ignore the risk of displeasing the CCP. It is one thing to lobby on behalf of one’s business interests, quite another when corporate elites lobby a U.S. presidential administration to soften up on issues such as strong support for Taiwan or Hong Kong, or human-rights abuses in general — and that line is sometimes crossed. Beijing puts enormous pressure on foreign businesses to see their interests and those of the CCP as one and the same. So it is that the U.S. financial industry more or less consistently lobbies against efforts to bring Chinese firms into compliance with U.S. financial-disclosure requirements, for example. Many titans of Silicon Valley have also tried to co-opt the U.S. government on their behalf, with varying degrees of success. The big social-media companies have been mostly shut out of the market by their Chinese competitors. Chinese influence through censorship has also hit the heart of American entertainment in Hollywood. Americans have likely noticed the absence of Chinese villains in American movies. Since China agreed to open its market to foreign films in 2012, Hollywood has had to make concessions to Chinese censors. Producers and directors must coordinate with the Chinese government or lose access to the Chinese market. No less impressive, or no less worthy of greater understanding, is the sophisticated network of well-paid consultants and advisers, from Henry Kissinger on down, that has developed over the past 40 years to service a whole panoply of clients within China. It may suffice to observe that nothing like this coterie of consultants, fixers, and former high-level U.S. officials was ever a feature of the U.S.–Japanese bilateral relationship. iii) Vulnerabilities in U.S. higher education. “Government, military, society and schools — north, south, east and west — the party is leader of all”: This cornerstone of “Xi Jinping Thought” and tenet of the CCP’s revised constitution of 2017 must be borne in mind when evaluating Beijing’s “engagement” with schools, both at home and overseas. With Xi’s ascendancy, educational policy within China has been formally mobilized against “hostile foreign forces” — meaning Western ideas and those who abet their “infiltration.” Under this policy, “educational exchange” with the U.S. has been throttled — but only on Chinese soil. Fewer than 12,000 American students have been authorized to study there in recent years; both their studies and their access to Chinese society are highly restricted. Beijing has a different approach to accessing America’s educational system, even if Americans do not recognize the scope of the CCP’s objectives. China now has an enormous footprint in the U.S. educational system. In 2018–19, some 360,000 Chinese were enrolled in American universities. No other country sends more students. In 2019, students from South Korea, for example, totaled just one-seventh the number of those from China. Almost half of America’s Chinese university students are in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, and nearly a third of all U.S. doctorates in science and engineering for international students were awarded to PRC nationals in the years 2000–17. Tuition from PRC students is a major revenue item for America’s institutions of higher learning, as much as a fifth of total revenue for some of them (see, e.g., the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign). PRC students in the U.S. (and their families) spent an estimated $13 billion in academic year 2017–18. (And that does not include gifts from China that the universities “forget” to report. The Department of Education estimates that such unreported foreign monies from China and other countries has totaled many billions of dollars since 1990.) The broad benefits from this bilateral arrangement are clear enough. A large number of talented young men and women from China obtain a much better education abroad than they could at home, while America gets to hold on to most of this highly trained talent. Nearly 90 percent of U.S.-minted Ph.D.s from the PRC are still in America ten years after graduation. Overall this looks like the sort of “win-win” that globalization is meant to encourage, although one could argue about which side profits more from the arrangement. But at the hand of the CCP, risks to the U.S. from this large presence are wholly different from, say, the risks from the almost equally sizeable population of students from the Republic of India. To begin, there is the espionage. U.S. universities are both a target and, where possible, a platform for CCP operatives and helpers. From this platform the CCP can orchestrate placement of agents, theft of cutting-edge research, and spying on U.S. defense research at civilian laboratories and institutes. This is not a hypothetical risk. It is going on all the time, all across America. A few examples from just the past year, as cited by NBC News: A Chinese Harvard-affiliated cancer researcher was caught in December with 21 vials of cells stolen from a laboratory at a Boston hospital. A Chinese professor conducting sensitive research at the University of Kansas was indicted in August on charges he concealed his ties to a Chinese university. A Chinese scholar at the University of California, Los Angeles, was convicted in June of shipping banned missile technology to his homeland. A Chinese student at Chicago’s Illinois Institute of Technology was charged last year with helping to recruit spies for his country’s version of the CIA. We may also note the case of Charles Lieber, the chairman of Harvard’s department of chemistry and chemical biology. He was arrested in January for his alleged paid secret involvement in Beijing’s “Thousand Talents Plan,” whose goal, in the words of the U.S. National Intelligence Council, is the “legal and illicit transfer of U.S. technology, intellectual property and know-how.” These are only the known incidents of recent CCP espionage in the American academy. Given the nature of U.S. domestic counterintelligence — perennially underfunded, haphazard, and often inept — it might be a safer first approximation to assume that CCP academic espionage in America is now taking place always, and everywhere. The scale and scope of the CCP’s espionage efforts on U.S. campuses ought to make us think about other risks America may face from “academic engagement” with Beijing. Academic self-censorship and suppression of freedom of speech? We see this today in Australia, where a student critical of China at a highly Beijing-reliant college faces expulsion for speaking out. Chinese student activists shutting down critics of Beijing’s human-rights violations and bullying pro–Hong Kong demonstrators? Been there, done that. Just take a look at what has been happening on campus recently in South Korea. Why should we think “it can’t happen here”? Because Chinese authorities would never want to exert such sway in our country? Ironically, the coronavirus crisis may create new opportunities for the CCP to pressure the American academy. From a report of the Hoover Institution and the Asia Society (2018): “Some American faculty members report troubling conversations with university administrators who continue to view Chinese students as such a lucrative revenue stream that it should not be endangered by ‘needlessly irritating Chinese authorities.’” Today colleges and universities across the nation are panicking about the loss of prospective tuition revenue in the coming school year — and PRC students who are not coming back will surely blow a big hole in the budgets of many institutions of higher education. What sort of entreaties, concessions, and compromises, one wonders, will the American academy be willing to proffer to woo these full-fare PRC students back to their schools? iv) Vulnerabilities from penetration of international organizations and institutions. As a consequence of Washington’s design for integrating the PRC into global governance and of China’s rapid development, Beijing has become an increasingly significant player in multilateral organizations and international institutions. But the CCP does not intend to use its increasing influence in these places to promote “Western constitutional democracy,” “universal values,” “civil society,” or “the West’s idea of journalism.” Quite the contrary. The Xi Jinping regime regards all of these as direct threats to the CCP and its power, as is spelled out in the party’s now-famous “Document 9” of 2013. Xi has declared that the regime favors “reform of the global governance system” in order “to create a favorable environment” to promote “a great modern socialist country” — his own. With the WHO’s top-level pandering to the CCP’s wishes during the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic, we got just a sneak peak of what “reform of global governance” is going to look like. The case of the WHO, we should note, demonstrates that the CCP does not need PRC nationals in charge to get its bidding done in global organizations — subservient foreign minions can do almost as nicely. That said, Chinese citizens, as of April 2020, headed a number of multilateral institutions, including the International Civil Aviation Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization, and the U.N. Industrial Development Organization. The international community also elected a PRC national as head of INTERPOL. Ironically, his tenure ended when Chinese authorities secretly arrested him for “corruption” and sentenced him to a lengthy prison term. And in a near-death experience for the international regimen for secure intellectual-property rights, the Chinese candidate for director general of the World Intellectual Property Office was beaten out by a competitor from Singapore this past March. Chinese nationals hold senior leadership positions in many other international organizations, including the U.N. Secretariat, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, and the International Atomic Energy Agency. In light of the WHO debacle, Americans need to think carefully about the ways that Chinese civil servants in seemingly innocuous international slots could misuse their influence at Beijing’s behest. No one can seriously think that a Chinese international bureaucrat who resisted a directive from the CCP could ever return home without reprisal. America’s failed experiment with engaging China has come at a steep price. Our country has incontestably benefited in a number of respects from facilitating China’s globalization, as already noted. But even a summary glance at the conventional metrics of great-power politics is worrisome. China is far wealthier and more powerful than it was when the U.S. engagement policy began in the 1970s, and it seeks to undermine U.S. global leadership and geopolitical primacy. It has an increasingly formidable military and menaces U.S. allies around its periphery. With its increasing economic reach, growing diplomatic influence, and worldwide propaganda efforts, China is making the case that it is a rising global leader, in contrast to a faltering United States. And the classical great-power calculus overlooks a very special factor in America’s rivalry with a rising China. That is the entire domain of internal threats to our well-being and security from a hostile foreign power deeply enmeshed within our globalized order. This is a new and unfamiliar security risk that we caused for ourselves — welcomed, even — because we could not see, or would not see, the dangers a rising CCP might someday pose to our system from within. Thanks to our strategy of engagement, the PRC’s great-power challenge to the U.S. and the West is taking place in many more dimensions than did our struggle with the USSR — including dimensions we are only belatedly beginning to understand. By comparison, the Cold War may in retrospect look almost simple. Even the old Britain–Prussia analogy is of limited utility in illuminating our current straits. Our enmeshment with China is immeasurably deeper and more complex than that of the U.K. with Germany at the dawn of the 20th century — and the CCP is more skilled at cultivating its opponents’ potential vulnerabilities than the kaiser would have dreamed of. There is one important additional and devilish difficulty that our failed engagement policy poses for America. For the truth is that most of our economic connections with China benefit the U.S. side — and more than a few may benefit the U.S. more than the PRC. If the current arrangements were overwhelmingly disadvantageous for the U.S., it would be a straightforward matter (albeit painful and unpleasant) just to end them. But this is not the case. Instead we find ourselves in a tableau mainly painted in shades of gray. Careful discrimination and informed judgment will be required to determine whether each of the myriad cords that bind us to China today is actually in the American interest. For each of these cords, domestic U.S. constituencies will be at the ready to make the case that their particular relationship really is. And so today we must begin the task of quarantining ourselves against the CCP. If we are successful, that task promises to be laborious and vexatious and endlessly disagreeable. It will also be unceasing, with constant new questions about constant new opportunities always arising. It will entail close calls and near calls and bad calls, all of which will be debated publicly by critics and activists and would-be claimants. And it will require not just years of concerted effort and attention, but likely decades. Possibly the task will not be satisfactorily advanced in much less than a generation’s time. But we have just had a dress rehearsal to remind us of what failure in this task will look like. And we should entertain no illusions that the CCP will spare us from exploiting the vulnerabilities we have offered them through the hubris of an only half-thought-through China policy. — Mr. Blumenthal, author of the forthcoming book China Nightmare: The Grand Ambitions of a Decaying State, is the director of Asian studies at the American Enterprise Institute, where Mr. Eberstadt holds the Wendt Chair in Political Economy. They would like to thank Evan Abramsky and Linda Zhang for their sterling research assistance with this study. The authors are responsible for any remaining errors. This article is sponsored by National Review Institute.  This article appears as “China Unquarantined” in the June 22, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

‘New York is the last place I would want to be right now,” said a young friend of mine on the phone, making me gulp a little: I live right here, in the city. He had a point, though. New York has been the hardest-hit city in America during this pandemic. So far, New York has had about 204,000 cases and about 21,000 deaths.  Yet millions of us live here — more than 8 million — and we go about our lives, in whatever fashion we can. New Yorkers have had a range of experiences. I will tell you a little about mine. In the first days of March, I had a gripe about a new inconvenience: a ban on plastic bags. I bought groceries at the Rite Aid, and I was coming home with two paper bags, stuffed. They broke, sending the groceries all over the sidewalk. Kind neighbors helped me pick them up. At the 7-Eleven, I was given a plastic bag, which already seemed kind of subversive and thrilling. How could I have such a wonderful thing? The clerk explained to me that they were allowed to use all the plastic bags they had on hand. After that, it was Paper City.  This seems quaint now, and trifling.  On April 8, about three weeks into the shutdown, a headline appeared in USA Today: “Plastic-Bag Bans Reversed: States, Cities, Stores Are Suddenly Banning Reusable Bags during Coronavirus.” That was not true in New York, however. Still, it was an interesting development, nationally. The last trip I had was March 12. I went to Washington, D.C., to give a talk at a club. The night before, I emailed my contact to ask whether we were still on: because things were getting canceled, left and right. Yes, he said. I left by train fairly early in the morning. Penn Station, which was usually like Calcutta, was almost a ghost town. That was a little unsettling. When I arrived in Washington, and was en route to the club (where I would stay, as well as talk), I got a message from my contact. Would I call him? Uh-oh. I called. “Have you left New York yet?” he said. Yes. “Okay, no problem. We were going to call it off if you hadn’t left, but now we will go through with it.” Before we hung up, I gave my host an assurance: If people wanted to stay away, I would certainly understand. No offense taken!   It was a merry evening — but it felt a little like the last supper. In fact, that was part of its merriness. The club was canceling all scheduled events until further notice. I returned to New York the next afternoon, on an almost-empty train. Penn Station was even more of a ghost town than the day before. I got on the subway, which was fairly crowded. People eyed one another warily, even accusatorily. Woe to you if you coughed. I wanted to tell everybody aboard that train what parents tell their children about certain animals: “Don’t forget, they’re as scared of you as you are of them.” That was March 13. I have not been down into the subway system since. I’m told, however, that the trains have become moving homeless shelters, more or less.  At the Metropolitan Opera, performances of Werther were canceled, and one of the stars, Joyce DiDonato, did something neat: She invited her co-star, Piotr Beczala, into her home for a livestream. They would perform excerpts from the opera, accompanied by a piano and a harp. Future performances at the Met — including of Werther — were still on. But livestreaming from home soon became the norm, all across the arts world, and now people are asking, “Will there be a 2020–21 season?” In New York, as elsewhere, people had to find “a new way of living.” (I’ve quoted a song from West Side Story.) Saying this, I am fully mindful that many were dying. A lot of us began to work by Zoom; go to church by Zoom; socialize by Zoom. The theme song of this period ought to be “Who’s Zoomin’ Who?” (the Aretha Franklin hit from 1985). Many people were out of work, out of luck. I was very lucky. In the magazine business, we can make our product at home. And our customers can consume the product at home. Contrast this with a clothing store, for example, or a sports club.  Of those who were working, many did not have the luxury of home confinement. They were “out there,” performing “essential services,” keeping the world afloat. Doctors and nurses, yes, but also grocery workers, policemen, et al. I felt surging gratitude for them.  The mail kept coming — I’m talking about the good ol’ U.S. Mail. “Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night . . .” My Internet provider, Spectrum, sent a man out on a Sunday evening to replace my defunct router-modem. I was kind of amazed. On another evening, at the end of March, a big, sustained cheer went up outside my windows. Lots of hootin’ and hollerin’. I had not heard anything like it since Election Night 2012 (a bad night for me). It became a ritual: a neighborhood cheer at 7 o’clock for everyone who was “out there,” working and helping. I happily joined in, often ringing a little bell that an old friend gave me, long ago. Some people think the 7 o’clock cheer is dorky. I find it a touching gesture, from people who are inside and wanting to express a little appreciation for those who are outside — and who maybe want to make a little noise as well.  Otherwise, it is quiet, eerily so. I hear a lot of birds. I am listening to them right this moment. In the 20-plus years I have lived in this building, I have become accustomed to a wall of sound: constant, urban sound, day and night. I think of an old joke, or story, about the family who lived next to the railroad tracks. At 6:23 every night, as the family was having dinner, a train came through and blew its whistle. This happened like clockwork. One night, the train did not come — and, at 6:23, the father jerked his head up and said, “What was that?” You wanted to check in on people, as the shutdown got entrenched. “Are you all right? Do you have enough food? Can I do anything for you?” I saw a woman in the hallway, going into her apartment, several doors down from me. I don’t know her name, she doesn’t know mine. (Very New York.) But she knows where I live, and I know where she lives. We both said: Knock if you need anything. The doormen in our building, as in others, never stopped coming to work: never stopped dealing with packages and people (not necessarily in that order). Doormen are a lubricant of New York life. A native midwesterner, I never knew anything about doormen until I came here, beyond Rhoda, the 1970s sitcom — in which a voice would come through the intercom, saying, “This is Carlton, your doorman.” Was it fair that they were “out there” — though masked and gloved — while many of the rest of us had the luxury of being “in”? Whatever the case, I was never more grateful for them. A few days ago, I read an article in the Times — not the New York Times, oddly enough, but the Los Angeles Times. Its heading was “While New York City Fights a Pandemic, Building Doormen Greet and Troubleshoot.” The article said that there is a higher death rate among New York doormen than among the New York police. Our building put in some pandemic rules, concerning guests, deliveries, etc. For instance, you could ride in the elevator only one at a time — one passenger or one family. We have two elevators, plus a freight. One of the elevators had a problem and was put out of service. Ordinarily, this would have meant long, long waits. Especially with one passenger or family allowed at a time! But an elevator — the elevator (plus a freight) — has never been more available in my 20-plus years. Why? First, people were simply not going out. I have a friend here who has not been out of her apartment since the middle of March. (We have been emailing.) Second, there were many fewer people in the building. They had decamped to second homes, or perhaps to their main homes, their apartments serving as pieds-à-terre. I detected a little class resentment among some of the remainers. In the early days, only a few people wore masks, out and about. Maybe 5 percent of the people you saw. They seemed extra-vigilant. Then it became 25 percent, 50 percent. Soon, I was one of the few without a mask, which made me self-conscious. Where were people getting these masks? I did not have the nerve to ask them. You approached people on the street, in the pandemic, even less than you did before. Naturally — I don’t blame them — they swerved from you as though you were a leper.  Masks were not available in stores, and Amazon told me it would be a month. (It turned out to be one month and two and a half weeks.) I wore a hankie. Then my sister dispatched me some masks, as did my mother. What am I, twelve years old? No, but it’s always nice to be cared for. By about May 15, friendly policemen were handing out masks in the parks — not merely to the unmasked but to the masked, in case they wanted extras. In March, there was a run on dry pasta in the various stores. One of the few items scarcer was hand sanitizer. Same with  toilet paper. Eventually, toilet paper returned, but it was kept behind the counter at Rite Aid, almost like contraband. A few weeks later, TP returned to the shelves, just like normal. (No sign of hand sanitizer yet.) My friend and colleague Elaina Plott tweeted out a picture of TP on the shelves at her store. Her caption was clever and sweet: “Nature is healing.” Trader Joe’s, like other stores, allows only a small number of people in at a time. There are long lines outside Trader Joe’s, made all the longer by social distancing: The standers are six feet apart. I thought of GUM, the old department store in the Soviet Union, outside of which people spent huge chunks of their lives, standing, waiting. I was in another store — Jubilee Market Place — in the checkout line. I was keeping my distance, I thought. But the elderly woman in front of me turned and said, with a shaky, urgent voice, “You’re too close.” I apologized and backed off (way, way off, so you could hardly tell I was in line). I try to cut people slack. There is a lot of fear in the air. And people, for the most part, have been patient and kind. “That’s when you have to worry,” said a friend of mine. “When New Yorkers are being patient and kind, there’s serious trouble afoot.” I have come to love the young cashiers at Rite Aid, Pinkberry, and other places. I see them almost every day. They are behind plastic partitions, working their tails off, scrubbing their hands, putting up with all manner of customer weirdness and nervousness. We have formed something like a bond. I feel quasi-parental toward them. In the beginning, the only restaurant open, within blocks of me, was a pizzeria. You could not dine in, but you could take out, or have the pizza delivered. The place was operating 24/7. As I watched them, the workers seemed well-nigh heroic. Were they foolhardy? Were we, who patronized them? Come to think of it, the McDonald’s next door to the pizza place never closed either. At least I don’t think it did. Maybe for a week or two, max. You can sooner take down the Statue of Liberty than you can the Golden Arches. After a while, more restaurants opened up for delivery and takeout (although not dine-in). A sign in one restaurant window — printed in the British World War II style — said, “Keep Calm and Carry Out.” Some restaurants, you could not enter. You waited on the sidewalk, and a worker reached through the door to hand you your food. My barbecue place, you could enter, to pick up. A sign said, “Please Stand Six Ribs Apart.” Street people were more present than ever, or at least they seemed so. They had the run of the sidewalks and squares. They begged with more intensity, I think, and my impression is they took in more, from passersby. What does “home confinement” mean to a street person? I met one man who seemed like a first-time beggar: someone whose back was against the wall, owing to the pandemic and unemployment. Was he scamming? Years in New York have taught me great wariness, not to say cynicism. But, no, I don’t think he was. Little platoons cropped up. Three young people started an organization called “Invisible Hands,” which runs errands for the shut in and vulnerable. The organization now has more than 10,000 volunteers. (That’s a big platoon.) And I like the touch of Adam Smith in their name.  A ship came in: the USNS Comfort, a hospital ship. Lots of New Yorkers came out to greet it. Was this wise? They did it, regardless. There was a field hospital in Central Park. It is startling to see a field hospital in a place you know well, or at least it was to me. It smacks of war. Field hospitals are for France, in 1916. I got some news from my hometown, Ann Arbor, Mich. An athletic facility I once worked in had been turned into a field hospital. The thought of it gave me a jolt. The field hospital in Central Park was set up by Samaritan’s Purse, a Christian relief organization. Some people protested the hospital, because the organization requires some contractors and volunteers to affirm an opposition to gay marriage. (The organization will treat anyone, however.) A pandemic can stop many things, but not politics. A sign at Mount Sinai Hospital said, “To the Health-Care Workers Fighting for Our Lives, Thank You.” I saw a headline, and a subheading, in the New York Times that was very hard to take. “Top E.R. Doctor Who Treated Virus Patients Dies by Suicide: ‘She tried to do her job, and it killed her,’ said the father of Dr. Lorna M. Breen, who worked at a Manhattan hospital hit hard by the coronavirus outbreak.” (That hospital is a branch of New York–Presbyterian.) In Riverside Park, a ball came rolling toward me. In ordinary days, I would have thrown it back, to the mother and her little son. This time, however, I called out, “Should I stop it?” The mother, after hesitating, said, “No, that’s all right.” In a touchy time, it can be hard to know what to touch, or have others touch. Normal human intercourse is called into question. A man jogged by me, wearing a mask. He was giving me what I thought was a thumbs-up — two thumbs up, in fact. A nice gesture of solidarity, I thought. I gave him a thumbs-up back. But then I realized: My mask was dangling around my neck — I was taking in a little fresh air — and he wanted me to put it back up. There was alarm and reproach in his eyes. Another time, I passed a woman, and probably got too close to her. Veering sharply off, she said, “Excuse me, moron.” I overheard a man in the park talking to his friend. “I have hay fever, and when I’m coughing, people look at me like I’m a serial killer.” Out on the Hudson River, three guys were on Jet Skis, slaloming like mad, making rooster tails. They had the river to themselves, and it looked like they were having a ball. Speaking of balls: I saw a man practice his tennis against a wall. It was the first “live sports event” I had seen in ages. Another man, in front of another wall, practiced his singing — day after day. I imagined that the others in his apartment did not want to hear him. He had found an outdoor studio. Often, the parks were crowded, while the streets were not. If you wanted social isolation, you were much better off in Times Square than in a park. In Times Square, there was practically tumbleweed. Not far from Times Square, I saw a father and a son playing catch in the middle of the street. (Baseball, I’m talking.) Just like it was 1937 or something. I had never seen this, in my years in New York. A friend of mine said he saw kids riding their bikes in the middle of the street, poppin’ wheelies — just like they were in suburbia. I noticed that the flower boxes outside the Javits Center — which was used for a while as a field hospital — were amazingly neat, pretty, and pristine. There was no one around to mess them up: to sit in them, for example, or throw litter in them. As for the air quality, we could almost compete with the Rockies. I  noticed something weird the other day: I waited for traffic, for like a minute. I had gotten used to tumbling into the streets, as though New York were Mayberry. Things are picking back up. There are more people about, with less obvious fear. Even the 7 o’clock cheer is petering out, much less robust and much less sustained than before.  On Memorial Day evening, people were gathered on the sidewalk outside two restaurants, one of them newly reopened (for takeout, between “3 and 8:30-ish”). The scene was almost a block party. Men were talking about the charity golf match shown on television the day before — a real, live, professional sports event: Tiger Woods and Peyton Manning versus Phil Mickelson and Tom Brady. On the sidewalk, there was something resembling normality. A few days later, however, trouble erupted in the city: riots, stemming from an awful case of police brutality in Minneapolis. There were riots in cities all across the country, in addition to righteous protests. One night, at 2:30, I was awakened by noise outside my windows: not birds, or cheering, but shouting. And police sirens. Was the commotion related to Minneapolis? I think so, but, this being New York, who knows? When the sun came up, all was peaceful, at least outwardly. Back to Memorial Day evening. I left the “block party” and returned to my building, where there was another party, of sorts. The super, two doormen, and I huddled for some music. We listened to a concert from New Orleans, featuring a jazz clarinetist, backed by a symphony orchestra. Picture us in our masks — a Honduran, an Albanian, an Ethiopian, and a Michigander, but all of us American, true-blue — groovin’ to some New Orleans jazz on Memorial Day. Pandemic or not, civil unrest or not, I have so much to be grateful for.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

Confession time: I’ve always been a bit of a prepper. I really shouldn’t be broadcasting this, I know. Prepping — the hobby of preparing for societal breakdown by stocking up on insane amounts of Chunky Soup and Band-Aids and waterproof matches and hand-cranked emergency radios that you actually have no idea how to use — was until very recently seen as a fringe activity for either bored weirdos who dwell in desert RVs or rich weirdos who live in Silicon Valley.  Moreover, telling people you are a prepper breaks the most important rule of prepping, which is akin to the first and second rules from Chuck Palahniuk’s Fight Club: You do not talk about prepping. If you share your prepping secrets with the world, after all, sooner or later the you-know-what will hit the fan and all sorts of unprepared friends and acquaintances and even frenemies who were making fun of you just the week before will sidle up with wide innocent Bambi eyes and ask to borrow “just a few of your Clorox wipes” or “just one segment of your last toilet-paper roll” or “just five or six of your guns.” But hey, it’s 2020. At this point, we’ve faced a mysterious mutant virus, government-sponsored lockdowns, an invading swarm of murder hornets, and violent unrest across America. Who knows what’s coming next? An alien invasion? Cats 2? I hate to break it to you, but if you’re here with us in 2020 and you’re paying attention and you’re not prepping, you’re the weird one now.  While this year has offered a steady dose of low-level torture for calendar-loving social-schedule planners — unfortunately for me, I’m one of those, too — for preppers, it’s been a bit of a vindication. “For years, one of the most smirked-at subspecies in the technology ecosystem was that of the Silicon Valley Prepper,” wrote Nellie Bowles in the April 24 New York Times. But now, she notes, “the coders and founders long snickered at for stockpiling flour and toilet paper were absolutely right.” Prepping, in other words, has gone mainstream.  But here we must face the gigantic elephant in the stockpile room that is delicately trying to squeeze behind the piles of bulging bugout bags and knocking down an entire stack of garbanzo beans in the process: If you rely on things you must buy from a store, you can never really be prepped enough. Those cans of freeze-dried beef stroganoff you ordered might have an impressive shelf life of 25 years, but eventually they’re going to run out. As our old friend Yeats might put it, things fall apart, the center cannot hold, and eventually you will eat all of your Spam.  To reach the true upper level of prepping — the luxury skybox of survival — one must learn to live off the land. One must know how to dress a deer and a turkey. One must know how to gut a fish. One must know which mushrooms, if consumed, will unceremoniously whisk you away from this earthly vale. One must know, like the magnificent Bear Grylls, how to extract hydration from camel poo. With this in mind, one must do what any reasonable aspiring hard-core survivalist would do in uncertain times: Sit back and turn on the TV. Don’t laugh. I’ve learned a lot! Say what you will about the boob tube, but these days it presents a cornucopia of wild and crazy survivalist fare. There’s Naked and Afraid, a terrifying visual offering featuring people stripped of their clothing and tossed into jungles where all sorts of nightmarish things can latch onto their skin. There’s Man vs. Wild, with the aforementioned international treasure Bear Grylls. And then there’s my family’s current favorite in the booming television-survivalist genre, featuring an impressive cast of some of the hardest-core live-off-the-land heroes you will ever encounter: Alone.   “ALONE,” as the History Channel declares on its website, “is the most intense survival series on television.” Indeed. From the start of the show’s first season — which plopped ten people into the wilderness on Vancouver Island, allowed them limited supplies, isolated them from one another, and granted the longest-lasting participant a prize of half a million dollars — the show has continually morphed and upped the ante. The first season’s winner, Alan Kay, emerged victorious after spending 56 days in the southern Canadian wilderness. Now, in season seven, the winner of Alone must last at least 100 days — in the Arctic.  Alone offers many lessons — among them, I have discovered that it is de rigueur for many survivalists to sincerely thank a captured fish for its life and service before bonking it on its head and scarfing it down for lunch. But one message resonates above all others: The winners of the show don’t share just certain physical skills. They share psychological traits as well.   Sure, they might be able to construct a cabin with a working fireplace and loft beds entirely out of stray pine needles in two days flat! They might be able to cure poisonous spider bites by whipping up a poultice made out of seaweed, good intentions, and fresh air! They can often build a full-sized fishing boat using nothing but a rusty hook, a dead snail, and an old washed-up buoy from the beach! But they also adjust their expectations beyond the temporary. The winners of Alone aren’t, in other words, sitting around feverishly counting the days. They develop a wilderness lifestyle with the assumption they will be in it for the long haul — and because of this, they pull through. Deep, is it not? “No,” you might be saying. “That is not deep at all. What are you suggesting, lady?” Okay, fine. Maybe I’m watching too much TV. But I’m right about the canned goods. You at least have to grant me that.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

The scene was a socially distanced checkout line at my local grocery store in March. “This man should be removed from the store. He’s not wearing a mask,” one woman said to whoever would listen, pointing behind her. “Mind your own business,” he replied. “It is my business,” she shouted back at him, and then, to the whole store: “This a**h***, like the one in the White House, is not following the rules and regulations.”  I wondered what rules she thought Trump was not following. But the maskless man had the final word, and it was chilling.  “Lady, if you don’t shut up, you’re gonna wish all I did was cough on you.” Mask-shaming is now a real phenomenon. Viral videos circulating among the smug shut-ins show clerks and retail greeters meeting demands for “freedom” with the requirements of store and company policy, which is also a form of freedom — stores have the right to set their terms of entry. It’s remarkable how much the world has changed in just a few months. In the Western world, we traditionally associate masks with danger. They are worn to protect against harmful fumes. They are worn to signal a threat to others, by bank robbers or terrorists. They are worn by people who want to commit street violence during a demonstration but not be subject to retaliation or criminal investigation when the mêlée is over. As protests bleed into riots across America, a mask is probably the first sign of trouble. Back in the last week of January, when a peculiar interest in the developing “Wuhan flu” story was seen as the mark of a paranoid, possibly racist rube, I decided I’d rather be safe than sorry. But when I went to look for masks at my local pharmacies, there were none. They were sold out seemingly everywhere. One clerk explained to me that “Chinese people” were buying them up, which I didn’t believe at first. And then I went home and discovered that masks were back-ordered on Amazon. That is the moment I became fearful of the disease. It was like discovering a massive hedge-fund bet against your own health and well-being.  In fact, it was Chinese shoppers, who had gone about this in an organized way. By the middle of February, Yahoo Finance reported that professional “daigou” shoppers had been sending masks back to China from all over the world. Daigou (roughly speaking, “surrogate shopping”) is a gig-economy and trade revolution in which members of the Chinese diaspora buy anything that can be resold at a profit in China, mostly luxury goods that would normally be subject to massive taxes. But household staples are just as good. Daigou shoppers have caused Australia, Singapore, and other nations to place strict limits on the sale of infant formula. These shoppers often advertise their finds on Chinese social networks. In April, Hexin Jiang, who goes by a name on Weibo that roughly translates as “fat American wife,” sparked viral outrage in America and China over videos in which she says, laughing, “They don’t know about the masks here [in Florida],” and brags to her potential buyers that she was not leaving any masks for the Americans. She even admits, with a guilty smile, “I feel like a thief.” Americans who came upon the story were angry that she bought up enough masks to fill the bed of her pickup truck and showed such callousness toward her neighbors. Chinese users thought she made their countrymen look evil. At that point in the pandemic, health authorities and clever-dick explainer journalists were telling the world that masks were not just useless but probably harmful for ordinary people, though desperately needed by frontline health-care workers. World Health Organization official Rabindra Abeyasinghe claimed that mask-wearers could be “at more risk” of catching the coronavirus. On March 2, Vox tweeted out, “Oh, and face masks? You can pass on them. Masks are only useful if you have a respiratory infection already and want to limit the risk of spreading, or if you’re working in a hospital in direct contact with people who have respiratory illnesses.” But, of course, if you can spread the disease while you’re asymptomatic, a mask is most useful precisely before you know it will be. Later, close readers noticed — and were outraged — when a Vox co-founder admitted he had ordered his masks in February. It turned out that the recommendations against mask-wearing were little more than a bit of folk wisdom. The theory was that medical masks used at hospitals are fitted to the wearer to give the maximum benefit, while ordinary people would wear masks improperly and then probably act recklessly, thinking they were protected. There’s no science to back up that assertion, just smug condescension toward the layman. It’s as if a union of chefs advised that home cooks don’t have perfect knife technique and therefore get no benefit from that utensil. A great deal depends on how one sees the masks. Are they a further imposition on daily life by a liberal expert class, a ready symbol of that set’s contempt for the masses, of their belief in the presumptive toxicity of unmanaged human life? Are they a useless piece of security theater, meant to keep us frightened? R. R. Reno, the editor of First Things, and Helen Andrews, a senior editor at The American Conservative, see it that way. Proving that liberty is a part of the Catholic vision of the common good, Reno expressed resentment of the mask as a symbol of subjection. Andrews compared mask-wearing to the duck-and-cover drills of the Cold War era, arguing that they were mostly futile against the threat, and that dignity required facing a danger with some equanimity.   In a blistering essay for the online magazine Damage, the left-wing writer Amber A’Lee Frost admitted that she hates the masks, hates the stupid consumerist fake enthusiasm for cute masks and the smug expert journalists chirping about virtuous mask-wearing. “I feel like I live in an open-air hospital,” she writes, “or a particularly cosmopolitan leper colony. I miss human faces very badly, and I hate the sensation of being trapped in a breathing swamp of my own self, as each damp exhale rolls back onto my face.”  This is a deeply human reaction, and one we’ve seen before. In the great influenza of 1918, San Francisco imposed mask-wearing on citizens when they were in public. Eventually people started letting their masks dangle below their chins in quiet defiance. An anti-mask league was formed just before the orders were lifted.  My own view is that masks are less an extension of a lockdown mentality of submission than the way out of it. In Austria, the conservative prime minister Sebastian Kurz imposed the wearing of masks at supermarkets as he was permitting the further reopening of the economy, even as he acknowledged, “I am fully aware that masks are alien to our culture.” In East Asian countries, which learned from successfully containing SARS in 2003, masks have again been part of the response to the wide-release sequel this year. The science on masks’ reducing the spread of droplets on which the virus can travel is compelling. Some have taken this to extremes and wear masks while they are driving alone in their cars, or even while exercising outside, miles away from anyone. But indoors, masks have been shown to be effective at containing the virus. When a sizeable portion of people are wearing them, it becomes very difficult for the sick to infect others. The symbolic gesture is not useless either, since the mask signals to strangers a kind of courtesy and care for their health. If masks can enable us to get back to business, we ought to be for it. But Kurz was on to something in observing that masks are alien to our culture. I believe that the resistance to public mask-wearing stems not just from its common association with criminality or from physical discomfort but that it goes to the theological roots of Western life, that it’s part of the same hard-to-articulate resistance we see in Europe to the intrusion of Islamic face-veiling into society. At the heart of the West is a conviction that the truth is “unveiled,” and that the face is where our personhood is incarnate. Our limbs merely gesture, but only a facial expression, and the uncovered mouth, can express, even betray, our deepest selves. That is why unveiling has featured so prominently in Christian liturgy, as a reminder that our destiny is to be transfigured when we see God face to face. This is so deeply a part of our culture that the resistance to and resentment of masks should not surprise us. They are a terrible imposition, and only a real danger could justify them. At the same time, we should have confidence that masks will not become a permanent feature of Western social life.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

Another 1.9 million Americans filed for unemployment benefits last week, bringing the total of jobless claims since the coronavirus pandemic began up to 42 million. The level of new claims outpaced the Dow Jones estimate of 1.775 million. However, last week’s new claims were still lower than the previous week’s total, which were revised upwards to 2.126 million.  Meanwhile, continuing jobless claims hit 21.5 million, an increase of 649,000 that rose higher than most economists  predicted. Continuing unemployment claims began to taper off in May, a sign that the economic destruction from the coronavirus is beginning to slow as some businesses are allowed to reopen and employees return to work. Since mid-March, the pandemic has forced businesses to shutter and furlough or lay off employees as states implemented lockdown and stay at home orders that have slowly been lifted, although social distancing restrictions remain in place in many areas. Of the 42 million unemployment claims that have been filed since the start of the pandemic, only  a fraction have been processed as agencies continued to be overwhelmed by the volume of claims. The unemployment rate for May is expected to hit 19 percent, up from 14.7 percent in April, and will be reported in the Labor Department’s monthly unemployment report Friday.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

George Floyd was killed in Minneapolis last week when a police officer used brutally excessive force to arrest him. It was the latest in a string of high-profile cases nationwide in which citizens, most of them African Americans, died from reckless police force. Once again, protests over police brutality turned violent and rioting ensued.  The U.S. is torn apart over the national mass quarantine. Liberal blue states accused red opened-up states of recklessly endangering national health by allowing their populations to go back to work before the virus has left. Red states countered that blue states were hypocritical in wanting federal money to subsidize their locked-down residents while expecting other states to generate needed federal revenue. They also contended that there was no longer scientific evidence to justify the lockdown. The nationwide protests and rioting have inadvertently adjudicated the issue: States cannot jail the law-abiding barber who wears a mask at work but allow the arsonist without a mask to roam the streets, burning with impunity. There is mounting evidence that an array of federal officials had plotted to disrupt Donald Trump’s 2016 campaign and his presidential transition, leaving Trump supporters furious.   Meanwhile, likely Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden is sequestered in his basement. He often appears confused. Yet Biden seems content that the more people do not see or hear him, the more they like the idea of him as president. Indeed, the more inert Biden has become, the higher his poll numbers have risen against Trump and his tweeting. 
 As the U.S. protested and bickered, China attempted to strangle what was left of Hong Kong’s enfeebled democracy. China’s theory seemed to be that if it’s going to be blamed for the spreading virus due to its deceit anyway, it might as well not let such a pandemic go to waste. The Chinese strategy in reaction to disclosures that it hid vital data about the virus and exposed the world to contagion while it quarantined its own cities has devolved from “So what?” to the current “What exactly are you going to do about it?” China also decided to ramp up its perennial border confrontations with India, as its forces encroached on Indian soil in the Himalayas. What better way to show the world that a defiant China is dangerous than to agitate the world’s largest democracy?   Beijing warned European nations that if their independent media continued to condemn China, there could be commercial retaliation. A few European journalists still exposed Chinese deceit, even as shaken EU leaders backtracked and tried to contextualize Chinese misbehavior. Japan and South Korea worried that China might move on Taiwan. They knew that if China did, only the United States — convulsed by quarantines, riots, and a contentious presidential race —could stand up to Beijing. For years, China has bullied and waged a virtual commercial war against Asian democracies such as Japan, South Korea, India, and Australia. It has subverted almost all international trading norms. The Chinese government assumed that Western elites would get rich by being complicit in China’s cheating and would thus help sell out their own countries. They were mostly right on both counts. As China Westernized its economy, it conned gullible Western officials that eventually it would become a useful member of the family of nations.  In truth, China strategically hoarded cash from its asymmetrical trade surpluses. It planted its functionaries throughout transnational organizations and subverted them. It beefed up its military and planted island bases in international waters. It compromised strategically important nations by investing in their infrastructure through its neocolonial and imperialist multitrillion-dollar Belt and Road initiative. China may have been forced by the global epidemic to give up its nice-guy façade. But it has insidiously pivoted from global friend to its new role as overt global villain. If the world had been anxious over the intentions of a suspiciously nice China, it will become downright terrified of an overtly hostile China. In other words, China is not wasting the disaster of the Wuhan outbreak. It once gained a lot by faking friendliness, but now it seems to think it has no choice but to gain even more by being authentically belligerent. As part of the about-face, China no longer flatters the West in passive-aggressive fashion but rather shows its disdain for a weak Europe and an increasingly divided U.S.  China’s real message to a fence-sitting world?  While America tears itself apart with endless internal quarreling and media psychodramas, while Europe appeases its enemies, and while the rest of Asia stays mute, waiting to see who wins, China is now on the move — without apologies. © 2020 Tribune Content Agency, LLC   

Cardenas Ortiz-Sandoval’s mother, Guadalupe, died last month. Cardenas, 22, helped to plan her funeral. She was told by mortuary officials that the state of California would not allow more than ten people to attend her mother’s graveside service. Some family members were forced to stay home. Lifelong friends could not bury a woman they had known for decades. “So many public spaces are open,” Ortiz-Sandoval told CNN, “but a cemetery, which is open-air, is limited to ten per funeral.”  The family of Guadalupe Ortiz-Sandoval did not burn Los Angeles to the ground. They did not start riots. They, and millions like them, did not attend their loved one’s funeral service because the public-health authorities told them not to. As I write this piece, a policeman is scouring the streets in my ruralish Connecticut suburb, patrolling the neighborhood for congregants and other insubordinates of the social-distancing regime. It is nice outside. Many are sick of sitting indoors, or pacing the streets in solitude. Most have dutifully followed the orders of the public-health officials, epidemiologists, and chart-makers whom the media have coronated as our de facto shepherds through this pandemic. You remember what they told us. People on the beach? Fools. Three people riding together on a boat in Michigan? Lethal. Tepidly reopening the economy? An experiment in human sacrifice. The virus doesn’t go away because you’re bored. It doesn’t care that you’re grieving, your livelihood is ruined, your business has collapsed, or your spouse is abusive. You can’t pray it away at your church. So stay home, stay safe, and flatten the curve.  And that’s an order.  
 Unless, of course, you’re protesting racial injustice. Those protesting George Floyd’s death in crowds large enough to fill a small stadium have evaded scrutiny from the same people who told us that Floridians lying distanced on a beach were Literally Killing People. Some elected officials say that these protests are different — that the demonstrators have a good reason to be congregating on the streets. As Bill de Blasio said, the protests are much different from the matter of the “aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person.” They don’t have good reasons to break quarantine. The looters do. Everyone you know has a “good reason” to break quarantine. Some wish to bury a relative, while others want to visit a lonely elder in a nursing home. Parents want to baptize their children to save their souls, and first-generation college students want to attend graduation. All of them were told to abstain from these things in the name of public health. Following those orders had human costs — rates of domestic violence increased during the lockdowns. Calls to suicide hotlines skyrocketed. Millions were thrown out of work. Businesses built over generations filed for bankruptcy, Some will never recover.  Those who protested the lockdown regime were ridiculed. Governor Gretchen Whitmer in Michigan said that anti-lockdown protests came “at a cost to people’s health.” Michigan nurses stood in front of protesters’ cars with folded arms, leering on in contempt. As hordes of looters and rioters turned to the streets, however, NPR informed us that “dozens of public health and disease experts have signed an open letter in support of the nationwide anti-racism protests.” Nurses in New York stood outside a hospital and cheered as protesters, some of whom were unmasked, packed together like sardines and marched through the streets to protest police brutality. The chair of the New York City Council’s health committee, Mark Levine, says that “if there is a spike in coronavirus cases in the next two weeks,” we ought not to “blame the protesters. Blame racism.” If we shouldn’t “blame” them, then we ought not “blame” the regular people who break quarantine to mourn their dead. If it’s true, as the experts told us, that the virus does not discriminate, and does not care how trying your personal circumstances are, then the virus certainly does not care about how unjust the Minneapolis police department may be. If no “open letter” of apology from the “medical community” is forthcoming to the bereaved who stared at their casketed relative on an iPad, the least that those officials can do is admit that they never really cared about the lockdowns at all. 

1. A nation on Fire Needs the Flames of the Spirit 2. Francis X. Maier: All Conflict, All the Time 3. Ross Douthat: Crisis in the Liberal City 4. The Pandemic Has Sent Child Hunger to Record Levels   5. Bishops join women with Down syndrome in call to change N Ireland abortion law  6. The Daily Signal: George Floyd’s Son Calls for End to Violence, Saying Rioting Won’t ‘Solve Anything’ 7. Rod Dreher: Language, Memory, & Soft Totalitarianism 8. New York Times: The C.D.C. Waited ‘Its Entire Existence for This Moment.’ What Went Wrong? 9. The gospel brings a humility to our activism: – we are as sinful as the people with whom we disagree – we are not God and cannot change the world – we work and labor but look ultimately to that better world to come — Daniel Darling (@dandarling) June 3, 2020  10. Jason L. Riley: Good Policing Saves Black Lives 11. Stephen A. Moses and Brian C. Blase: Nursing Homes, Coronavirus and Medicaid 12. Funding Illegal Surrogacy 13. Don’t Panic If You Feel Fear 14. Karen Swallow Prior and Rod Dreher talk about Joseph Conrad’s Heart of Darkness 15. Community comes together to throw adoption parade for 2-year-old who spent 700 days in foster care 16. Fostering Hope: Bartow couple opens hearts, home to 14 children in need since 2018 17. 4 things we have learned in the uncertainty of foster care 18. Idaho’s foster care system sees a slight increase in adoptions during COVID-19 19. Washington Post: A blind therapy dog brings joy to assisted-living residents with visits through the window  20. Wall Street Journal: Last Person to Receive Civil War-Era Pension Dies  

First: It seems that several major studies, including one in The Lancet suggesting that the drug is actually harmful, were based on rather questionable data. The Guardian has the details: “The US-based company Surgisphere, whose handful of employees appear to include a science fiction writer and an adult-content model, has provided data for multiple studies on Covid-19 co-authored by its chief executive, but has so far failed to adequately explain its data or methodology.” The company has a minimal online presence, and the “get in touch” function on its website doesn’t even work, yet it provided data it claimed to get from “more than a thousand hospitals worldwide.” These revelations follow concerns aired elsewhere that the data seemed fishy. Second, though, a randomized trial found that the drug didn’t measurably help to prevent COVID-19 when given to individuals who’d been exposed to infected people. From the New York Times: Conducted in the United States and Canada, this trial was the first to test whether the drug could prevent illness in people who have been exposed to the coronavirus. This type of study, in which patients are picked at random to receive either an experimental treatment or a placebo, is considered the most reliable way to measure the safety and effectiveness of a drug. The participants were health care workers and people who had been exposed at home to ill spouses, partners or parents. “The take-home message for the general public is that if you’re exposed to someone with Covid-19, hydroxychloroquine is not an effective post-exposure, preventive therapy,” the lead author of the study, Dr. David R. Boulware, from the University of Minnesota, said in an interview. The drug could still be effective against COVID-19 in other situations, and there are other trials in the works. And there are some weaknesses to the study itself: Not all the participants could be tested for the virus, because when the study was being conducted, there was still a shortage of test kits. There was no meaningful difference between the placebo group and those who took the drug. Among those taking hydroxychloroquine, 49 of 414, or 11.8 percent, became ill. In the placebo group, 58 or 407, or 14.3 percent, became ill. Analyzed statistically, the difference between those rates was not significant. In other words, they couldn’t test everyone to make sure their illnesses were COVID-19, and people who got the drug were about 17 percent less likely to become “ill” — a difference that wasn’t statistically significant because the study was so small. But there’s no denying this is disappointing news.  

Remember that scary hydroxychloroquine study in The Lancet and New England Journal of Medicine that everyone in the media was writing about a few weeks ago? It turns out that the underlying data were likely fake: A Guardian investigation can reveal the US-based company Surgisphere, whose handful of employees appear to include a science fiction writer and an adult-content model, has provided data for multiple studies on Covid-19 co-authored by its chief executive, but has so far failed to adequately explain its data or methodology. A peer-reviewed Lancet study claimed that Surgisphere culled data from nearly 15,000 COVID-19 patients from 1,200 hospitals around the world. There is no evidence that it collected any data from anyone. Partisans been rooting against hydroxychloroquine for months now. There’s really no other way to describe the manic reaction to a drug that has been widely, though anecdotally, said to have therapeutic value against the coronavirus. Politicians have blocked attempts to study the drug. The number of shoddy pieces of journalism surrounding hydroxychloroquine is just remarkable. Apparently, it is also dangerous. A couple of weeks ago, Joe Biden compared taking hydroxychloroquine to drinking bleach, even though millions of Americans use the drug every day to survive. At the time, I linked to an NPR interview in which doctors at Columbia University and other research institutions complained that they couldn’t find people to conduct simple clinical trials on hydroxychloroquine’s effectiveness, even though the drug was, as one doctor put it, “very very safe.”  Two verys. Now we know that thousands of hospitals around the world relied on Surgisphere data to make determinations about treatment and studies. The WHO, the organization I am assured we must continue funding, halted clinical trials — followed by a number of countries — because of the alleged dangers borne from the imaginary data put together by an adult model. WHO has now reversed course and resumed studies. If we learn that hydroxychloroquine is helpful mitigating the harm coronavirus — and that’s still a big if; a new study today shows that it is not effective as a prophylactic — we can probably thank knee-jerk anti-Trumpism for delays. Scientists have trouble conducting studies, medical journals will take shortcuts in a rush to prove the president wrong (what else could explain it?), and the media will publish any scary story that reaffirms their preexisting prejudices. If you’re interested in further corroding public trust in experts, this is a perfect way to do it. It’s a scandal.  

How to square the circle of insisting on social distancing to fight the spread of COVID-19 while supporting large-scale protests? Public-health experts are here to help, as is Shannon Palus of Slate. “Public Health Experts Say the Pandemic Is Exactly Why Protests Must Continue,” reads the headline to the story, which notably lacks anyone who is willing to say that the protests will reduce the death toll from the disease or even to deny that it will increase them.  The central claim, rather, is that racism is (quoting one of the experts) “one of the more dangerous infectious diseases” and that fighting it is therefore a blow for public health even if it comes at the price of spreading COVID-19. “In the long term, breaking down structural racism is an unequivocal public health good,” Palus writes. But even if we grant that premise — something that the slipperiness of the phrase “breaking down structural racism” counsels against — the planted axiom is that these protests are likely to be an effective means of reducing racism. It is not at all obvious that they are, especially when the protests spill over into violence and looting. What should also comfort us about the protests’ role in spreading disease, Palus writes, is that they are “happening as states are relaxing stay at home orders, as largely white crowds head to pool parties and brunch.” (Let’s pause to marvel at the rigorous empiricism, doubtless expert-approved, by which we can ascertain that it’s “largely white crowds” that are exercising newly recovered freedoms.) Because of this, another expert tells Palus that if COVID-19 cases spike, “we’re not going to be able to pin this on the protests.”  It’s a point that is logically incompatible with Palus’s next move, which is to try to pin any such increase in cases on the police. Note again, though, that Palus and her expert aren’t denying that protests will spread a deadly disease. They’re just saying it won’t be possible to prove how much they do it. Which underscores that this is just politics. If racism can reasonably be likened to a dangerous infectious disease, so, surely, can stupidity. Update: I got the spelling of Palus’s name wrong, and have fixed it. My apologies to her and to readers.  

A study that cited worldwide hospital data to warn of higher risks of death and heart problems with taking the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine to treat coronavirus is now under scrutiny for faking data. The hydroxychloroquine study, published in two of the world’s leading medical journals — the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine — used data from thousands of hospitals and tens of thousands of patients to conclude that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine treatments had no positive effects on Covid-19 patients and led to greater risks of health problems.  The findings caused the World Health Organization and other researchers to halt studies looking into the effectiveness of the antimalarial drugs as possible coronavirus treatments, and raised further criticism against the Trump administration, which has touted the drug as an effective treatment. Last month, President Trump said that he had completed a two-week course of hydroxychloroquine as a preventative measure against coronavirus. But the studies were based on data from Surgisphere, a little-known U.S. company, whose employees have little or no data or scientific background, according to The Guardian. The company’s chief executive, Sapan Desai, who is listed as a coauthor of the Lancet study, said that his company was “not responsible for the source data,” explaining that the records of the nearly 100,000 patients used in the study were compiled by the respective hospitals, not his team. But the claim contradicted that of QuartzClinical — the content management system Desai said Surgisphere employed — which stated on its website that it “successfully integrates your electronic health record, financial system, supply chain, and quality programs into one platform.”   Peter Ellis, the chief data scientist of Nous Group, an international management consultancy that does data integration projects for government departments, told The Guardian that Surgisphere’s database was “almost certainly a scam.” “It is not something that any hospital could realistically do,” he explained. “De-identifying is not just a matter of knocking off the patients’ names, it is a big and difficult process. I doubt hospitals even have capability to do it appropriately. It is the sort of thing national statistics agencies have whole teams working on, for years.” Following widespread scrutiny, both the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine released statements saying they have acknowledged the serious concerns and are looking into the source of the data.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Racism should be blamed if George Floyd protests cause a spike in coronavirus cases, New York City council member Mark Levine said on Wednesday. “Let’s be clear about something: if there is a spike in coronavirus cases in the next two weeks, don’t blame the protesters. Blame racism,” Levine, who is the head of the city council’s health committee, wrote on Twitter. “And let’s remember that the police are increasing COVID risk by: using tear gas; herding demonstrators into tight spaces; putting people in crowded jails.”  Massive demonstrations erupted across the country following the killing of Floyd, who is African-American, at the hands of white police officers in Minneapolis. While the demonstrations have led to widespread looting and rioting in major U.S. cities, even peaceful protesters have not adhered to social distancing guidelines despite the continuing risk of coronavirus spread. A meta-analysis in the medical journal The Lancet published on Monday concluded that social distancing is the most effective method of coronavirus mitigation. “We just spent 93 days limiting behavior, closing down, no school, no business, thousands of small businesses destroyed,” New York governor Andrew Cuomo said on Monday, “And now? Mass gatherings, with thousands of people, in close proximity?…What sense does this make?” On Tuesday, New York City mayor Bill de Blasio defended his decision to keep religious institutions and small businesses closed until June 8 even as police struggled to contain nightly looting. “When you see . . . an entire nation, simultaneously grappling with an extraordinary crisis seated in 400 years of American racism, I’m sorry, that is not the same question as the understandably aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person who wants to go back to services,” de Blasio said at a press conference. “We’re not going to treat it like, ‘Why are people outside [at] the bars,’ and not notice that all of America is grappling simultaneously with a horrible crisis….Sorry guys, there’s a world outside New York City.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Since the beginning of this COVID-19 crisis, the Mercatus Center has published 45 policy briefs, 21 of them authored by scholars with non-Mercatus affiliations. These briefs were a result of a call for papers we launched at the beginning of the pandemic, and scholars from all over the country responded to our call with ideas and policy reforms. These briefs have helped shape a new vision for Mercatus scholars as to what the way forward may look like: As policymakers begin to “unpause” the economy, they will have to address immediate challenges in economic and fiscal policy, regulatory policy, health policy, and monetary policy. This brief addresses all four of these areas. For each, it identifies innovative and action-oriented ideas developed by the community of scholars at the Mercatus Center at George Mason University for a rapid, entrepreneur-led rebound. This summary brief covers 4 areas of policy: Economic and Fiscal Policy, Regulatory Policy, Health Policy, and Monetary Policy. In the regulatory section, for instance, you will find the suggestion from my colleagues Matt Mitchell, Adam Thierer, and Patrick McLaughlin to create a “Fresh Start Initiative,” modeled after the Department of Defense’s Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Commission. The commission would identify and study all the rules revised or suspended during the current crisis and then make recommendations for each rule to be terminated or reformed, thereby crafting “a plan and timetable for automatically sunsetting or comprehensively reforming those policies or programs as part of a single reform package.” If it works as well as BRAC did, many of these useless rules will be permanently terminated. Another favorite of mine comes from my colleagues Brent Skorup and Connor Haaland about easing federal restrictions to allow state and local authorities to facilitate drone delivery services: The use of drones for medical, parcel, and grocery deliveries would be enormously beneficial as part of America’s response to COVID-19. These benefits are not just theoretical; drones have been effectively deployed in China in the wake of its COVID-19 outbreak. The barriers that prevent drone delivery services from scaling up in the United States are not technological, but institutional. The Federal Aviation Administration and White House, perhaps through a statement of policy, could resolve some of the ambiguity in federal airspace law, which would allow state and local authorities to demarcate and lease the airspace above public roads. States could undertake reforms that allow for the creation of drone highways for medical and parcel deliveries. The federal government could also implement changes that will help facilitate the widespread use of drones for medical deliveries. The whole thing is here. Make sure you check the Mercatus page for our new call for papers and send your brilliant ideas. 

Wow, what a morning! Dr. Anthony Fauci has good news on a coronavirus vaccine; the nation’s cities were somewhat calmer and less violent last night — although the decision about deploying the National Guard has now become hopelessly politicized; and one of the country’s least-popular Republicans loses a primary. Dr. Fauci: We Should Have 100 Million Vaccine Doses by the End of the Year  All right, finally some good news: “The US should have 100 million doses of one candidate Covid-19 vaccine by the end of the year, Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) and a member of the White House coronavirus task force, said Tuesday. ‘Then, by the beginning of 2021, we hope to have a couple hundred million doses,’ Fauci said during a live question and answer session with the Journal of the American Medical Association.” But before we break out the party hats . . . “When you look at the history of coronaviruses, the common coronaviruses that cause the common cold, the reports in the literature are that the durability of immunity that’s protective ranges from three to six months to almost always less than a year,” he said. “That’s not a lot of durability and protection.” We might need annual coronavirus shots the way we’re supposed to get annual flu shots. Also note that Fauci changed his tune a bit late last month when he declared that a second wave in the fall was “not inevitable.” (So it’s “evitable,” then?)   Actions to Restore Public Order Require a Buy-In from Broad Swaths of the People President Trump is not interested in listening to state officials who disagree with him, and he has no ability to persuade them to come around to his position. Democratic officials have little or no interest in listening to the president and refuse to take actions that could be perceived as concurring or supporting the president. This has far-reaching, real-world consequences. On a call with the nation’s governors Monday, Trump seethed with frustration, telling them, “most of you are weak. You have to dominate. If you don’t dominate you’re wasting your time . . . Somebody throwing a rock, that’s like shooting a gun. You have to do retribution, in my opinion.” Trump’s preferred, or perhaps lone, form of persuasion is to berate and insult others until they change their minds. Governor Tim Walz of Minnesota — who has earned plenty of fair criticism for his response to riots in his state — urged the president “to make clear to the public that the National Guard wasn’t an occupying force and instead consists of people’s neighbors.” Trump responded, “It got so bad a few nights ago that the people wouldn’t have minded an occupying force. I wish we had an occupying force.”  When someone who President Trump doesn’t like says, “I am concerned that this could become X,” Trump’s first instinct is often to say, “This will absolutely be X.” Maine governor Janet Mills, a Democrat, told the president she was concerned about his upcoming trip to Puritan Medical Products, which manufactures swabs for test kits. Trump later said, “she tried to talk me out of it. Now, I think she probably talked me into it. She just doesn’t understand me very well.”  In this sense, Trump is correct. When other people warn him not to do something, he often reflexively does it to demonstrate he won’t be controlled, regardless of consequences. (“DO NOT CONGRATULATE.”)  Unsurprisingly, the governors who did not already agree with the president were not persuaded to change their actions. Some Democratic officials who had activated National Guard units before Monday’s call are now publicly insisting they will not deploy them. Trump’s tone Monday appears to have pushed some Democrats further away from his preferred position. Calling out National Guard could be step to restoring public order. Despite historically ignorant claims that this hasn’t been done in centuries, California governor Pete Wilson called out nearly 10,000 of his state’s Army National Guard to in Los Angeles after the riots in 1992. There is some debate as to whether the National Guard deployment was the decisive factor in ending the riots; the amount of violence in the city dropped after the third day, and the deployment was largely complete by the end of day four. As of Monday morning, National Guard units had been activated to prepare to assist law enforcement (but not necessarily deployed) in Arizona, Alaska, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Michigan, Minnesota, North Carolina, Nevada, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, and Wisconsin. (This is separate from the active and deployed National Guard units assisting with the coronavirus response in all fifty states.) It is worth noting that the National Guard can be used in ways to assist police — communications, directing traffic, simply having a deterrent presence in public squares and intersections, etc. — and not necessarily in a role that puts them in confrontation with protesters or rioters.  Washington, D.C. mayor Muriel Bowser also activated her local National Guard Sunday, but by Tuesday morning she declared, “I don’t think that the military should be used on the streets of American cities against Americans. And I definitely don’t think it should be used for a show.”  What happened in between Sunday and Tuesday? Trump’s conference call to the governors about “domination” and “retribution.” Fairly or not, the president altered the perception of what those troops were there to do with his rhetoric. For the deployment to run smoothly, the public in these cities needed to see the Guardsmen as a reinforcement for local police, ensuring stability and order. Local and state officials needed most of the public to buy-in to the value of the deployment, just as the president needed the state governors to buy into the proposal as well. And then Trump explicitly wished the Guardsmen could function as an occupying force.  Unsurprisingly, since Monday, several Democratic governors like J. B. Pritzker and Andrew Cuomo have publicly declared they not want the National Guard deployed in their states’ cities. Interestingly, Texas governor Greg Abbott also said he doesn’t see a need for National Guardsmen in his state’s cities, and Trump declared via Twitter he agreed with Abbott’s decision because of the border wall. (For those wondering how close the biggest Texas cities are to the U.S.–Mexican border, San Antonio is about 157 miles from Laredo, Austin is 235 miles away, Houston is about 315 miles, and Dallas is about 430 miles.) There are portions of the District of Columbia that are under the control of the federal government. This is why last night dozens of masked, camouflaged National Guardsmen lined up on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. The masks are presumably for coronavirus protection, and the Lincoln Memorial was among several national monuments and sites on the National Mall that were spray-painted with graffiti on previous nights. Nonetheless, it is easy to see why people are unnerved at the sight of masked troops lining up behind barricades at an iconic American structure, after the president yearned for domination, retribution, and an occupying force. Whether or not you think the people of these besieged states and cities should have elected these governors and mayors, they did. Those state and local officials were as freely elected as the president was; they took oaths of public service upon taking office just like he did. Any successful deployment of the National Guard will require cooperation from state and city officials, and state and local police. Posse Comitatus is on the books for a reason. Soldiers and police both carry guns, but their missions are distinct. Soldiers set out to neutralize and kill an enemy, usually foreign combatants. Police enforce laws against U.S. citizens. (Yes, military police units enforce laws as well.) There are rare situations where military forces can be deployed to assist civilian law enforcement agencies, but responsible leaders in the civilian and military worlds recognize the two realms ought to be mixed as little as possible. This is one of the reasons it is also disturbing to hear Defense Secretary Mark Esper say that when he walked with the president Monday evening across Lafayette Park, he believed he was following the president to “see some damage and to talk to the troops,” not to pose for photographs in front of St. John’s Episcopal Church. “I didn’t know where I was going,” Esper told NBC News. This is a moment where clear communication between civilian and military leaders is most necessary, and the president is not communicating to his own secretary of defense where he’s going and why. Esper requested the use of Virginia’s National Guardsmen earlier on Monday, in order to deploy them on the streets of Washington. Governor Ralph Northam denied Esper’s request, and his chief of staff declared in a statement, “we quickly learned it had not been made at Mayor Bowser’s request or coordinated with her, and we have heightened concern based on the president’s remarks that the administration is looking to use the Guard to escalate — not de-escalate — the situation.” Democratic governors are simply not going to deploy their state’s national guardsmen into cities where Democratic mayors do not want them. Trust is the fuel that moves the engine of any resolution to this violence. Without it, efforts are just going to sputter. Yesterday I described President Trump’s mentality as one of perpetual conflict “with himself and groups he likes on one side, and others he cannot abide on the other.” The opposition never has a point, there is no honorable concession, all compromises are forms of surrender, and the only objective is complete victory and forcing the opposition to accepting defeat. “No matter the problem, he always finds a path back to his favorite explanation: He is strong and others are weak; if other people were as strong as he was, the problem wouldn’t be happening.” Unsurprisingly, a lot of the president’s fans agree with him.  A lot of options get taken off the table when someone has this mentality. Every conflict can only be escalated. Tensions can only be ratcheted higher. Like a horned ram who likes to bash heads, the president can only charge into conflict and hope that the collision does more damage to his opponent than himself. This is a situation that requires building consensus, and Trump turned it into another one of his battles of wills. Perhaps the president’s foes were always going to accuse him of being an aspiring dictator or fascist. But he sure makes their job easier for them. A King Is Toppled Good riddance: Republican voters ousted U.S. Rep. Steve King on Tuesday, delivering an end to the two decades of controversy he brought to his heavily conservative district. The Associated Press has called the 4th Congressional District primary race for state Sen. Randy Feenstra of Hull, who had the backing of many state elected officials and national Republican groups. Feenstra won with 45.7% of the vote to King’s 36%, a margin of just under 8,000 votes, according to unofficial results from the Iowa Secretary of State’s office. ADDENDUM: A little while back, I had a chat with Oliver North, discussing the actions of the Chinese government and the coronavirus; that interview can be watched here.  

China foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian on Monday urged the U.S. to end racial discrimination following the death of George Floyd. “Black lives matter,” Zhao said at a press conference. “Their human rights need to be guaranteed. Racial discrimination against minorities is a chronic sickness in American society.” Zhao continued, “We hope the U.S. government can take substantial measures and fulfill its obligations to the international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination, so as to safeguard and guarantee the legitimate rights of minority groups.”  China itself has seen an uptick of racism against Africans, especially in the city of Guangzhou which has a large population of African residents. After five Nigerian residents of the city tested positive for coronavirus in April, a McDonald’s branch posted a sign banning black people and many Africans were evicted from their homes or hotels. The U.S. State Department sent out an advisory on April 13 warning African-Americans to avoid the city, noting that police had instructed bars and restaurants not to serve customers of African origin. African-Americans in Guangzhou have since been refused service at businesses and some have been forced into mandatory quarantines despite testing negative for coronavirus, the New York Times reported on Tuesday.  China maintains extensive relations with African Union nations, where it has invested billions of dollars in infrastructure projects. Following the events in Guangzhou, a group of African ambassadors in China condemned the “stigmatization and discrimination” faced by residents of the city.  On Tuesday, Zhao said China supports African Union nations in the wake of the George Floyd protests. “China stands with the African [nations] in their just cause and will work with the African [nations] to firmly oppose all forms of racial discrimination, including inciting discrimination and hate speech,” Zhao told reporters.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

President Trump on Tuesday announced that the Republican National Convention would not take place in Charlotte, N.C., after Governor Roy Cooper said the state could prevent the convention from proceeding at full capacity due to the pandemic. “Governor Cooper is still in Shelter-In-Place Mode, and not allowing us to occupy the arena as originally anticipated and promised,” Trump wrote on Twitter. “Would have showcased beautiful North Carolina to the World, and brought in hundreds of millions of dollars, and jobs, for the State.”  Governor Cooper, a Democrat, responded, “We have been committed to a safe RNC convention in North Carolina and it’s unfortunate they never agreed to scale down and make changes to keep people safe. Protecting public health and safety during this pandemic is a priority.” A complete cancelation of the convention could cost the city of Charlotte tens of millions of dollars in damages, the Charlotte Observer reported last week. The contract between the city and the RNC does not include an “act of God” clause that could have exempted the city from liability because of the pandemic, although the Observer noted that many political events do not include such clauses in their contracts. “It is not going to be easy for anyone to say ‘We’re out,’” said City Council member Ed Driggs, a Republican. “This is a legal, commercial and political minefield.”   The convention would have seen up to 19,000 people gathering in Charlotte’s Spectrum Center, but Cooper said earlier on Tuesday that it was “very unlikely” the convention would occur at full capacity. However, some Republicans could still gather to conduct “official business” in Charlotte about a week before the convention itself. “Due to the directive from the governor that our convention cannot go on as planned as required by our rules, the celebration of the president’s acceptance of the Republican nomination will be held in another city,” the RNC said in a statement. “Should the governor allow more than 10 people in a room, we still hope to conduct the official business of the convention in Charlotte.”    Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Sweden’s response to the coronavirus resulted in too many deaths and could have been improved, the country’s chief epidemiologist Anders Tegnell told Swedish radio on Wednesday. Tegnell designed a unique strategy by which the country allowed non-essential businesses to remain open, urging citizens to comply with social distancing regulations and to avoid unnecessary travel. Sweden’s death rate from coronavirus as of Wednesday sits at 443 per million of the country’s population, far higher than its Nordic neighbors Finland (58 per million) and Norway (44 per million), both of which imposed more far-reaching lockdowns of nonessential businesses.  When asked whether Sweden had seen too many deaths, Tegnell answered, “Yes, absolutely.” “If we were to encounter the same disease again knowing exactly what we know about it today, I think we would settle on doing something in between what Sweden did and what the rest of the world has done,” Tegnell said, in comments translated by the Guardian. Tegnell added that medical officials would need to learn “what else, besides what we did, you could do without imposing a total shutdown.” Coronavirus has been particularly lethal for the elderly in Sweden, with roughly half of the country’s 4,500 deaths occurring among residents of nursing homes.   “There was no strategy at all for the elderly, I now understand,” Annike Linde, former chief epidemiologist from 2005 to 2015, told the Swedish state broadcaster last week. “I do not understand how they can stand and say the level of preparedness was good, when in fact it was lousy.” Sweden’s relatively lax strategy was designed in part to avoid a complete shutdown of the economy. While the country’s GDP grew slightly in the first three months of the year, Swedish economists still predict an eventual economic contraction of 7 percent by the end of 2020, with 10 percent unemployment.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he “Live Free or Die” state has been locked down for almost three months. Last week, 17 times as many Granite Staters filed for unemployment as did in the same period a year earlier. About 200,000 New Hampshire workers have filed for unemployment since Governor Chris Sununu declared a state of emergency March 13 and followed up with a stay-at-home order March 27. To put that in perspective, the U.S. Census reports that New Hampshire’s total 2017 employment was 603,923.  Last Friday, Sununu extended his stay-at-home order for a third time, guaranteeing more people will lose their jobs. He also threatened legal action against Riverside Speedway and Adventure Park in Groveton, N.H., forcing the track to remain closed. His stay-at-home order carries a potential $20,000 fine for businesses that defy him and possible arrest and criminal prosecution for anyone else failing to follow the various micromanaged edicts he has issued. (You can use equipment at the gym if you pay for a personal trainer to follow you around, but not on your own. Out-of-staters must quarantine for 14 days before staying in a hotel. Hair-cutting is OK, but dye jobs are not. Golf-course employees must wear masks at all times even when eating lunch alone in a break room. Etc.) Then on Saturday, he tweeted: “I called the organizers ahead of the #GeorgeFloyd March in Manchester to let them know the State of NH stands with them in their calls for justice.” His tweet contained a link to an article at the website of WMUR, the local ABC affiliate, with a headline stating that over a thousand people had attended the march. Yet gatherings of ten or more people are supposedly still prohibited by his own Emergency Order No. 16, issued April 6. When asked by NHJournal.com about the contradiction, Sununu replied: Those that want to compare social injustices and the issue surrounding the murder of George Floyd to the effectiveness of a stay-at-home order and social gatherings are completely missing the point. They are two completely separate issues and those that try to combine those two issues . . . they’re doing an absolute disservice to the importance of the message around those protests, the importance of the message around the injustices. On Monday, Sununu reaffirmed his support for the anti-police Black Lives Matter and Antifa protests that are burning their path of destruction through American cities, saying, “We have seen peaceful protests happen across America.” Tell that to Americans watching looters smash store windows, viciously beat people who get in their way, and set fire to St. John’s Episcopal church across from the White House. “As we speak, there is a protest taking place at Hampton Beach in memory of George Floyd. As I have previously said, the state stands with those calling for justice,” the governor continued.  
 The beaches in New Hampshire have been closed, by Sununu, since March. Monday, June 1, was the first day they were reopened. But only for swimming. “This is not a time to drop your blanket and sit around,” the governor said May 22.  I support everyone’s right to peacefully assemble, and I am grateful that the two Black Lives Matter rallies in New Hampshire this week were nonviolent, unlike in other states. But nonviolence should be the expectation, not the exception. In neighboring Massachusetts, police cars were burned in Boston, and 53 people were arrested for looting and rioting. Sununu is not the only governor who is keeping his state locked down while supporting Black Lives Matter and Antifa rallies that blatantly violate bans on large group gatherings. New Jersey governor Phil Murphy recently said, “It’s one thing to protest what day nail salons are opening, and it’s another to come out and peacefully protest about somebody who was murdered right before our eyes.” That’s a different tone from Murphy’s response in April when asked about how his lockdown order affected the First Amendment rights of New Jersey residents, specifically the arrest of 15 congregants at a synagogue. “That’s above my pay grade,” he told Fox News’s Tucker Carlson. “I wasn’t thinking of the Bill of Rights when we did this.”   If that’s all a little confusing to you, then I’m glad I’m not the only one bemused here. These governors seem to be saying that the virus is so dangerous that they must shut down our normal way of life, and suspend constitutional rights . . . except if you’re a member of a radical left-wing anti-cop group, or a domestic terror organization like Antifa. One wonders how the virus knows to infect the small-business owner wanting to reopen but not the black-clad anarchist burning down said small business. Sununu and other governors aren’t enforcing their stay-at-home orders equally. To the contrary: They’re willing to prevent you from going to church but not willing to prevent Antifa from burning down churches. 

I think Kyle Smith’s post below on the “Suicide of the Cities” is a really smart one, and a warning that urban leaders should heed carefully. The coronavirus and its related policies of quarantines and lockdowns was already tipping the scale against urban life in the eyes of some big city residents. A sense that the police or prosecutors either are unable or unwilling to keep order in the streets will spur another, even wider exodus.  The only mitigating factor in the portrait that Kyle paints is that urban progressives who move out to the suburbs or the country, driven by exasperation with the problems of urban life, don’t always change their voting habits. Ask longtime New Hampshire residents about the transplants from Massachusetts, longtime Virginia residents about the spillover in the northern suburbs of Washington, D.C., or longtime residents of any Western state about the new transplants from California. Many red state conservatives have fumed as newcomers complain about high taxes, soft-on-crime policies, and maddening bureaucracy and stupid rules where they used to live . . . and then vote for candidates who share the same worldview all over again. Kyle concludes, “the demonstrators and rioters are going to remake the cities in their own image. And it’s going to be disastrous for those cities.” Indeed, but those leaving the cities are likely to try to remake their new communities in the image of their old ones. These transplants won’t completely change the political currents in their new communities, at least not for a while. But one of the maddening aspects of modern public policy is that hard lessons need to be relearned every few decades as citizens forget which policies solved the problems and which ones created them.  

In a recent letter to the United Nations, John Barsa, acting director of the U.S. Agency for International Development, asked the U.N. to remove “reproductive health” and abortion from its humanitarian plan to address the COVID-19 global pandemic. “The U.N. should not use this crisis as an opportunity to advance access to abortion as an ‘essential service,’” Barsa wrote. “Unfortunately, the Global [Humanitarian Response Plan] does just this, by cynically placing the provision of ‘sexual and reproductive health services’ on the same level of importance as food-insecurity, essential health care, malnutrition, shelter, and sanitation.”  Rebuffing that letter, the U.N.’s Human Rights Council now has formally cited several U.S. states that attempted to limit abortion, among many elective procedures, in order to stem the coronavirus outbreak. “UN experts are concerned some U.S. states — such as Texas, Oklahoma, Alabama, Iowa, Ohio, Arkansas, Louisiana and Tennessee — appear to be manipulating #COVID19 crisis measures to restrict access to essential #abortion care,” a U.N. Twitter account wrote last week. In a statement, the U.N. Human Rights Council’s Office of the High Commissioner elaborated on this criticism, asserting that “some US states appear to be manipulating the COVID-19 crisis to curb access to essential abortion care.”  “We regret that the above-mentioned states, with a long history of restrictive practices against abortion, appear to be manipulating the crisis to severely restrict women’s reproductive rights,” said Elizabeth Broderick, vice chair of the U.N.’s working group on discrimination against women and girls.  “This situation is also the latest example illustrating a pattern of restrictions and retrogressions in access to legal abortion care across the country,” Broderick added. “We fear that, without clear political will to reverse such restrictive and regressive trends, states will continue pursuing this pattern.” The high commissioner’s office noted, too, that it was “extremely concerned” at the U.S. insistence on removing abortion from the U.N.’s COVID-19 response plan. “We reiterate that sexual and reproductive health services, including access to safe and legal abortion, are essential and must remain a key component of the UN’s priorities in its responses to the COVID-19 pandemic,” Broderick said. The U.S. and the U.N., then, are at an impasse. In the view of the U.N.’s Human Rights Council — rather inaptly named, considering its dogmatic insistence on promoting the killing of unborn human beings — health care, disaster response, disease mitigation, and human advancement all are impossible without unlimited access to abortion. The U.S. was right to condemn this position, and it ought to forcefully defend the states that drew criticism from the organization. Unfortunately, the Trump administration is handicapped in that effort because U.S. courts have, in most cases, already struck down the state policies in question as conflicting with our abortion jurisprudence.  

New York City mayor Bill de Blasio on Tuesday said that although mass protests had erupted in the city, religious institutions and small business owners would still be closed until Monday. “When you see . . . an entire nation, simultaneously grappling with an extraordinary crisis seated in 400 years of American racism, I’m sorry, that is not the same question as the understandably aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person who wants to go back to services,” de Blasio told a reporter for the ultra-Orthodox Jewish publication Hamodia.  “This is a powerful, painful historical moment. So no, I have eyes to see. We’re not going to treat it like it’s just any other day, we’re not going to treat it like, ‘Why are people outside [at] the bars,’ and not notice that all of America is grappling simultaneously with a horrible crisis,” the mayor continued. “Sorry guys, there’s a world outside New York City.” De Blasio said that while he did fear that demonstrations could result in another outbreak of coronavirus, New York institutions would continue to reopen according to the timetable set in conjunction with state health officials. New York has seen widespread looting in the upscale neighborhoods of Soho and Midtown Manhattan, as well as in parts of Brooklyn. De Blasio has clashed with ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities in the city during the course of the pandemic. In late April, after police dispersed a crowd at a funeral for a Brooklyn rabbi, the mayor wrote on Twitter, “My message to the Jewish community, and all communities, is this simple: the time for warnings has passed. I have instructed the NYPD to proceed immediately to summons or even arrest those who gather in large groups.”   While the tweet provoked criticism from the Satmar ultra-Orthodox sect, whose leaders had organized the funeral, some in the sect defended the mayor from other critics. “We strongly denounce the vicious attacks against the Mayor, particularly those accusing him of anti-Semitism,” wrote Mayer Rispler, head of a Satmar faction. “The close relationship between Mr. De Blasio and our community goes back close to two decades…We consider him a dear friend.” Since the incident, the NYPD has shut down several yeshivas operating in defiance of lockdown orders. Last week, however, demonstrations protesting the death of George Floyd, an African American man killed during arrest by white officers, spread across the city. Those demonstrations have devolved into looting and rioting. Rioters and even peaceful protesters have not adhered to social-distancing guidelines.  “You don’t get to pick and choose First Amendment freedoms. You don’t get to side with protesters and slough off churches and synagogues,” Senator Ben Sasse (R., Neb.) said in response to de Blasio’s decision to keep businesses and religious institutions closed. “Americans ought to hope that New York City is sued so that Bill de Blasio’s nonsense gets laughed out of court.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Associated Press does an excellent deep dive into the World Health Organization’s interactions with the Chinese government in January, and finds WHO officials “complained in meetings the week of Jan. 6 that China was not sharing enough data to assess how effectively the virus spread between people or what risk it posed to the rest of the world, costing valuable time.”  The AP report concludes the “delay in the release of the genome stalled the recognition of its spread to other countries, along with the global development of tests, drugs and vaccines. The lack of detailed patient data also made it harder to determine how quickly the virus was spreading — a critical question in stopping it.” The only problem is that we’re learning about WHO’s internal frustration with China after a lot of investigative reporting at the beginning of June, instead of as it was happening. Officials at WHO felt obligated to lie to the world, repeatedly praising Beijing’s cooperation, response, and transparency and echoing the false Chinese conclusion that the virus could not be spread from one human to another. It is somewhat reassuring to learn that not everyone in the organization agreed with the strategy of doing whatever was necessary to stay on the good side of Xi Jinping. But how much reassurance can we take when the effect of that internal dissent was nil? Ending U.S. funding for the World Health Organization may or may not be a good idea during a pandemic. But even those who want to continue funding must recognize that the WHO failed in its primary responsibility to provide timely and accurate information about a serious public threat. [Insert every “you had one job” gif here.]  If the WHO is incapable of reforming itself to ensure that it prioritizes accuracy and timeliness, what is the point of the organization? Governments of the world that prioritize accurate information over the sensitive egos of autocratic regimes ought to form their own international organization, to do the job that WHO is unwilling or incapable of doing.  

1. ABC News: ‘Just relax’: George Floyd’s brother condemns violent protesters 2. Brian Butler: I’m a CEO, a retired Army officer and a black man 3. Our Sisters in Chicago are all safe, but our bookcenter was broken into and looted last night during the riots. Please pray for our Sisters. And pray for peace. pic.twitter.com/Wzmkfpry6j — Sister Bethany, fsp (@SrBethanyFSP) May 31, 2020  4. Fr. Raymond J. de Souza: Don’t think abusive and wrongful arrests are just a U.S. problem  5. 6,000 miles away in a war zone https://t.co/IvsPC5tUkb — Mindy Belz (@mcbelz) June 1, 2020  6. When a human rights lawyer throws a molotov cocktail at a police car, but it just fizzles out on the dashboard, you have to wonder what they're teaching in human rights school these days. https://t.co/5pYlhfN4IP — Caitlin Flanagan (@CaitlinPacific) June 1, 2020  7.WSJ: Hong Kong Police Ban Tiananmen Massacre Vigil   8. USA Today: ‘Very encouraging’: Spain reports no coronavirus deaths in 24-hour period 9. Reuters: New coronavirus losing potency, top Italian doctor says  10. Reuters: India’s coronavirus infections overtake France amid criticism of lockdown 11. Kay Hymowitz: The Human Network 12. NY Daily News: ‘I just miss him:’ Coronavirus pandemic prolongs NYC mom’s fight to regain custody of toddler in foster care 13. Supreme Court decision could affect abortion debate in America 14. Dr. Leonard Sax: Living with Uncertainty 15. “COVID-19 has killed at least 11,000 to 12,000 nursing-home and assisted-living residents in New York, nearly double what the state admits to.And as the deaths mount, so have the lies and cover-ups.”We want answers and an investigation ⁦@NYGovCuomo⁩  https://t.co/hGiIkQQig1 — Janice Dean (@JaniceDean) May 30, 2020  16. Andrew McCarthy: It wasn’t just religious liberty that Chief Justice Roberts strangled 17. Babylon Bee: Powerful: Protestors Spell Out ‘Love’ With Burning Homes And Businesses 18. “Justice, therefore, can be understood as the virtue of a community, the harmony of all the souls that form it.” One Reading Well, page 70 —@KSPrior pic.twitter.com/9U7zAl1OlG — Rebeka Watson (@RebekaWatson) June 1, 2020  19. Protesters pray with police officers in Lexington, Kentucky @ryanhermens   pic.twitter.com/zs2tgBDsK6 — Breaking911 (@Breaking911) June 1, 2020  20.  A Pentecost homily from Pope Francis    

The Wall Street Journal has to publish a story like this one every couple of years. When William Mark decided to get back into investing after the 2008 financial crisis, he looked past stocks and bonds. Needing to play catch-up with his retirement portfolio, the piping engineer decided to bet on a complicated product he hoped would deliver double-digit annual returns. It worked so well—earning him 18% a year in dividends, on average—that he eventually poured $800,000 into the investments, called leveraged exchange-traded notes, or ETNs. When the coronavirus pandemic hit, he lost almost every penny. “I’m 67 years old and I’m basically bankrupt in just two weeks,” Mr. Mark said. The Journal should have a standing headline for these: “Hey, Stupid, Don’t Put Money You Can’t Afford To Lose into Complex, Volatile Investments You Don’t Understand.” If your broker or your brother-in-law promises you 20 percent on yen-denominated Baltic Exchange freight future — can’t lose! — run, run, run.  

From the beginning of California’s COVID-19 shutdown in March, religious institutions were excluded from the state’s definition of “essential businesses,” including the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, Calif. The church spent most of May in court fighting Governor Gavin Newsom’s imposition of more stringent restrictions on religious gatherings than comparably risky secular activities.  As California shifted to a four-stage reopening plan, its discrimination against houses of worship grew as their reopening was pushed to “Stage 3,” behind manufacturing, warehousing, offices, schools, and shopping malls.  Californians were allowed to gather by the thousands ten hours a day, seven days a week, to visit America’s high altar to consumerism, but could not gather for an hour a week to worship God. When the Pentecostal church’s challenge reached the Ninth Circuit, a 2–1 panel affirmed the district court’s refusal to grant the church a temporary restraining order, over the blistering dissent of Trump appointee Daniel Collins. The church then made an emergency request to the Supreme Court via Justice Kagan, the circuit justice responsible for the Ninth Circuit. Last Monday, Newsom gave a bit by allowing houses of worship to gather at 25 percent of building capacity or 100 attendees, whichever is lower. That restriction does not apply to the favored businesses. The church did not ask the Court for any special privilege. It was willing to comply with the same social distancing and hygiene protocols as the favored entities. It simply asked not to be subjected to more onerous restrictions than they were. How is wearing a mask and keeping six feet apart riskier when done in a church auditorium vs. a school auditorium? Answer: It isn’t.  This should have been an easy call. But soon before midnight on the Friday before Pentecost Sunday, the Court denied injunctive relief by a 5–4 vote. Chief Justice Roberts joined the liberal bloc, opining in a concurrence that “The precise question of when restrictions on particular social activities should be lifted during the pandemic is a dynamic and fact-intensive matter subject to reasonable disagreement.” Justices Thomas, Alito, Gorsuch, and Kavanaugh voted to protect the church.  As the chief justice saw it, “comparable secular gatherings” including concerts and theatrical performances faced similar (or greater) restrictions while “only dissimilar activities” where “people neither congregate in large groups nor remain in close proximity for extended periods” had fewer burdens. He argued that elected officials have “especially broad” latitude to “act in areas fraught with medical and scientific uncertainties.” Chief Justice Roberts blatantly mischaracterizes the issue. The test of discrimination isn’t whether any comparable secular activity is treated as badly as religious activity, it is whether any comparable secular activity is treated better than religious activity. In the race context, it is obviously wrong to say blacks cannot claim discrimination if Hispanics are treated just as badly, because the proper question is whether any race is treated better than African Americans. If Roberts thought this was a close call, he should have voted to grant the temporary relief to avoid irreparable harm in turning back so many Pentecostal churchgoers on Pentecost Sunday.  Justice Kavanaugh wrote a dissent, joined by Thomas and Gorsuch, pointing out that in fact “comparable secular businesses are not subject to a 25% occupancy cap, including factories, offices, supermarkets, restaurants, retail stores, pharmacies, shopping malls, pet grooming shops, bookstores, florists, hair salons, and cannabis dispensaries.” The fact that some secular activities like movie theaters are restricted as much or more than churches is entirely beside the point.  Of course, several of the favored categories can include large numbers of people and longer stays than a church service. The risks inherent in those settings were addressed by safety protocols, which suddenly cease to be sufficient when the context shifts to churches. “The State . . . has substantial room to draw lines, especially in an emergency,” Kavanaugh noted. “But as relevant here, the Constitution imposes one key restriction on that line-drawing: The State may not discriminate against religion.” California’s occupancy cap “indisputably” does that, in violation of the First Amendment.  For good measure, Kavanaugh’s incisive opinion quoted the Sixth Circuit’s recent observation in a similar case, improbably named Roberts v. Neace: “The State cannot ‘assume the worst when people go to worship but assume the best when people go to work or go about the rest of their daily lives in permitted social settings.’” Sadly, it would appear it can when the state is California. 

Back on April 15, White Coat Waste, an organization that opposes government funding for medical research that involves animal experimentation, filed a Freedom of Information Act request with the U.S. National Institutes of Health requesting all correspondence with State Department officials regarding the Wuhan Institute of Virology, as well as all emails, text messages, memos, and reports related to WIV.  Starting in 2014, NIH provided grants to EcoHealth Alliance; part of that group’s research included studies of viruses in bats in partnership with the Wuhan Institute of Virology. On April 19, Michael Lauer, NIH Deputy Director for Extramural Research, wrote to EcoHealth, “There are now allegations that the current crisis was precipitated by the release from Wuhan Institute of Virology of the coronavirus responsible for COVID-19. Given these concerns, we are pursuing suspension of Wuhan Institute of Virology from participation in federal programs.” Five days later, Lauer declared in a follow-up, “the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), an Institute with the National Institutes of Health (NIH), under the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has elected to terminate the project . . . NIH does not believe that the current project outcomes align with the program goals and agency priorities.” Gorka Garcia-Malene, the FOIA officer at NIH, responded to White Coat Waste’s request on May 22: The records you requested involve pending investigations. I have determined to withhold those records pursuant to Exemption 7(A), 5 U.S.C. § 552 and (b)(7)(a), and section 5.31 (g)(l) of the HHS FOIA Regulations, 45 CFR Part 5. Exemption 7(A) permits the withholding of investigatory records compiled for law enforcement purposes when disclosure could reasonably be expected to interfere with enforcement proceedings. In his original message, Lauer wrote, “it is in the public interest that NIH ensure that a sub-recipient has taken all appropriate precautions to prevent the release of pathogens that it is studying.” It is unclear if the NIH review is the “pending investigation” and “law enforcement proceedings” referred to in the FOIA response, or whether there is a separate U.S. criminal investigation of the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The National Institutes of Health has its own police force to secure its facilities, but the Department of Health and Human Services refers violations of civil or criminal law to the Department of Justice. 

On the menu today: a near-complete breakdown in American leadership, driven in large part by elected officials who cannot bear unpleasant truths that contradict their preexisting worldview; the role and limited culpability of foreign intelligence operations; the coming argument about just who counts as a member of Antifa; and oh yeah, remember that ongoing potentially lethal pandemic?  Our Leaders Fear the Evidence, Even When It’s on Fire, Right in Front of Them Let’s begin the week with words I wouldn’t have predicted writing a couple of years ago: I really liked a recent observation by Glenn Greenwald: “Until people start forming beliefs based on evidence rather than the narrative that’s most comforting, our discourse will continue to be toxic trash. (Also, as long as media outlets employ people with a documented history of fabrication & fabulism, the media will be unreliable).” Perhaps all of our problems boil down to an unwillingness to form or adjust our beliefs based upon evidence, and the habits of mono-focusing on evidence that supports our preexisting beliefs and ignoring, downplaying, or seeking ways to refute evidence that challenges our preexisting beliefs. Greenwald made his comment in response to Saint Paul mayor Melvin Carter declaring Saturday that every person arrested in riots in his city was from out of state, and then amending it to at least 80 percent. (When someone in authority makes a sweeping statement adamantly and emphatically, and then quickly qualifies it, our spidey-sense should start tingling. This is often an indicator that the speaker wants something to be true but realizes that what they said is not quite true.)   Minnesota governor Tim Walz and Minneapolis mayor Jacob Frey made similar comments Saturday morning. But data from arrest reports released later that day indicated that was not the case. “In Hennepin County, which includes Minneapolis, 47 of the 57 people arrested in protest incidents through Saturday morning had provided a Minnesota address to authorities, according to Jeremy Zoss, a spokesman for the Hennepin County Sheriff’s Office.” Surely, there were some non-Minnesotans in the mix of those committing crimes in that area. But Minnesota’s government leaders simply didn’t want to acknowledge the possibility that members of their own communities could do something so destructive and callous. Confronting that problem was too daunting and intimidating to them, so they turned to a more morally convenient villain. It was not hard to find people, generally on the Left, arguing that the violent rioting, looting, arson, and other crimes were being committed by white nationalists who sought to exacerbate tensions between whites and blacks. Walz told reporters he suspected white supremacist groups and drug cartels were carrying out some of the violence in Minneapolis.  With such widespread urban violence across the country this weekend, it is certainly possible that some perpetrators fit that description. But the vast majority of those were young whites, in anarchist or Antifa regalia, and young blacks and other minorities. (Omar Kelly is correct: Count the number of skateboards you see in those videos. Separately, you can read how Antifa is preparing to hit the streets right on Reddit.) The young people you see in those videos are unlikely to be white nationalists or the pawns of white nationalists.  There was a much simpler and sadder explanation than a vast right-wing conspiracy. A lot of young people saw an opportunity to either steal things or indulge their most destructive impulses without significant consequence to themselves and embraced that opportunity. They may be driven by some sort of left-of-center ideology, but it is likely that many were driven by simpler human instincts: greed, selfishness, malevolence, and a desire to feel powerful, at least for a moment. Elected officials’ inability to accurately characterize the protesters and their actions was matched by an inability to accurately characterize the government responders and their actions. On Saturday, Walz said the Pentagon was providing “intelligence support of what they’re seeing, what they’re signal intercepting, they have obviously from NSA and others massive support to be able to see who these operators are.” This raised quite a few eyebrows, as the National Security Agency is not a domestic law-enforcement agency; it is focused on intercepting and collecting signals intelligence from foreign sources. Later, the governor’s office stated he had misspoken and there was no NSA involvement. Apparently, the governor just went before the cameras and winged it, saying things he thought were true, or hoped were true.  Every one of these people in elected office asked for their jobs and put considerable effort into telling the public they were prepared to handle the difficult duties that came with it. One of those duties is communicating accurate information to the public. That accurate information may be difficult and painful to hear. Mayors and governors across the country may be pained to declare something like, “Significant numbers of young people of all races are taking advantage of widespread outrage about the police role in the death of George Floyd to commit selfish and cruel crimes.” (If you doubt that these crimes are cruel, listen to Stephanie, a disabled Minneapolis woman.)  But that is a more accurate description of what is happening than the idea that the significant numbers of African-American youth looting the Nike store on Michigan Avenue in Chicago are somehow being manipulated by those losers who marched in Charlottesville. (Even if you contend that the worst of the situation is being driven by “outside agitators,” you are eliding the fact that your local population — the one you want to believe is good and decent and law-abiding and peaceful — is reacting just as the outside agitators desired.)  Not every crime leads back to the suspect you already disliked. Sometimes the trail leads back to the people you thought better of, who you thought were on the right path, the people who you thought weren’t capable of this. The combination of the coronavirus pandemic and widespread urban violence should be reinforcing to all Americans the hard lesson that elected office is not about being a celebrity. It is not about looking good on television, or an opportunity to manipulate and control the lives of human beings like moving pawns on a chess board. It is not about soaring rhetoric and pretty words. Leadership in elected office is often about telling people difficult truths that they don’t want to hear, making hard decisions that will fully satisfy no one, and accepting the responsibility for making those decisions. If you are not willing to accept that, don’t run for the job.  We Can Blame Foreign Disinformation Only So Much Speaking of “outside agitators . . .” National-security adviser Robert O’Brien, former national-security adviser Susan Rice, and senator Marco Rubio pointed to foreign intelligence operations seeking to exacerbate tensions through disinformation and propaganda on social media. (Great, more foreign competition for jobs Americans traditionally do.) Rice pointed the finger at Russia, Rubio said “at least three foreign adversaries” were at work, and O’Brien named Russia, China, and Iran. Hostile intelligence services make the decision to lay out the bait, but Americans make the decision to take the bait. Our problem is not that the secret efforts of Moscow, Beijing, and Tehran involve malicious and incendiary lies; they’ve always done that. Our problem is that some Americans want to believe their lies. Those Labels Come On and Off So Easily, They Must Use Velcro In the coming days, you’re going to see a lot of semantic arguments about just who can be accurately labeled “Antifa” — just as we saw in previous arguments about which perpetrators of crimes really qualify to be labeled a member of al-Qaeda, ISIS, militia members, white nationalists, incels, and any other violent ideological movement that is tenuously connected to an American community or either side of the aisle in U.S. politics. To a lot of folks on the Right, a masked young person who is dressed mostly in black, oftentimes wearing an anarchist symbol, and spray-painting a public building is de facto Antifa, whether or not they have a formal membership. To a lot of folks on the Left, that person is just some young punk, with no meaningful connection to the left-wing politics, and certainly not one of “their side” that warrants denunciation from allies. There is, admittedly, quite a contradiction between statism and anarchy. Quite a few hardline activists on the Left say they believe in bigger, stronger, and more far-reaching government, but act like anarchists. No doubt some progressives look at Trump voters and see a lot of people who say they’re motivated by liberty and fear of powerful government, but somehow they always end up calling for the cops to crack some skulls. I suppose it’s just a matter of time before Antifa is characterized as having a political wing and a militant wing. Back in 2014, I discussed that alleged division within Hamas: From over here, it looks like a public-relations wing and a convenient-scapegoat wing. “Oh, it wasn’t us that fired those rockets! It was our militant wing!” Militant wings are the evil twins of geopolitics. If your organization has a military wing — as opposed to an actual, declared, uniforms-and-everything-military — you’re probably a troublemaker. You notice the good guys in life rarely have a militant wing. “I’m with a hardline faction of the Red Cross.” “I’m with Mother Theresa’s paramilitary branch.” These groups really seem to think that the political wing can’t be blamed for what the militant wing does. Guys, you’re two halves of the same chicken. Colonel Sanders just sees one bird. Hey, Remember Coronavirus? Oh yes, there’s still a pandemic going on, even though apparently large swaths of the public decided to stop worrying about it. Most of the cities that burned this weekend still have various quarantine, stay-at-home, and other restrictions on large gatherings, restrictions that are now effectively suspended — and as Rich observes, barely even mentioned anymore. The good news is many protesters were wearing masks and were outdoors. The bad news is that lots of people were much closer to each other than six feet apart and shouting all day long. (Perhaps the fear of tear gas or being identified in photos can spur mask-wearing when the fear of the coronavirus cannot.)  New York City mayor Bill de Blasio declared Friday, “I want to just say anyone who wants to protest, we’re going to protect your right to protest.” This is the same man who declared in late April regarding Orthodox Jews attending funerals in Brooklyn, “My message to the Jewish community, and all communities, is this simple: the time for warnings has passed. I have instructed the NYPD to proceed immediately to summons or even arrest those who gather in large groups. This is about stopping this disease and saving lives. Period.” We can all see what’s going on. The mayor fears crossing those who are protesting the police, but he does not fear crossing the Jewish community in Brooklyn. Varad Mehta observed, “Remember, many local authorities have closed swimming pools, community centers, and other facilities because of the coronavirus. Take one release valve for the summer heat away and the pressure will just vent elsewhere. If this weekend is a preview, the summer won’t be pretty.” Jon Gabriel added, “Add to that the people furloughed, fired, and bored out of their skulls at home. With the only socially acceptable way to go outside is to riot.” Nearly three months of lockdowns and restrictions didn’t cause this weekend’s violence. But they probably exacerbated it. ADDENDUM: The editors are correct: “Restoring order should be the first priority. The dynamic of riots is always that if the police don’t show up, if they hold back, or worse, if they retreat, the disorder gets more intense and destructive. Violence must be met with overwhelming (and, obviously, lawful) force.” A few people with reading disabilities interpreted these tweets as “don’t enforce the law” or “looting is okay.” No. The point is if police are going to use deadly force, they must do so in circumstances to protect human life. My perspective is not some sort of bleeding-heart soft-on-crime idealism. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6–3 in Tennessee vs. Garner that a police officer may use deadly force to prevent the escape of a fleeing suspect only if the officer has a good-faith belief that the suspect poses a significant threat of death or serious physical injury to the officer or others. This means that if a cop sees that woman walking out of Cheesecake Factory with that whole cake, the cop cannot shoot the woman in the head. I’m such a squish.  

This isn’t anywhere close to the most important thing that been going on over the last week, but the hypocrisy on social distancing has been extraordinary. Just about a month ago, when protestors surrounded the Michigan state capitol from the safety of their cars, with about 75 or so people scattered outside on the capitol grounds, all we heard is that they weren’t social distancing, that it was extremely reckless, that Michigan would pay the price in a new outbreak of infections.  Now that we have enormous crowds gathering in cities all over the country to protest the death of George Floyd, the talk of the importance of social distancing has almost completely disappeared in the media, and Democratic officeholders don’t talk about it anymore, either. Just another example of how the rules they establish are usually in service of their political and ideological agenda, and as soon as the rules are no longer useful, they are changed or dropped.  

There have now been ten times as many COVID-19 deaths in Sweden than Norway on a per capita basis. According to the Worldometers website, 435 out of every one million Swedes have died from the virus, while the virus has killed 44 out of every million Norwegians. Norway imposed a lockdown to slow the spread of the coronavirus early on March 12, but the country reopened schools early in May. “Our goal is that by June 15 we will have reopened most of the things that were closed,” Norway’s prime minister said at a press conference earlier this month.  Its neighbor Sweden, by contrast, took a more lax approach: The government banned events with more than 50 people and shut down universities and secondary schools but imposed few other restrictions. Swedish government officials said lockdowns could do little to save lives over the long term and that their more lax approach would let their society reach herd immunity more quickly and lessen the economic pain the country would endure. “About 30 percent of people in Stockholm have reached a level of immunity,” Karin Ulrika Olofsdotter, the Swedish ambassador to the United States, told NPR on April 26. “We could reach herd immunity in the capital as early as next month.”  But a recent study found that just 7.3 percent of Stockholm residents tested positive for coronavirus antibodies at the end of April. “I think herd immunity is a long way off, if we ever reach it,” Bjorn Olsen, professor of infectious medicine at Uppsala University, told Reuters.  And it’s not clear Sweden’s economy will be better off than Norway’s this year. “Economists at Swedish bank SEB estimate Sweden’s GDP will drop 6.5 per cent this year, about the same as the US and Germany, but a little better than Norway and ahead of 9–10 per cent falls in Finland and Denmark, all of which have had lockdowns,” the Financial Times reported May 10. A Reuters poll from April found economists predicting the Scandinavian economies would all fare about the same in 2020.  

This week, our Tobias Hoonhout reported that the Justice Department is continuing its insider-trading investigation of Senator Richard Burr (R., N.C.), though the probe has been dropped with respect to other senators who — with such remarkably good fortune! — dumped stock just before the coronavirus tanked the market. That makes sense. As I’ll explain momentarily, Senator Burr’s public defense of his actions — along the lines of “I only relied on public information” — is unavailing as a legal defense. I hasten to add, though, that this does not mean he will be charged. Indeed, it would be a tough case . . . as are most cases that prosecutors try to bring against the folks who write the laws.  I don’t have a dog in this fight. I am not a fan of Richard Burr, the preeningly bipartisan chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee (in my estimation, among the most useless on Capitol Hill, which is saying something). If there’s been anything written with more delightful bite this year than my friend Kevin D. Williamson’s “History Called — and Senator Burr Called His Broker,” I haven’t seen it. Still, I’m not rooting for the senator to be prosecuted, particularly under this elastic theory of securities fraud. The insider-trading laws are not really traditional criminal statutes. More a cobbling together of SEC rules and judicial decisions, I’ve always thought they failed the main test of penal laws: to put a person of ordinary intelligence on clear notice of what conduct is prohibited. Hence the confusion over the years, and the “creative” prosecutorial envelope-pushing, over who qualifies as an “insider,” and how far the duty to refrain from trading on “material non-public information” extends — just the insider? Her husband? Their neighbor? The neighbor’s Uber driver? You get the point.  These laws are ignoble, moreover, in that they’re driven by envy. They are reminiscent of then-candidate Barack Obama’s response when it was pointed out that cutting taxes can increase revenues that underwrite the progressive wish-list. Even if that would be a better real-world outcome, the Cosmic One opined, raising taxes on the wealthy was still preferable because it accorded with his sense of “fairness.”  
 Similarly, the prohibition on insider trading is designed to combat the unfairness said to result when people with superior information (indeed, the best information, which is known to corporate insiders) engage in exchanges with people who lack access to that information — as if someone were holding a gun to the less-well informed person’s head, as if that person did not know the risks of trading securities, and as if the civil fraud laws were not in operation.  The problem, of course, is that the prohibition deprives the market of price signals generated by the purchases and sales made by the people who know the most about a company’s conditions, assets, liabilities, and prospects. It would be better for us to have that information, but that would enable the insiders — especially the already wealthy ones — to profit: They can buy up their company’s stock at bargain prices before the public announcement of good news certain to drive the price up; or they can dump stock at premium prices before, say, the onset of a pandemic they’ve been given a heads-up about. So, while it is not the choice I would make, we have prioritized handcuffing the privileged over gaining access to what they know — although proponents of this balance will tell you that the information-deficit problem is ameliorated by the voluminous disclosure requirements the SEC imposes on publicly traded companies (which, of course, are another fertile source of SEC enforcement actions and Justice Department securities-fraud prosecutions).   Alas, the remorseless fact: There is no such thing as an even playing field when it comes to information, though that is what the insider-trading laws strive to construct. Some people pay more attention than others, some are just more savvy than others, and sometimes that is as important, or even more important, than having access to privileged information. Hence the main drawback of insider-trading bans: They purport to restrict exchanges involving uneven access to nonpublic information, but not to hinder securities trading that is profitable because of study, ingenuity, the capacity to connect dots and spot trends, etc. Yet it is often not possible to tell the difference. Senator Burr’s case is a good example. Take what he’s been saying publicly, namely, that in making his questionable trades after receiving a classified briefing, he drew only on publicly available information. Generally speaking, trading on publicly available information is legal. But it is not legal for insiders. That is, once someone the law designates as an insider has access to material non-public information, it is no longer permissible for that insider to trade on the basis of public information. The rationale is that people cannot mentally compartmentalize what is public, distinct from what is non-public. Even if they could, it would not be possible for regulators to discern the difference – which, I’m sure you’ll be shocked to hear, is the thing that most matters to regulators.  In 2012, when Congress passed the STOCK Act (i.e., the Stop Trading on Congressional Knowledge Act), the stated purpose was to put lawmakers in a position analogous to that of corporate insiders. (And how interesting that Burr was one of only a handful of lawmakers to vote against the measure, which passed 96–3 in the Senate and 417–2 in the House.) The SEC and the federal courts have long held that, as long as an insider is in possession of privileged information, the insider will be deemed to buy and sell stock on the basis of that information.  This is why I say that Burr’s public defense won’t help him legally. If he had information based on classified briefings that was unavailable to the general public, his claim to have relied solely on public information is irrelevant.  But here is where it gets dicey for the Justice Department. As former federal prosecutor Paul A. Tuchmann explains in a useful National Law Review column, prosecutors must prove that the material non-public information was “about that security or issuer” involved in the purchase or sale in question. That is, there must be a tight nexus between the privileged information and the stock (or other security) that is the subject of the alleged insider trading. You can see the proof problems this could create. Sure, some cases could be easy. Let’s say Congressman X received a classified briefing in which he was told, “We see a pandemic emerging from China that could be disastrous for the market in air travel; in fact, United Airlines is already taking steps in mitigation.” If Representative X, on leaving the congressional SCIF, proceeds immediately to call his broker with instructions to unload his United holdings, that’s an open-and-shut case. Most cases, though, are not slam dunks, especially when sophisticated actors are involved. I am betting it is more likely that Burr, because of his privileged position, was given some alarming classified information about the pandemic, warning of dire economic consequences if aggressive steps were taken to suppress the spread of infectious disease. It would not surprise me if specific corporations whose securities he held were not mentioned by name, but that enough descriptive information was conveyed that any sensible person would realize that the fallout for the travel sector — airlines, rail, oil and gas, hotels, tourism, etc. — could be disastrous. Let’s assume I’m right about that. Let’s say Burr put two and two together and realized that his stock in a travel-sector company was about to take a major hit. Would his consequent trades in those holdings be so clearly “on the basis of material non-public information about that security or issuer” that he could be criminally liable? To be more concrete about it, Mr. Tuchmann notes that Burr reportedly sold holdings in Wyndham Hotels after receiving his classified briefing. But what if the briefing did not address Wyndham Hotels? Or what if it didn’t precisely address hotels at all, just a looming catastrophe for travel and tourism? Plainly, investigators must be scouring the exact substance of whatever briefing Burr received. Whether there was a tight enough nexus between the briefing and the senator’s trading activity depends on what was discussed — the words used, the names (if any) mentioned, the level of detail. The point of the STOCK Act was to discourage trading based on inside information. It was not to discourage all trading, full stop. Had Congress sought to do that, it could have expressed that objective clearly; but that would have dissuaded many worthy people from seeking public office, and spurred many worthy incumbents to leave. On the other hand, members of Congress often get briefings involving non-public information about sectors of the economy. Obviously, that gives them an informational leg up on most other investors. The STOCK Act was supposed to address that. I’m as doubtful that it does as I am skeptical that it should. Not every problem of fairness and ethics is fit for a criminal-law solution. And if recent history has taught us anything, it is that the less Justice Department involvement there is in politics, the better. I wouldn’t have minded seeing Burr, who is retiring, thrown out of office for cashing in on his public service. That doesn’t mean he should be thrown into jail, and I’d be surprised if he were. 

The battle over voting by mail flared up over the last week, thanks in part to some presidential tweets that, as they often do, have generated more heat than light. On May 20, President Trump tweeted: “Breaking: Michigan sends absentee ballots to 7.7 million people ahead of Primaries and the General Election. This was done illegally and without authorization by a rogue Secretary of State. I will ask to hold up funding to Michigan if they want to go down this Voter Fraud path.”  On May 26, he tweeted: “There is NO WAY (ZERO!) that Mail-In Ballots will be anything less than substantially fraudulent. Mail boxes will be robbed, ballots will be forged & even illegally printed out & fraudulently signed.” There’s a lot to unpack here. First of all, Michigan hadn’t sent out 7.7 million ballots — it announced plans to send out 7.7 million absentee-ballot applications. Trump replaced the original tweet with one correcting the error, but it still included the claim that he would “ask to hold up funding” to Michigan for sending out absentee-ballot applications. Ask whom? It wasn’t clear, and he dropped the idea shortly thereafter. As for the tweet that mail-in ballots would be “substantially fraudulent”? That’s the claim that prompted Twitter to issue its first ever presidential fact-check. It may be unwise for any social-media platform to get into the business of fact-checking politicians, and it was especially odd to single out this tweet, rather than the deranged tweets suggesting MSNBC host Joe Scarborough is a murderer.   If you strained hard enough, you could come up with a somewhat plausible defense: The word “substantially” may mean largely or significantly. Maybe he meant the latter? And since elections are sometimes decided by a very small number of votes, any amount of voter fraud is significant. That reasonable defense was dashed Thursday night when the president tweeted Thursday evening that “MAIL-IN VOTING WILL LEAD TO MASSIVE FRAUD AND ABUSE. IT WILL ALSO LEAD TO THE END OF OUR GREAT REPUBLICAN PARTY.” 
 To cut past the confusion and misinformation, it’s important to keep in mind three things in the debate over mail-in voting. The first is that the November elections will very likely be a “mostly mail” election whether anyone likes it or not — even if no laws are changed. Twenty-nine states already have no-excuse absentee voting, including the states where control of the White House and the Senate will be decided: Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania, Florida, Arizona, North Carolina, Georgia, Iowa, Montana, and Maine. In April, when Wisconsin held its Democratic primary, only one-quarter of voters cast ballots in person on Election Day. If voters are concerned about the coronavirus, and there’s every reason to believe it will still be a threat in November, the overwhelming majority will choose early mail-in or curbside voting.  The second thing to keep in mind is that expanded mail-in and early-voting will not necessarily hurt Republicans in November. The GOP just won an all-mail special election in California. Colorado Republican Cory Gardner won his first term in the Senate in 2014 in an all-mail election. In 2018, 79 percent of ballots were cast in Arizona by mail. Republican governor Doug Ducey won re-election by 14.2 points even as Republican senator Martha McSally lost by 2.4 points.  So Republicans can win in mail or mostly-mail elections, and at any rate it’s unlikely that many states will transition to California-style all-mail states before November. The logistical hurdles are too high, but there will be an increase in absentee- and early-voting nationwide. If Republicans were solely interested in winning, they would be more concerned about a significant sliver of elderly voters — a Republican-leaning demographic — not voting because of concerns about catching the virus than about the possibility of a slight increase in the small number of illegitimate votes.  And that brings us to the third point, which is that there are real and legitimate concerns about voter fraud and the best way to safely and securely expand voting options in the fall. This year, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals struck down Arizona’s ban on “ballot harvesting” — the practice of third-party collection of mail-in ballots. Critics of ballot harvesting are concerned that the practice opens the door to voter fraud and intimidation, not to mention the spread of the virus if ballot collectors are going door to door. Arizona’s attorney general is trying to get the Supreme Court to review the Ninth Circuit’s decision, which could affect more than 20 other states that have similar laws. In Congress, meanwhile, the fight is between Democrats who want to force states to adopt a uniform policy on how to conduct elections and Republicans who are adamantly opposed to a federal takeover over the elections process but are not opposed to providing more money for election assistance.  As much as the president’s Twitter feed and media coverage may make it difficult to see, that’s where the real debate over balloting stands. 

In a new video, National Review editor-at-large John O’Sullivan interviews former U.S. attorney general Jeff Sessions about his recusal in the Russia investigation, President Trump, the coronavirus pandemic, and more as part of the Danube Institute’s Lockdown Diaries series. Toward the end they discuss Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei and the Five Eyes intelligence alliance.  Watch it here: 

Well, it was a good run. But after 124 consecutive years, the Boston Marathon will not be held in 2020. The Associated Press reported yesterday: Organizers canceled the Boston Marathon on Thursday for the first time in its history, bowing to the social distancing requirements of the coronavirus outbreak and ending a 124-year run that had persisted through two World Wars, a volcanic eruption and even another pandemic. Earlier this year, race organizers had delayed the race to September 14, joining many other springtime races that punted to the fall in the hope that something like normal life would resume by then. But for Boston, it was only that: a hope. And Boston mayor Marty Walsh concluded that “it became clear as this crisis developed that Sept. 14 was less and less plausible.” This is an understandable decision. Having raced Boston last year (somewhat fortuitously, in hindsight), I can attest that the whole experience depends on the kind of close contact and common usage not ideal for a pandemic: Thousands of runners in intense proximity, not only on the starting line and in the race itself — with plenty of sweating and expectorating throughout — but also in the buses on the way from downtown Boston to the Hopkinton starting line outside of the city. Not to mention people using the same portable restrooms. And of course, thousands of spectators. I get why all of this would be a dicey proposition in the biggest city of a state still dealing with one of the worst coronavirus outbreaks in America. None of this means Boston’s cancellation isn’t a sad occasion. It is, of course. For virtually its entire history, the race has been one of the most important parts of running culture, serving both as a showcase for the sport’s best talent and perhaps the most prestigious race that a hardworking but otherwise unheralded runner could reasonably hope to reach. I was not planning to race Boston this year, though I know many people who were. Now, the earliest anyone can hope to make that 26.2-mile journey is April 2021.  It’s also a reminder of how far we still have to go for normal life to return. Running is, in some senses, immune to the restrictions and closures that have affected other sports and activities; its simplicity allows it to be done just about anywhere, and it can be done alone. I have derived considerable solace — and sanity — in this strange time from running because of this. But Boston’s cancellation is a sober reminder that, in its more complex forms, running is subject to the same cautions and hesitations that are likely to complicate and prolong the return to normalcy for football, baseball, and other sports. The best one can hope for, at this point, is that 2020 ends up as the sole interruption in the storied history of this race.  

1. Staggering facility-by-facility breakdown of COVID-19 long-term care facility deaths in Massachusetts released 2. Senators Ernst and Grassley Ask Trump to Deploy Special Envoy to Nigeria to End Christian Genocide 3. Miami Herald: ICE amidst to transferring detainees with COVID-19, says it can’t test everybody 4. Christianity Today: George Floyd Left a Gospel Legacy in Houston  5. The riots are a product of a riotous & unjust system. The disorder began when a man’s rights were violated & life was taken on the asphalt. American racism was rioting against the people long before they took to the streets. Condemn the cause & then address the broken reaction. — Justin Giboney (@JustinEGiboney) May 28, 2020  6. How about a Justice League or Avengers-style gathering of great heroes in defense of human equality at this moment? @USCCB @ERLC @AARP @LiveAction @ElderJustice @demsforlife @SantEgidioUSA @nrlc @CCharitiesUSA @AUL It would be the greatest nonpartisan crossover event of all time. https://t.co/Ii6fuR1mxF — Charlie Camosy (@CCamosy) May 28, 2020  7. Diocese of Santa Rosa Green Lights Sunday Services In Defiance Of Local Health Officials    8. Providence mom channels grief into helping others during pandemic 9. Michael Gerson: What it means that one of our time’s greatest scientists is a Christian 10. These nuns are giving tens of thousands of broken children home, hope, happiness 11. As restrictions ease, focus on the mission God has planned for you 12. Mini horses visit Colorado Springs retirement community 13. 99-year-old veteran who beat COVID-19 surprises granddaughter on wedding day 14. Meet the dad who’s teaching basic skills on YouTube for kids without a father figure 15. Kid throws socially distant prom after babysitter’s prom was canceled PLUS: Watch last night’s foster-care discussion co-sponsored by NRI and the Catholic Information Center at your convenience:  There was not a dry eye in the live stream. John Paul II fans ecumenically might appreciate this on Pentecost.  

If you have not been following him on Twitter, @PoliticalMath has been doing yeoman’s work debunking misinformation about coronavirus data. One big theme is the popular conspiracy theory, bandied about regularly by major media, that Florida is actually covering up significant numbers of deaths. But then you look at the evidence: [T]he author of [a CNN] piece references the fact that the CDC’s excess death data shows that COVID deaths are likely under-counted and says this is probably true of Florida. But that very specific thing is very specifically not true in Florida. In fact, Florida’s excess death data shows the opposite of New York’s. It shows that, excluding COVID deaths, excess deaths are lower than normal. . . . The author took a data point from one state, said that it was probably happening in Florida too so we can’t trust their data, and then never checked to see if his statement was correct. On the even-worse reporting on the firing of a woman working on the COVID-19 dashboard: This story has caused thousands of people to claim that Florida is faking their numbers. The Sun-Sentinel all but accuses Governor DeSantis personally of “rigging COVID-19 data” which is a flat-out lie and they know it. That narrative is now set for people and there is no going back from it. In pursuit of this narrative, the press (especially the Florida press) has repeatedly misinformed, fumbled basic data concepts, and omitted vital information. They have taken any small accident in reporting, any decision to protect patient privacy, any after-the-fact data correction and spun it into a grand conspiracy. None of this is true. In fact, the opposite is true. The Florida Department of Health has worked heroically to deliver the best data they can with the most transparency possible as quickly as they can. Read the whole thing. 

Personal incomes rose by 10.5 percent in April, far surpassing predictions of a 5.9 percent decline. The Senate’s economic-spending package put money in the hands of consumers just as they reduced their purchases by 13.6 percent due to the coronavirus shutdowns. The data released by the Commerce Department today raise the possibility that a combination of higher disposable incomes and lower production will spur inflation after the pandemic. With supply chains disrupted and businesses upended, the rapid growth of monetary aggregates could mean more money will be chasing fewer goods, especially if the economy reopens in short order.  Predicting inflation has become a treacherous enterprise of late, as protracted low interest rates have coincided with persistently low inflation. Recent history suggests that prices will remain stable no matter the magnitude of economic stimulus. That being said, whereas the post-2008 fiscal and monetary stimulus replaced an endogenous credit contraction, this time around the credit contraction is exogenous — the result of COVID-19. Should that exogenous shock quickly recede, the massive economic stimulus could prove excessive. In any event, it was warranted, and the risk of disinflation remains much higher than the risk of inflation. 

On the menu today: a return to the topic of the Wuhan labs and the origin of the coronavirus, as China’s top epidemiologist declares the Huanan Seafood Market was not the origin point of the coronavirus. China Stops Blaming the Huanan Seafood Market for Launching the Pandemic The fact that scientists backed by the Chinese government insist that SARS-CoV-2 didn’t come from the Wuhan Institute of Virology is not surprising. But the fact that an official Chinese source, on state-run television, is now changing the current official theory of the origin point of the virus is intriguing: The director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, at the center of allegations around a potential laboratory accident, Wang Yanyi, over the weekend told China Central Television that the coronavirus was significantly different from any live pathogen that has been studied at the institute and that there therefore was no chance it could have leaked from there. Note that there were two labs in Wuhan working on coronaviruses found in bats; the other was the Wuhan Center for Disease Control. For what it’s worth, some bright minds like Matt Ridley believe this other lab should be the focus of scrutiny, in part because it is a lower biosafety level and closer to the market that was believed to be the source of the outbreak. But now we must put greater emphasis on “was” believed to be the source of the outbreak: Separately, China’s top epidemiologist said Tuesday that testing of samples from a Wuhan food market, initially suspected as a path for the virus’s spread to humans, failed to show links between animals being sold there and the pathogen. Gao Fu, director of the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said in comments carried in Chinese state media, “It now turns out that the market is one of the victims.” If you don’t believe anything said by any official in China, that’s understandable. And anyone who believed or continues to believe the origin point was a wet market has good reasons to lean in that direction. Virologists warned about these markets for years, calling them the perfect spot for a new virus to jump into humans. Smithsonian magazine, back in 2017: China is uniquely positioned to create a novel flu virus that kills people. On Chinese farms, people, poultry and other livestock often live in close proximity. Pigs can be infected by both bird flu and human flu viruses, becoming potent ‘mixing vessels’ that allow genetic material from each to combine and possibly form new and deadly strains. The public’s taste for freshly killed meat, and the conditions at live markets, create ample opportunity for humans to come in contact with these new mutations. Could there be a third vector? Sure. Farmers all over Asia go into caves to collect bat guano to use as fertilizer, and a 2013 study looked at samples of guano sold in Thailand and found group C betacoronavirus. (You can learn more about the types of coronaviruses here and betacoroaviruses here; the upshot is that most group C betacoronavirses aren’t a serious danger, with the glaring exception of the one that causes Middle East Respiratory Syndrome.) That scenario would be a little strange; we haven’t heard about any cases among farmers preceding the known outbreak in Wuhan. But the first moments of this outbreak are still murky and unclear; more on this point further below. You probably recall that back on April 3, my lengthy examination of the evidence pointing to a lab release pointed out a few problems with the wet-market theory. No one had evidence that bats or pangolins were sold in that market. Chinese scientist Botao Xiao claimed he had spoken to “31 residents and 28 visitors,” and none could recall bats ever being sold in the market. Quite a few of the early cases in Wuhan hospitals could not be traced back to that market.  One last point: As I encounter pushback against the lab theory, I feel like certain people really want this to be a story of bad exotic animal poachers and bad animal smugglers. If these sorts of criminals are deemed ultimately responsible for worldwide pandemic that has nearly 6 million cases and more than 360,000 deaths, government authorities around the globe might finally cooperate and shut down this multi-billion-dollar illicit industry. I’d love to see that, too, but animal smugglers make a particularly convenient villain; just about everybody except their customers already hates them. If the trail leads back to a Chinese government lab . . . the ramifications are much more troubling and disruptive to an existing world order.  We Don’t Know the Virus’s Origin . . . and We May Never Know Earlier this week, National Institutes of Health director Francis Collins made a statement of fact that shouldn’t be seen as controversial: At this point, while we see no indication of engineering or other manipulation of the virus and thus it is naturally occurring, we just don’t know how this virus jumped from animals to humans, and no scenario can be ruled out at this point. “Whether [the coronavirus] could have been in some way isolated and studied in this laboratory in Wuhan, we have no way of knowing.” As I mentioned in a video chat with the National Review Institute’s 1955 Society earlier this week — sign up to support a noble cause and get perks like watching me in my home office! — I suspect we will never definitively know the origin of this virus. If it came from a lab, the Chinese government has probably long since destroyed any “smoking gun “evidence, and they will never admit it. The Beijing authorities have remarkable skills, tools, and resources for silencing whistleblowers and dissenters. Even if the virus really did come from the Huanan Seafood market, Wuhan authorities made decisions that destroyed necessary biological evidence: Local authorities in Wuhan collected extensive samples at the end of December from a market where the virus is believed to have first begun spreading widely, enlisting professional disinfection crews to help with the effort, The Wall Street Journal reported. Four months later, officials have yet to share any data from those samples with any labs outside of China. Some Chinese and foreign researchers told The Journal they had been informed by Chinese officials that animals taken from the market were destroyed. The Chinese argument that they acted responsibly hinges heavily on the point that they identified the genetic sequence of the virus quickly in late December and early January and released that information to the world about a week later. But on February 28, the Straits Times laid out an account that made it sound like it was much more of a coverup and strategic delay in releasing information: On Jan 1, after several batches of genome sequence results had been returned to hospitals and submitted to health authorities, an employee of one genomics company received a phone call from an official at the Hubei Provincial Health Commission, ordering the company to stop testing samples from Wuhan related to the new disease and destroy all existing samples. The employee spoke on condition of anonymity, saying the company was told to immediately cease releasing test results and information about the tests, and report any future results to authorities. Then on Jan 3, China’s National Health Commission (NHC), the nation’s top health authority, ordered institutions not to publish any information related to the unknown disease, and ordered labs to transfer any samples they had to designated testing institutions, or to destroy them. The order, which Caixin has seen, did not specify any designated testing institutions. In mid-May, an NHC official partially confirmed that account, saying the destruction of the samples was for safety reasons: NHC official Liu Dengfeng confirmed that the commission had issued these guidelines at that time “for pandemic prevention and control, which also played an important role in preventing biosafety risks.” “If the laboratory conditions cannot meet the requirements for the safe preservation of samples, the samples should be destroyed on the spot or transferred to a professional institution for safekeeping,” said Mr. Liu, supervisor of the commission’s Department of Health Science, Technology and Education. To summarize the Chinese government’s argument, the virus could not have accidentally been released from one of their labs, because their labs are too diligent and professional to ever make that kind of mistake, and once they had identified the virus, they had to destroy the samples because of the risk of an accidental release.  What Was Happening in Wuhan in November? Bit by bit, we continue to get anecdotes that don’t quite align with what we think we know about the early days of the virus. An unnamed source citing Chinese government data told the South China Morning Post that the first documented case was November 17; no other source has verified that. A study of early cases in the medical journal The Lancet declared, “The symptom onset date of the first patient identified was December 1, 2019.” Two weeks ago, there was a stir about athletes claiming they came home sick from Wuhan after the World Military Games in October. (Testing these athletes for antibodies should be simple. Have they been tested? Did they come back negative and no one found it newsworthy?) Now there’s a curious little anecdote from the San Francisco Bay area. Charlie and Margaret Getz, an American couple, had booked a seven-day cruise along the Yangtze River in early November, and their first day was supposed to be in Wuhan on November 1: Their relaxed overnight stay turned into a brief three-hour visit. Within minutes of getting off the plane, the two were rushed to a Wuhan history museum. “We were the only ones at the museum, no local folks around,” he said. “Then, they had a brief concert for us.” The itinerary suddenly changed and the Wuhan city tour was canceled. “We were told we immediately have to leave that night, not the next day,” said Getz. There was no warning and no explanation. “My wife Margaret said, ‘Wait a second, we’re supposed to look at these historic districts. What’s going on here?’ Getz said, pointing out the brochure they showed the tour guide. “They said, ‘No, no, no.’ Then, they said, ‘Oh there’s a lot of traffic on the river.'” But, Getz remembers seeing very little traffic. It’s China, it’s a tour company, and itineraries get changed all the time. Even the Getzs say it could well be coincidental. But it’s easy to start wondering: Did certain people in Wuhan, perhaps including people connected to that tour visit, know something was wrong or unsafe in the city?   ADDENDUM: “It’s just unrealistic to think that a lab accident could have set off a global pandemic like this!” Reuters, this morning: “A troop of monkeys in India attacked a medical official and snatched away blood samples of patients who had tested positive for the novel coronavirus, authorities said on Friday. The attack occurred this week when a laboratory technician was walking in the campus of a state-run medical college in Meerut, 460 km (285 miles) north of Lucknow, capital of Uttar Pradesh state.” You knew something like this would happen after we lost Charlton Heston.  

Of the many lessons of the COVID-19 pandemic, one of the most obvious is the need to reevaluate state-licensing laws that impede the free and rapid movement of health-care workers to places they are needed. Many governors suspended state-licensing requirements in early March so that doctors, nurses, and other health-care professionals licensed in other states could help with the public-health crisis in their own states. These governors should not resume the ways of the past when the crisis ends.  Individual state-licensing requirements for health-care professionals do not help patients or ensure quality. Rather, they serve as a mechanism to protect health-care provider interests. From its inception in 1847, the American Medical Association sought to reduce the number of practicing physicians by promoting state-licensing laws. It was largely unsuccessful in its campaign until after the Civil War. Then state chapters of the AMA persuaded legislatures to enact licensure boards, claiming they would protect the public from gross incompetence. Unfortunately, as many victims of medical malpractice will attest, the granting of a license offers no such protection. Licensing restrictions do, however, restrict the supply of health-care providers at a time when America’s aging population portends a physician shortage of crisis proportions. When states that were badly hit by the COVID-19 pandemic removed licensing barriers, allowing doctors from outside states to practice medicine and to help their residents, the obvious question became why state medical restrictions were necessary in the first place. Is there a legitimate difference between the quality and necessity of additional certifications for a physician in Alabama versus Arizona?  The medical-school requirement, national medical-licensing examination requirements, and residency-training requirements are nearly identical in all state-licensing processes. Yet in most cases, a medical license is not transferrable from state to state.  
 A physician in New York City cannot practice medicine in New Jersey or Connecticut without three separate medical licenses using the same national-board examination, medical degree, and specialty training. These same licensing regulations prevent patients from receiving telemedicine from out-of-state providers. It’s akin to a state prohibiting someone from driving on their highway with an out-of-state driver’s license. Furthermore, having a license does not ensure quality care. Private credentialing and certification organizations, such as the American Board of Surgery and the American Board of Neurological Surgery, do the vetting of practitioners’ training and competency that health-care consumers need when seeking medical advice. Health-care consumer-rating sites such as Healthgrades or Vitals rate health-care providers, while sites lsuch as Leapfrog or Consumer Reports rate health-care facilities. Licensing boards provide no such tangible function. Once they get a license, physicians in most states may practice any specialty they choose in their offices. Many hospitals or insurance companies, on the other hand, may require their panels of providers to be specialty-board certified. For example, a physician with no formal training or certification in psychiatry can post “psychiatrist” on the office door but would not be able to practice psychiatry in a hospital. Licensing doesn’t protect people. Credentialing protects people by carefully examining and verifying physicians’ depth of training and experience in the area in which they claim to have expertise.   State license boards’ websites may be cumbersome to navigate. Consumers might find it a challenge to view and fully understand any out-of-state complaints a physician might have had prior to relocating in their state. Nobel Prize–winning economist Milton Friedman understood this when he criticized medical-licensing laws. The governance of physicians is best done closest to the physician at the hospital, group, or specialty certification level. The licensure apparatus is also a money-making scheme. It costs $315 to get a license in Alabama. It costs $500 to get a license in Arizona. It costs $375 more to create the portfolio needed to help send the application through the Federation of State Medical Boards. On top of that are the general licensing-examination costs, which tally well over $1000. A cottage industry has developed to help physicians navigate the process. Over the past 100 or so years, “organized medicine” guilds have teamed up with legislatures to erect a hidden medical-licensing/industrial complex.  In 2019, Arizona became the first state to grant reciprocal recognition to all occupations holding out-of-state licenses in good standing that wish to set up operations within its borders. Shortly thereafter, Montana and Pennsylvania followed suit. Missouri became the latest state to do so this May. These are all steps in the right direction, but these states still require out-of-state licensees to maintain brick-and-mortar locations within their borders. A better reform would be to define the “locus of service” as the state in which the provider holds the license, not the state in which the consumer resides. The United States is a 50-state free-trade zone. Consumers can purchase goods and services across state lines without obstructions. Yet they are barred from services provided by people who must obtain a state license to practice their livelihood.   Artificial shortages develop wherever there are barriers to entry by new providers. Medical- licensing laws artificially reduce the availability of physicians and the availability of care. By their emergency suspension of state-licensing laws, governors of states that are COVID-19 “hot spots” tacitly admitted as much. Hopefully the lesson in this will not be lost on those governors and their legislatures once the crisis is over. The suspensions should be made permanent and form a basis for a comprehensive overhaul of medical-licensing laws. Jeffrey A. Singer practices general surgery in Phoenix, Ariz., and is a senior fellow at the Cato Institute. Richard P. Menger is the chief of complex spine surgery and an assistant professor of neurosurgery and assistant professor of political science at the University of South Alabama. 

It’s 2009 again, or feels like it. That was when spontaneous, grassroots protests against overweening government sprang up and were widely derided in the media as dangerous and wrong-headed. The protesters then were inveighing against Obamacare; the protesters now are striking out against the coronavirus lockdowns. The anti-lockdown agitation shows that, despite the revolution in Republican politics wrought by President Donald Trump, opposition to government impositions is deeply embedded in the DNA of the Right and likely will reemerge even more starkly if former vice president Joe Biden is elected president.  The Tea Party that was so powerful in the Obama years, roiling Republican Party politics and making stars out of the likes of Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, sputtered out and was subsumed by the Trump movement in 2016.  The emphasis on constitutionalism, opposition to deficit spending, and American exceptionalism gave way to an emphasis on American strength, opposition to immigration, and nationalism. 
 The differences shouldn’t be exaggerated — the Tea Party was opposed to amnesty for undocumented immigrants, and Trump has faithfully nominated constitutionalist judges. The Tea Party, like Trump, hated the mainstream media with a passion. But the shift from an overwhelming focus on fiscal issues to Trumpian cultural politics was very real. The change was exemplified by the House Freedom Caucus, founded in 2015 and defined by its hard line on government spending, reliably lining up behind Donald Trump, who has pursued a notably expansionary fiscal policy — with huge budget deficits — even before the coronavirus crisis.  The intellectual fashion among populists and religious traditionalists has been to attempt to establish a post-liberty or “post-liberal” agenda to forge a deeper foundation for the new Republican Party. Instead of obsessing over freedom and rights, conservatives would look to government to protect the common good. This project, though, has been rocked by its first real-life encounter with governments acting to protect, as they see it, the common good.  One of its architects, the editor of the religious journal First Things, R. R. Reno, has sounded during the crisis like one of the libertarians he so scorns. First, he complained that he might get shamed if he were to host a dinner party during the height of the pandemic, although delaying a party would seem a small price to pay for someone so intensely committed to the common good. More recently, he went on a tirade against wearing masks. Reno is apparently fine with a much stronger government, as long as it never issues public-health guidance not to his liking.  Reno has published vituperative attacks on the conservative writer (and my friend and former colleague) David French, supposedly for having a blinkered commitment to classical liberalism. But it is the hated French who has actually tried to thoughtfully balance liberty and the common good during the crisis, favoring the lockdowns at first and favoring reopening now that the lockdowns’ goals have been achieved. What’s happened during the lockdowns is that the natural distrust that populists have of experts has expressed itself in opposition to government rules. Being told what to do by epidemiologists and government officials wielding all-caps SCIENCE as their authority has been enough to bring Tea Party–era liberty back in vogue. We’ve also seen a return of the glue that has held moral traditionalists and libertarians together in the conservative coalition for so long — the belief that big government is a threat to traditional institutions. Hence, the focus on resuming church services. In retrospect, the Tea Party wasn’t as much a purely liberty movement as it seemed at the time. A populist anti-elitism was an enormously important factor, which is why it faded into the Trump movement so seamlessly. On the other hand, Trumpian populism has a big streak of liberty to it.  All it has taken to bring it to the fore is extraordinary government intrusion into our lives. If Biden is elected president, there’s more where that came from. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate 

City transit systems have been battered by the coronavirus pandemic. They’ve lost millions of riders, and still they are being lambasted for carrying too many people. But the long-term effects of the pandemic on mass transit are still unclear: Who will ride once things return to some semblance of normality? How will transit agencies provide for current riders and win back those staying away?  Circles painted on a Paris train-station floor to define social-distancing requirements may provide a hint. Looking more like a Twister game than a transit plan, the circles assume each person rides alone; there are no provisions for couples or adults with children. If each person stands in a circle, how long will trains need to dwell in the station to give those in the farthest circles time to enter? How will social distancing be maintained once everyone is on the trains? Who will count the number of people in each car, subtracting those exiting and adding those entering? Undaunted by these questions, New York City recently announced it is considering similar diagramming. On buses, some operators are allowing only ten or 15 riders. After that, the bus will stop to discharge passengers, picking up only enough riders to replace those who have exited. Most cities are using rear-door boarding to maintain contactless entry and protect drivers from scared, angry, and sometimes unmasked patrons.  Rear-door entry is free, raising the questions of when and how — or if — fares will be re-instituted. It also creates issues similar to those posed by Paris’s scheme: Who will be responsible for assuring that patrons are masked? Who will be responsible for passenger counts? Will those who begin their ride mid-route be assured of getting on a bus or will their trip depend on how many riders have entered or exited before their stop? *    *    * The bigger picture is no less cloudy. In “normal” times, New York City’s subway system serves an average of more than 5 million people each day. According to New York’s Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), as of mid-April, subway ridership was down 90 percent from the same time last year, bus ridership was down 80 percent, and commuter-line ridership was down 95 percent. Although also heavily affected, the agency’s bridges and tunnels reported the smallest loss, with crossings down about 60 percent. The transit systems serving Boston, Washington, D.C., Chicago, San Diego, Los Angeles, and the San Francisco Bay Area have reported similarly sharp declines in use.  
 Patrick J. Foye, the MTA’s chairman and CEO, said that as of mid-March the system had lost $4 billion as a result of the pandemic. Despite the system’s receiving about $3.8 billion from the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act, he indicated that without additional relief to cover operating losses estimated at more than $8 billion, the “present and future of the MTA are in serious jeopardy.”  But money may not be the only problem. The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey received $450 million in CARES Act funds, much less than the requested $2 billion. It reported a 95 percent drop from the same time last year in ridership on trains travelling between New York and New Jersey, along with a 97 percent decline in patrons at its major airports (Newark, LaGuardia, and JFK), but only a 50 percent decline in bridge and tunnel traffic.  What do the MTA and Port Authority tell us about the future of mass transit? Do the lower losses on bridges and tunnels provide indications that as the New York metropolitan area wakes up from its pause, travelers will reject public transit in favor of their own cars, which make it easy to maintain social distance and don’t require the use of a mask?  In New York, the MTA recently floated the idea that in addition to all patrons wearing masks and being exposed to the previous night’s cleaning chemicals, they might be asked to reserve space on subways and buses similar to the way they do now for concerts and other ticketed events. Currently, only employees submit to having their temperatures taken, but if the technology improves, might this become required of patrons also? Transit systems rightly rejected the Transportation Security Administration’s airport-check-in procedures as inappropriate for mass transit, but they are now talking about far more invasive and time-consuming protocols. After the fear is gone, will riders self-regulate by wearing face covers and avoiding crowding? Will employers stagger office hours to eliminate rush-hour crush-loads, or will they rather institute work-from-home schemes that eliminate the need for workers to undertake daily, weekly, or monthly commutes? Pointing to the success of staggered hours during the 1918 flu pandemic seems a nostalgic indulgence, a look back at how many people worked a century ago, the type of work they did, and the lack of other travel options they had; it’s not necessarily a recipe for a successful reopening of 21st-century urban America. But it may well be tried, and if it is, transit-use patterns could change dramatically: The less workers need to visit the office, the less they’ll buy the weekly, ten-day, and monthly tickets that, in return for a slight discount, provide transit systems with a regular income stream paid in advance of the actual ride.   A number of cities, notably Oakland, San Francisco, Seattle, Boston, and Minneapolis, are experimenting with closing streets to private cars. New York City is also doing this, but it is less likely the closings will remain permanent there. Not all the cities have the same regulations; some allow only walking, others walking and biking, others the full range of activities that do not include a motorized vehicle.  All claim the changes are primarily to facilitate residents’ ability to exercise while maintaining social distance. But bicycle sales are booming; cities throughout the United States report that bikes are becoming as difficult to purchase as toilet paper and cleaning products were early in the pandemic. As people walk, bike, or even skateboard more frequently, these may become viable options for short-distance commutes. Will they increase sufficiently to make a dent in transit revenue, particularly if fares rise and service remains limited? In London, with similar concerns about crowded trains and buses, bikes are also in high demand. And although the transit system received a £1.6 billion bail-out after Mayor Sadiq Kahn threatened to cut service, towns are hinting at providing free parking to encourage people to use their cars. This is also an alternative in many U.S. cities where parking is plentiful even in downtown areas. *    *    * Few systems anywhere, with the exception of Metrolink, the commuter-rail line that serves Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, and Ventura counties in Southern California, have surveyed riders to determine what the future may hold. In an email survey to which 11,000 Metrolink riders responded between April 23–28, about 40 percent described themselves as transit-dependent, either because they were disabled or because they had no car. A far larger number — 81 percent — said they would ride Metrolink after stay-at-home orders were lifted. But fewer than a third of the latter group said that they’d feel safe riding as early as this summer, and an almost equal percentage said that they’d feel safe only after a virus vaccine existed or that they could not put a time-frame on their reply. Most transit agencies don’t depend primarily on fares to cover their expenses. But until now, the goal of every transit agency has always been to provide maximum service to the maximum number of people. The pandemic has changed that, forcing systems to limit their service to those who absolutely need it. If this new model endures after things return to normal, the expense of continuing to operate transit systems could cease to be worth it. So in the next round of decisions on transit, systems may have to choose between rebuilding ridership or accepting a far smaller role in moving the urban masses. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				s there an unimpeachable right to abortion somewhere in the Constitution? Should abortion policy be left up to each state’s discretion? Does the 14th Amendment give government the power to ban abortion? Is legal abortion incompatible with the principles of the Declaration of Independence? These arguments are endlessly complex and highly contentious. But if you spend any time observing our public debates over abortion, you’ll notice that these topics are rarely addressed.  Instead, political fights over abortion policy feature two arguments that seem not to respond to one another. There are those who recognize the humanity of the unborn child and argue that our political system should protect his right to life just as it does yours or mine. And there are those who rest their case for a right to abortion at the feet of Supreme Court precedent, implicitly arguing that Roe v. Wade has removed the need for them to justify abortion itself. To be sure, many thinkers indulge in philosophical discussions about the ethical questions at stake in abortion. But in policy fights, legal-abortion supporters almost never defend abortion qua abortion. They don’t admit that abortion is killing and justify its legality anyway; they don’t explain why we should privilege one person’s bodily autonomy over another’s autonomy and right to life. Instead, they cloak their views with euphemisms such as “women’s rights” and “reproductive freedom” and, when challenged, retreat to the comfortable ground of proclaiming Roe “the law of the land.” The legal battles over abortion during the COVID-19 outbreak illustrate the fundamental problem with this status quo, which ensures that the acrimonious debate will stretch on interminably absent major changes.   Since March, several states have included surgical abortion among the many elective procedures halted during the pandemic, aiming to limit the spread of disease and conserve medical resources. Abortion-advocacy groups have hauled these states to court, insisting that a health-care crisis is not sufficient reason to abridge a so-called constitutional right. In one of the most egregious examples, the American Civil Liberties Union sued Arkansas for requiring women to test negative for COVID-19 prior to having an abortion. 
 In short, abortion advocates and their allies argue, Roe and subsequent jurisprudence mean that states may not, for any reason, restrict a woman’s ability to obtain an elective abortion at any stage of pregnancy. By and large, federal judges have agreed with them, prohibiting states from limiting abortion as one of many nonessential procedures. This pandemic has underscored a problem that already existed, exposing not only the insatiable greed of the abortion lobby but also the way in which U.S. abortion jurisprudence has established an unworkable system for adjudicating these disputes. When the Supreme Court in Roe manufactured a right to abortion, it gave judges the power to impose a nakedly political decision on the entire nation, including states that correctly view the ruling as a hijacking of the Constitution. As a result, supporters of abortion can avoid defending their views before the public and instead demand that judges handicap their opponents.  The anti-constitutional decision in Roe, bolstered by subsequent rulings, has allowed proponents of unlimited abortion to hang their hat on precedent — or “super-precedent,” as they would have it — rather than on their preferred policy. But those who cry precedent on Roe are the same voices lobbying the Court to overturn less favorable rulings, such as Heller or Citizens United. It is not precedent they defend but the status quo that one particular precedent created.  Meanwhile, the American people are content to believe that Roe legalized abortion only in the first three months of pregnancy and that states may regulate the procedure thereafter. Such a status quo would comport with what a majority of Americans want, but it is not the landscape that Roe created. If it were, states would not be losing the battle to limit elective abortion during a global pandemic.  Relatively few know that Roe’s misinterpretation of the Constitution — combined with Doe v. Bolton’s loophole for maternal health — permits abortion on demand through all nine months of pregnancy. Even fewer realize that these flawed decisions enable judges to block pro-life policies that most Americans support. The moral and political question of abortion has starkly divided us for more than half a century, and it cries out for a just solution. To the extent that we have not achieved one, it is because flawed jurisprudence enables abortion advocates to dodge the debate while preventing abortion opponents from doing anything to alter the status quo. 

Think of Brian De Palma’s first novel — Are Snakes Necessary? — as his COVID-19 movie. Produced under duress, during a period when De Palma was blocked from green-lighted big-budget Hollywood filmmaking, rather like shelter-in-place restrictions, it is as full of movie references as any De Palma film. Are Snakes Necessary? is also politically charged, continuing the obsession with skullduggery and government suspicion that goes back to De Palma’s earliest films, the anti-draft satire Greetings, and the radical activist/media satire Hi, Mom! This time. modernist De Palma satirizes the very form he essays — the hard-boiled crime novel with its built-in plot twists and duplicitous femme fatales.  Lead character Elizabeth de Carlo follows such puckish De Palma heroines as Grace and Danielle in Sisters and Laure/Lilly in Femme Fatale, where identity folds, multiplies, contrasts, and mirrors. Elizabeth and a mother-daughter duo, Jenny and Fanny, are involved with untrustworthy males: a photographer, a politician, and his political consultant, who variously exploit the women sexually and politically. Elizabeth, de Palma writes, has “innate grace.” She goes by the rule that “knowing how to speak to the animal in the man is half the game.” (She’s like Rebecca De Mornay in Alex Cox’s The Winner, a sign of De Palma’s instinctive cinematic good taste). Tension and humor, De Palma’s two best tricks, propel the narrative, which deliberately references specific Kennedy and Clinton scandals (although De Palma indulges typical liberal petulance when labeling the offenders “Republicans”). But the villain of the piece, with his gruesome comeuppance, reveals the true political intent of Are Snakes Necessary? It is an apologia for De Palma the (supposedly) sexist pop artist.  This would be unnecessary in a fairer, more erudite era that was not held hostage to #MeToo coercion but, instead, appreciated that De Palma created more memorable and sympathetic female characters in Sisters, Phantom of the Paradise, Carrie, Dressed to Kill, Blow Out, and Femme Fatale than any female filmmaker. The sops to feminism in Are Snakes Necessary? might be the result of De Palma’s collaborating with his wife, Susan Lehman, a former New York Times editor.  
 In De Palma’s own field, where his virtuosity has no contemporary parallel, it isn’t likely that he would share the role of auteur with another byline. Lehman, credited as co-author, may be providing cover for De Palma’s usual misunderstood, bad-boy fantasies: “He never thought he could have everything — brains and beauty and sexy and sweet and light and hot — in one package.” Yet the novel’s strict adherence to female empowerment (“the one and only rescuer in Elizabeth’s story has been Elizabeth”) and revenge renders the novel trite. Its stock plotting lacks the larger, cosmic fate that ultimately made Carrie, Dressed to Kill, and Casualties of War so powerful and that lifted The Fury, Blow Out, and Femme Fatale into awe-inspiring, cosmic visions. De Palma’s decision to write a novel supports his brave, hold-out position as a cinéaste who resists television. Before television conquered cinema, especially for the “golden age of cable-TV” generation and today’s streaming culture, there was a concept called “la caméra-stylo” (camera-pen), formulated by critic and filmmaker Alexandre Astruc to describe filmmaking that was as fluent and expressive as writing. The museum cruising scene of Dressed to Kill fits Astruc’s theory, as does the carefully built final sunlit tableau of Femme Fatale: pure cinema.  Although De Palma finds no literary equivalent to his famous split-screen device in Sisters or even the binocular sequence in Richard Quine’s Pushover that influenced De Palma’s voyeur fetish (which culminated in the noir extravagance of the nighttime sound-recording sequence in Blow Out), he tries writing such effects. Most of it is narrative wind-up. It takes a while before we get to the first movie moment of visual contradiction: “Rogers can’t see the paper, which if he could would stop his heart (not to mention his campaign): in clear bold print, the paper says Paternity Test Results: POSITIVE.” It’s a naughty joke, like Angie Dickinson discovering the venereal-disease health notice in Dressed to Kill combined with Obsession’s incest revelation.  Some moments show De Palma’s media sophistication (“videotaping has the potential to change how we campaign”) and his yearning to make cinema (“I need to feel the rush and shoot it”), especially his reference to The Great Gatsby’s Doctor T. J. Eckleburg, whose bespectacled eyes, on an old, faded billboard, stare down at Gatsby — an ideal De Palma image. He is a Hitchcock buff here: “Nick, crushed by the ending he has orchestrated, drops his camera to his side and looks over the railing” like Jimmy Stewart in Vertigo. He pays secret homage to Fritz Lang’s Beyond a Reasonable Doubt. And he is his own best critic here: “It all happened in that funny slow-motion way events unfold in the heat of certain moments.” There’s also some plain good writing: Rogers has the same general regard for applause. He treats it the way porpoises regard the shiny red balls they balance on their noses, He chases it. He relishes it. He plays it for all it’s worth. Applause is his favorite toy. Best of all are the last 15 chapters, mostly short, one-page action-filled accounts that evoke De Palma’s suspenseful, contrapuntal crosscut editing style. The title Are Snakes Necessary? reveals a roué’s phallic embarrassment, which De Palma typically compounds with a film reference: Norman Taurog’s 1942 comedy Are Husbands Necessary? But this lockdown creation commands attention because it also evinces social and cultural change — the shift from De Palma’s counterculture Sixties origins to Millennial resignation. The liberal critique he delivered in his Iraq War movie Redacted was a shocking failure, so now, following the wonderfully perceptive but hardly seen Domino, De Palma is a cinema outsider, left spinning a handwritten tale about “the world of politics — of smoke and mirrors and endless spin . . . lies.” Are Snakes Necessary? is available from Hard Case Crime publishers. 

1. The Dispatch: The COVID Nursing Home Crisis Was 50 Years in the Making 2. NY Gov Andrew Cuomo Uses Cooked Numbers To Defend Record On Nursing Homes 3. RI House Republicans ask committee to meet over COVID-19’s impact on nursing homes 4.Should the coronavirus pandemic change our Christian approach to elder care?  5. Essence: Pregnant Alabama Woman Jailed, Put At Risk For Coronavirus Over Parking Violations  6. Washington Post: A third of Americans now show signs of clinical anxiety or depression, Census Bureau finds amid coronavirus pandemic  7. Wall Street Journal: America’s Churches Weigh Coronavirus Danger Against the Need to Worship 8. For Special Needs Kids, the Classroom is Essential 9. Fr. Sean M. Salai: Democrats: Don’t repeat the mistakes of the Catholic Church with Tara Reade 10. St. Augustine bishop calls for end to Florida death penalty 11. Noah Rothman: The Indefensible Cult of Cuomo 12. Stephen White: Catholic Schools and the Common Good 13. Megan McArdle: Conservatives who refuse to wear masks undercut a central claim of their beliefs 14. Congress passes Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act 15. Do you know about the Hillbilly Thomists? You may enjoy this.  

In Bloomberg Opinion, I write about some red tape that is making it even harder for small businesses to survive this economy: Congress established the Paycheck Protection Program in late March to provide forgivable loans to businesses to help them through the Covid-19 crisis. The Small Business Administration is insisting that 75% of any amount forgiven has to be spent on payroll, as opposed to rent, utilities and other overhead costs. That requirement is not in the law, as the agency’s inspector general has pointed out in a report. The agency explained that it had consulted Mnuchin and determined this limit fit the law’s “overarching focus on keeping workers paid and employed.” But the rule subverts the purpose of the program . . . .  

The coronavirus pandemic has exacted a devastating toll on men, women, and children across the United States. But some Americans are weathering the COVID-19 financial storm better than others. Our research suggests that married men and women have proven to be much more resilient in the face of this storm than their single peers.  On the social and emotional front, we have already highlighted evidence that marriage is buffering many Americans from feelings of loneliness amid stay-at-home orders. We found, for instance, that singles were nearly twice as likely as married adults to say they felt lonely every day or nearly every day during the previous week. But marriage offers couples more than social and emotional security. It is also a critical source of financial stability during good times and bad times. Marriage puts families at a financial advantage by providing them with two potential sources of income. Moreover, research shows that marriage reduces the odds that a household will go through costly family transitions, encourages greater support from family networks, and builds habits of financial prudence, all of which shore up additional security against financial hardship when the tides of fortune turn. The economic value of marriage has only grown since COVID-19 hit. A new survey spearheaded by the Data Foundation and NORC at the University of Chicago shows how married adults are weathering the pandemic’s economic challenges better than singles. In analyzing the second wave of data from the COVID Impact Survey, we find that married men, women, and families are less likely to experience hunger, to be less dependent on public assistance, and to be better prepared to cover unexpected expenses during this pandemic, when compared with single adults and families headed by single parents. Married adults appear to have experienced fewer job losses than unmarried adults since the World Health Organization declared the COVID outbreak a pandemic just over two months ago. Single parents are almost twice as likely to say they became unemployed after March 1 of this year or that they have been temporarily laid off or furloughed when compared with married adults without kids.  One of the greatest areas of concern during these challenging times is hunger. Proper nutrition is essential for childhood development and adult health. We find that single parents are more than twice as likely as married parents to say that their household ran out of food before they had enough money to buy more during the previous month. Nearly half (49 percent) of single parents said this happened in the previous 30 days, while 21 percent of married parents said the same. Even for adults without children, married couples fared better than singles on food-insecurity measures.  Unsurprisingly, marrieds have been less likely to turn to the government for public assistance during the pandemic. Take food stamps. Single parents were more than twice as likely as married adults to say they received or applied for benefits through the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) in the past week (figure 3).  Married men and women, and their families, are also much more likely to have a financial buffer built up. The COVID Impact Survey asked people about their ability to cover unexpected expenses based on their current financial situation: “Suppose that you have an unexpected expense that costs $400. Based on your current financial situation, how would you pay for this expense? If you would use more than one method to cover this expense, please select all that apply.” Respondents were given eight options to select from, including “use money currently in my checking or savings account or with cash,” “put it on my credit card and pay it off over time,” “use money from a bank loan or line of credit,” and more. Given all of these options, about a quarter of single parents still said, “I would not be able to pay for it right now,” compared with only 13 percent of married parents. Many singles, then, seem to be struggling with not only a thin savings account but also a limited ability to borrow, which could compound their hardship in this time.  The coronavirus pandemic has hit everyone hard, but it appears that married Americans — both those with and without children — are weathering turbulent economic conditions more successfully than their single peers. In particular, we find that single-parent families are almost twice as likely to be suffering from food insecurity, relying on food stamps, and unable to cover emergency expenses, compared with families headed by married parents. What’s more, even when we control for factors, such as race and education, that might seem to better explain why some Americans are more financially resilient than others, we still find that marriage is a significant predictor of who is getting by during the pandemic. In the midst of increasingly difficult and uncertain times, marriage is helping Americans steer clear of hunger, government assistance, and financial destitution.     The financial advantages of marriage are especially striking because cultural and political elites in the U.S. are so reluctant to discuss them in public. Those who control the commanding heights of popular culture, the media, and both political parties typically shy away from acknowledging a simple truth: When it comes to money, two is greater than one. But in the rest of America, where the devastation of this pandemic is real and present, this truth could not be clearer. 
 Peyton Roth is a research assistant in poverty studies at the American Enterprise Institute. W. Bradford Wilcox is director of the National Marriage Project at the University of Virginia and a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. 

The Wall Street Journal’s editorial board takes a look at the way that the EU is trying to combine tackling the effects of the pandemic with a broader agenda: Whatever else you might say about them, European Union mandarins aren’t short of ambition. They have long wanted to knit the EU into a true federal union, and they’re seizing the coronavirus as a €1.9 trillion opening. That’s the combined size of the €750 billion one-time virus recovery package European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen proposed Wednesday, and the €1.1 trillion seven-year budget the Commission also is proposing that includes a heavy dose of virus relief. This is on top of €540 billion in Covid-19 relief the Commission unveiled last month, and however many trillions the European Central Bank deploys in the crisis. Brussels wants Europeans to focus on how the mandarins will spend the money. Much of it will go in grants to states, apportioned on such factors as youth unemployment . . . Far more consequential is how Brussels would pay for this. The money from the seven-year budget would be provided in the normal way, as block grants from the EU’s 27 member states to the Commission. But Brussels also wants to borrow a large portion of the €750 billion emergency program — and then impose new, EU-wide taxes on everything from plastic waste to digital commerce to repay the bonds. This new borrow-and-tax authority is the main point. The alleged inspiration is Alexander Hamilton, America’s first Treasury Secretary. His plan for the new federal government to assume Revolutionary War debt from the states, and then repay that debt from the federal government’s revenues, put the U.S. on track to become what it is today. Some European leaders have hoped for decades that issuing eurobonds mutually backed by all members would knit the bloc together, or that new digital taxes might do the trick. Now they think the only way to keep the EU from splintering is to forge a new borrowing capacity that can transfer resources from richer nations to poorer. This misunderstands American history. Before Hamilton wrote his First Report on Public Credit, he coauthored the Federalist Papers to persuade his fellow New Yorkers to ratify a new Constitution. He understood that a political union providing democratic accountability for the federal government was a precondition for fiscal union . . . And there’s the rub. There is still no evidence that voters in the EU’s member states want to enter into a political union on anything approaching the American model. For fairly obvious historical reasons, the nascent American Republic was a nation, or proto-nation, in a way that the EU’s ungainly confederation is not. This is understood very well, if not widely admitted, in Brussels, but those steering the European project have always appreciated the value of, to use that entertainingly cynical phrase, a ‘beneficial crisis.’ The euro was built on a foundation of sand. To launch a currency union without the backing of at least a partial fiscal union was asking for trouble, but the necessary political support within the member states for a fiscal union simply was not there. No matter: The single currency was launched anyway. The thinking of at least some of those responsible was that, if trouble came, it would set off a crisis that would create the conditions in which some sort of fiscal union would become politically palatable, if only because the alternative was an economic catastrophe.  Trouble duly came calling, but, in the end, it turned out that the first euro-zone crisis was not enough (quite) to do the trick. The question now is whether the impact of COVID-19, particularly on the already weakened economies of the euro-zone’s south, will scare the currency union’s members into a fiscal union. Probably not (or not exactly) but the greater the taxing power that the EU assumes, the louder will be the demands for greater democratic accountability — no taxation without representation and all that. And logically, ‘representation’ would have to be at the EU, rather than the national, level, and it would be achieved by giving more power to the EU parliament at the expense of national parliaments.   The poorly designed currency will thus have led to an economic crisis that forced the pace of fiscal integration, and the crisis of legitimacy that could well ensue from forced fiscal integration will force the pace of political integration. See how this works? The Wall Street Journal: Perhaps the EU needs closer fiscal and political integration to survive this crisis. But then someone should tell voters, and persuade them to assent. They’re entitled to change their minds after 2005 [when a proposed EU constitution was rejected], especially if a new political organization for the EU gave voters more direct control over Brussels. The problem with that is that the EU Parliament cannot, as things currently stand, in any true sense of the word, be democratic, for the simple reason that there is still no EU ‘demos’. One day there might be, but it doesn’t exist now, and it’s not going to be created overnight by transferring more powers to a parliament that represents everybody, but nobody. ‘Control’ will not in any real sense lie with the voters, but with a technocracy that will use the illusion of increased democracy to produce exactly the opposite result. And there are a good many reasons to think that, in the end, the technocrats will get away with it.  

Last week I was searching the Internet for some COVID-19 statistic or other, and I came across a new CDC website. The site featured some numbers the federal government is using to model the spread of the epidemic. One in particular caught my eye: 0.4 percent, the “current best estimate” of the disease’s “case fatality rate.” The document also said that 35 percent of infections are asymptomatic, which suggests the infection fatality rate is just 0.26 percent.  These numbers struck me as low for several reasons. For one thing, the virus has already killed 0.2 percent of all New Yorkers, and obviously a much higher percentage of those who’ve actually been infected in the city. For another, if we’ve had 100,000 deaths nationwide and a CFR of 0.4 percent, that means we’ve had 25 million symptomatic cases; including cases without symptoms, more than 10 percent of the entire country has been infected, which seems out of sync with what we’re hearing from serology tests. Individual studies and reviews of the evidence tend to put the infection fatality rate somewhere around 0.5 to 1 percent, though there’s at least one dissenting review that puts it lower (while managing not to include any studies finding a fatality rate above 0.5 percent, of which there are plenty). I put out a tweet expressing my confusion, and things spiraled quickly, as they often do on social media. A follower alerted the prominent biologist Carl Bergstrom, who wrote a thread criticizing the CDC’s numbers. The next morning he was featured in a CNN story about the issue. There have been many media reports since, with the narrative predictably varying from “Heroic Scientific Experts Hammer Corrupt CDC for Fake Low Fatality Rate” to “CDC Finally Admits COVID Is Basically Harmless.” (I exaggerate, but only a little.)  I don’t have a scorching hot take on the number. But I do want to know where it comes from, which is not clear from the site itself. It says the information is based on data about a month old and names the source “Preliminary COVID-19 estimates, CDC,” which I have not been able to locate (if indeed it refers to a specific document at all). I have contacted the CDC several times in the past week to no avail. Both the Center for Public Integrity and BuzzFeed similarly report that they sought comment and received no reply.  If the fatality rate of this thing is 0.26 percent, that is fantastic news. If the CDC has evidence this is the case, it should share it with the rest of us.  

I periodically write that if the growing national debt manifested in the form of Godzilla or some other giant monster, Americans would mobilize in droves, and make great sacrifices, to stop it, reverse it, and overcome it. We move pretty quick, and are pretty cooperative, when we can see a threat. We’re visual creatures; some studies indicate that 90 percent of the information processed by the brain is visual.  When something visibly threatens us, like terrorists crashing airliners into skyscrapers, everyone instantly grasps the danger and swings into action. After 9/11, Americans were hungrily looking for ways to help and do something and feel useful: blood donations, charitable donations, volunteering, memorial services, enlisting in the military. (“Not Knowing What Else To Do, Woman Bakes American-Flag Cake” is one of my all-time favorite Onion stories, a perfect expression of how so many wanted to help in some way and couldn’t quite figure out how.) But we can’t see the coronavirus, except through a microscope. If this virus manifested as a visible green gas, people would see it and run from it. There would be little or no dispute about wearing masks. Crowds would instantly disperse at the sight of a forming green cloud. No one would enter a building or room with any discernable green haze.  Americans mobilized — or in many cases, de-mobilized — on a massive scale to respond to the threat of SARS-CoV-2. (In the first week of April, U.S. residents spent 93 percent of their time at home.) They donated to charities and food banks. They canceled events, they put on masks and gloves, they socially distanced. Industries reorganized their assembly lines to make masks and protective gear and ventilators. At the Braskem petrochemical plant in Delaware, 43 men worked 12-hour shifts all day and night for a month straight, “producing tens of millions of pounds of the raw materials that will end up in face masks and surgical gowns worn on the front lines of the pandemic.” All of this for a threat that cannot be seen, and whose effects are not immediately or easily visible. I suspect that many people expected 100,000 Americans dying from a virus in less than three months to look like something out of apocalyptic fiction — bodies in the streets, soldiers in bio-chem suits, giant scary biohazard signs everywhere.   But the coronavirus deaths are almost entirely occurring far away from cameras. This is not a request or a demand that Americans witness their countrymen breathing their last breath and succumb to the virus, just an observation that for most human beings, seeing is believing. A significant portion of America’s coronavirus victims are dying in nursing homes and long-term care facilities — locations that felt shut away from the rest of society and easily forgotten before the pandemic hit our shores. Cities with empty streets looked eerie, but a vocal contingent on the right concluded, with some accuracy, that the emptiness of the streets was driven by the lockdown, not from the virus. It is easy to see politicians, such as the president, or Bill de Blasio, or Andrew Cuomo, or Gretchen Whitmer, or Ralph Northam bumbling through, shutting things down too late or maintaining the shutdowns too long, ignoring rules and recommendations they expect others to follow. They are all visible targets for frustration, disappointment, and ire. The virus SARS-CoV-2 is the root of all of our problems, but there’s no point in holding a rally or protest against a microscopic entity with no mind. As for those who doubt the danger of the virus, no number of skeptics dying will convince other skeptics; the not-so-subtle glee at the irony in the ranks of the media just makes the other skeptics dig in deeper.  We are forced to muddle through as the real fight against the virus occurs behind closed doors — in hospitals, in medical-research facilities, with only brief, fleeting glimpses.  

On the menu today, we’re taking stock of where we are as a country in this fight: Almost every part of the country is in some early stage of reopening; the discernable indicators in our fight against the virus are better, but not great; a surprising amount of economic optimism . . . and meanwhile, the president seeks to make Big Tech liable for what’s posted on their platforms; and Minneapolis burns.  America’s Gradual but Grand Reopening American society is reopening, bit by bit, at different paces in different places. Even the District of Columbia is ending its stay-at-home order that has been in effect for two months; the Maryland suburb of Montgomery County now feels the need to acknowledge that they may be able to start phase one next week. Almost all of the New York City suburbs are now in their first phase of reopening, although not the city itself. Across the country in Wyoming, the state is allowing gatherings of up to 250 people in outdoor settings and 25 people in indoor settings, although six of the state’s largest rodeos are now canceled. For the past few months, Americans debated, increasingly contentiously, about whether the economy and society could reopen and how fast. As noted yesterday, Americans’ behavior changed faster than the debate did. Over in USA Today, Mitch Albom chooses to frame the debate in the least useful and most demagogic way, a battle of caring and suffering good people who understand the threat on one side, up against ignorant, selfish, and entitled whiners on the other: Let’s face it. It’s easy to whine about not getting your hair cut when you haven’t lost a child to the coronavirus. It’s easy to insist on getting back to your favorite bar when you haven’t watched your father die alone in a hospital bed on a cellphone held up by a nurse. And since 100,000 deaths represents only three ten-thousandths of the country, the odds are overwhelming that most people won’t have experienced a COVID-19 loss of their own. When nearly 41 million people have signed up for unemployment since the outbreak began, and you’re still characterizing the desire to reopen the economy and society as “whining about not getting your hair cut” or going to the bar, you’ve demonstrated that you’re not interested in a good-faith discussion or accurately illuminating the problems we face. A few days ago on the NRPlus Facebook page, I elaborated that my general outlook was pro-lockdown-for-several-weeks, while being anti-one-size-fits-all. It doesn’t make sense for Hamilton County in New York — which has five cases — to have the same lockdown rules as New York City, which has 204,000. And it seems almost every government official and public-health expert has been deliberately blind to the fact that the public’s acceptance of the rules is going to be different in Week One than now as we wrap up Week Ten. Lockdowns were never going to be a long-term answer, and state and local lawmakers needed to be beating the drums to get people ready for post-lockdown, manageable risk, “life with the virus.” Perhaps a few did, but I think a lot of governors got locked in — no pun intended — to a “lockdowns are good, opening back up is risky and bad” mentality. They are much more afraid of the consequences of opening up too early than opening up too late.  You May Be Tired of Living with the Virus, But the Virus Isn’t Tired of Living with You   How is the country doing in the fight against the coronavirus? Better, but not great. Daily new cases remain in the 20,000 range, which isn’t necessarily bad; more testing means more positive cases. After a holiday weekend dip, we may be returning to a daily death rate of about 1,500. The rate of testing dropped in the past few days; one wonders if this is related to the holiday weekend. Surely everyone is tired of hearing about models. Dr. Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute and professor of health policy at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, told NPR that the consensus of the models is “we’re probably going to see 70,000 to 100,000 deaths between now and the end of the summer.” At first glance, these may seem like unimaginably pessimistic numbers, but we’ve got from 644 on March 28 to more than 100,000 today, and most parts of the county were self-quarantining and social distancing by late March. Yes, warm weather should help somewhat, and more Americans spending more time outside should be beneficial. (If the study in China that concluded that only one of 318 outbreaks occurred outdoors is accurate and is supported by other studies elsewhere, we would have an extremely useful clue for protection and mitigation: Spend as much time outdoors as possible until winter.)   But with the reopening, more Americans will be interacting with more Americans, and most of the workforce labors indoors. We’ve seen from grocery stories, meatpacking plants, and warehouses — such as the ones used by Amazon — that as Americans go to work, they will inadvertently spread the virus to each other. There are roughly 90 days in summer; if we average 1,000 deaths per day, that gets us to 90,000. With all of that said, Robert VerBruggen wrote yesterday about just how concentrated our coronavirus outbreak is: “One-third of U.S. COVID deaths are in counties that hold just 4 percent of the population, and another third are in counties holding 11 percent.” Avik Roy separately noted nursing homes and assisted-living facilities “hold just 0.6 percent of the population but have produced 43 percent of COVID deaths” in the country. One part of the country that appears particularly concerning right now is Minnesota*: Between Sunday and Monday, Minnesota saw an unprecedented jump in COVID-19 cases in intensive care, with 41 new patients. MDH has heard of some hospitals nearing or reaching capacity as of the end of last week and expects some to begin setting up surge capacity. A few have staffing concerns, said Infectious Disease Director Kris Ehresmann, while other parts of the state are less full. As of May 25, 87 percent of ICU beds in the Twin Cities metro area were in use — a level not unexpected, Ehresmann said, adding that during flu season, it’s not uncommon for 95 percent of ICU beds to be full. Still, she said, the department is watching numbers closely and remains in close contact with hospitals. As of this morning, Minnesota is using 1,010 of its 1,257 ICU beds, although another 585 could be ready in 24 hours if needed, and another 541 could be ready in three days if needed.  *Minnesota is particularly worrying for reasons entirely separate from the recent on-camera police brutality and rioting in Minneapolis. It’s enough to make one yearn for the days when anti-lockdown protests were considered the scariest threat on the streets. The Economy No one can or should understate just how bad a beating the U.S. economy took in the past three months. Even if things break our way, this is still going to be a long climb back to the heights of pre-coronavirus life. But already we can see some encouraging indicators. Restaurant bookings hit bottom and are starting to creep back up. New unemployment claims are down slightly, and nearly 4 million stopped collecting unemployment claims. Two-thirds of corporate executives think the economy will recover within a year. Bank of America sees consumer spending climbing back closer to the previous “normal” levels. Jamie Dimon, the head of J. P. Morgan Chase says there’s a good chance of a “fairly rapid recovery.” If your business has managed to survive this nearly three-month economic coma, you can probably survive anything. Meanwhile, in the White House . . .  The president intends to escalate his battle with Twitter today by signing an executive order that would encourage federal regulators to allow tech companies to be held liable for the comments, videos, and other content posted by users on their platforms. His move is spurred by Twitter choosing to post a “fact check” underneath a president’s tweet about widespread fraud in voting-by-mail. The president probably wouldn’t be in this mess if he hadn’t chosen to attack Joe Scarborough on the grounds of an allegation that the MSNBC host murdered an intern years ago and hadn’t chosen to keep doubling down on the accusation even after the intern’s widower wrote a public letter to Twitter asking the company to take down Trump’s tweets. (I think a company policy of removing Trump’s most egregious tweets would actually help Trump in a way his critics do not intend, and I think the objections to Twitter enacting a likely arbitrary and imbalanced “fact-check” policy are compelling ones.) You notice the president is quite engaged and enraged about what Twitter is doing to him, and less outspoken and furious about, say, what’s going on in America’s nursing homes.  ADDENDUM: Yesterday, I had the chance to chat with Henry Olsen about campaigning in the era of the coronavirus and the pandemic’s longer-term impact on how conservatives see the world.  

An additional 2.1 million Americans filed unemployment claims last week, the Department of Labor announced Thursday, bringing the total number of unemployed Americans to over 40 million. Continuing unemployment claims dropped last week for the first time since the coronavirus pandemic began, a sign that the economic destruction from the coronavirus is beginning to slow as some businesses are allowed to reopen and employees return to work.  A total of 2.1 million Americans claimed jobless benefits during the week ending May 16, down from a peak of 25 million the previous week. Another 2.12 million Americans filed initial claims for unemployment benefits over the week that ended May 23, even as social distancing restrictions put in place to combat the coronavirus began to be lifted. The previous week saw 2.45 million people file initial benefits claims. More than 40 million workers have filed for jobless benefits over the past nine weeks as the coronavirus forced businesses to shutter and furlough or lay off employees.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

‘The novel coronavirus seems to be more deadly for men,” CNN tweeted. “But in many other ways, women are bearing the brunt of this pandemic.” More men are dying from the coronavirus, but women, we are told, have been saddled with a disproportionate share of household chores. Who has it worse?  Apparently a bit more laundry is a fate worse than death. The notion that women are “bearing the brunt” of this pandemic virus is smattered on scores of feminist think-pieces across the Internet. To pick three: The Guardian says that “UK women bear emotional brunt of Covid-19 turmoil;” NPR laments that “Women Bear The Brunt Of Coronavirus Job Losses”; and the Miami Herald reports that “Women are bearing the brunt of the social and economic crisis caused by COVID-19.” The story of women’s COVID oppression is told half by anecdote and half by data. We are enjoined to pity the women who, confined to their homes by statewide stay-at-home orders, are engaged in more housework than their husbands. NBC News speaks with a think-tank official who presents a five-step plan “to reset the unfair division of labor at home during COVID-19;” NPR goes further than “unfair,” quoting a source who says that the pandemic has laid bare the “grotesque” gender inequalities in America’s division of household labor.  
 There is an entire genre of articles devoted to the supposedly benighted women of COVID-19, whose disproportionate attendance to childcare during the pandemic could, in Vox’s words, “harm women’s long-term career prospects.” The fact that the unemployment rate among women is about three percentage points higher than among men has been presented as evidence that between housework and economic misfortune, women are “bearing” the proverbial “brunt” of the pandemic — even as men are shown to be far more likely to die from the coronavirus.  These unemployment disparities and unequal divisions of household labor have been a subject of myopia among the nation’s most unpleasant media guild — “gender reporters” and “equity correspondents.” The very existence of their jobs, of course, is premised on there being sexism to fight, rampant discrimination to overturn, and looming forces of reaction eager to reinstall — if it was ever uninstalled — the patriarchy. When reality doesn’t provide the requisite oppression needed justify their salaries, they have recourse to the theoretical. CNN’s Ivana Kottasová, for instance, quivered that the pandemic has “presented some world leaders with an opportunity to grab more power, sparking fears among women’s rights activists and researchers.” The mere fact that “fears” are being “sparked” among “women’s rights activists” can itself become a pretext for a story, without requiring the reporter to pause and consider whether her underlying premise — that the Western world’s sun rises and sets around the subjugation of women — has any basis in fact.   Kottasová informs readers that any deviation from the official narrative of American female oppression is “dangerous”: “A CNN analysis earlier this year found that in the countries for which data was available, men were 50% more likely than women to die after being diagnosed with Covid-19. But experts say focusing purely on health data is dangerous.” Dangerous?  The “experts” that Kottasová cites insinuate that focusing on male COVID deaths distracts from the “existing structural inequalities in society,” and ignores the “secondary impacts” of the pandemic, “where women are being disproportionately affected.” The reasoning here is a bit like the Anti-Defamation League’s “Pyramid of Hate,” which purports to sketch the path from “biased attitudes” — “microaggressions,” “non-inclusive language,” “insensitive remarks,” and so forth — through “acts of bias,” overt discrimination, “bias-motivated violence,” and, ultimately, genocide. Since every fascistic regime begins with “biased attitudes,” shaming and ostracizing those who make “insensitive remarks” in casual conversation essentially kills Hitler in the crib. (“Tax the rich,” however, is never viewed as the first step on the road to the gulags.) A similar logic explains the aversion to discussing male COVID deaths: To the “expert,” such discussion could set off a similar series of dominos — perhaps bringing attention to those disparities inspires a strain of male grievance, which might foster a mobilized political movement based on male resentment, which might then get weaponized against women and minorities, and — voila! — your discussion of male COVID deaths has enabled the Third Reich.  It is, in any case, remarkable to me that the most miserable people in our society — many of whom are childless and publicly extoll the virtues of childlessness — are the same ones writing pieces telling you how to run and structure your home life. “Some gender scholars are arguing that this pandemic may create an opportunity for men and women in heterosexual families to both gain more awareness of how much is involved in managing a household and raising children,” the sociologist Sinikka Elliott told Vox, as if “gender scholars” who spend their time calling fetuses parasites know more about what is “involved” in “managing a household and raising children” than you do.  It is also remarkable that this same three-headed hydra of activist reporters, academics, and professional feminists is of one voice in lamenting the “gendered” effects of the pandemic, even as they go around telling us that gender is a social construct, that there is no such thing as “male” or “female,” and that men and women as such are fabrications of the patriarchy with no basis in chromosomal fact. Women don’t exist, but they still “bear the brunt” of this pandemic. 

More than 100,000 people have died of the coronavirus in the U.S. as of Wednesday, with almost 1,700,000 infections confirmed throughout the country. As of May 22, 43 percent of coronavirus victims were residents of nursing homes or assisted-living facilities, according to an analysis conducted for the Foundation for Research on Equal Opportunity. In the state of New Jersey alone, one-tenth of all long-term care residents in nursing homes have died during the pandemic.  The state of New York, which has seen over 5,000 coronavirus deaths in nursing homes, along with New Jersey and Michigan, have compelled nursing homes to readmit coronavirus patients discharged from the hospital. That policy stood in contrast to Florida, where state health officials worked to keep coronavirus patients out of nursing homes. At least 650 Florida nursing home residents have died of coronavirus. In addition to nursing homes, prisons account for a large share of coronavirus outbreaks. Eight out of ten of the country’s biggest coronavirus hotspots are in jails, with the New York Times reporting over 47,000 infections and 485 deaths among inmates and staff in both federal and local prisons. U.S. states are in the process of reopening certain regions following mass closures of businesses meant to mitigate the spread of coronavirus. President Trump has repeatedly urged states to lift restrictions on local economic activity. However, social-distancing recommendations remain in place across much of the country, effectively limiting the amount of customers businesses can admit on their premises.  “Social distancing will be with us through the summer to really ensure that we protect one another,” Dr. Deborah Birx said in an interview last month on NBC’s Meet the Press.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

If you didn’t get to watch today’s (inspiring!) foster-care virtual event, you can watch it here:  I’m so grateful to everyone who participated and made it possible. I’m so grateful to the National Review Institute for supporting such thing — and for your support for the National Review Institute!  [Note: The YouTube had been temporarily unavailable. Another option for viewing here.) 1. Canadian military details horrific conditions in nursing homes battling Covid-19  2. Stranded Babies, Hurting Moms: COVID-19 Crisis Highlights Problems With Surrogacy 3. How to help teens navigate the disruption and uncertainty of a pandemic 4. To Mental Health Care Providers and Faith Leaders: A Note of Gratitude and a Call to Connect  5. The Ideology of Transgenderism Will Brook No Dissent 6. The Black-White Divide in Suspensions: What Is the Role of Family? 7. Father John Tveit: Going out: A Covid Diary 8. Why medical students should learn about religion 9. New York Times: How a Queens Pastor Tends to His Flock from Six Feet Away 10. "We have a sign on our door thanking delivery personnel for bringing us our supplies because we have an infant with medical needs. Our Amazon driver dropped off our package, read our note, and prayed for our boy before heading out." – Raquel Pearson – Caldwell, Idaho ❤️ pic.twitter.com/r3A8COBWj4 — CBS News (@CBSNews) May 26, 2020  11. Christianity Today: The Black Death Left Many Terrified. Not Catherine of Siena.  12. The masked but unconquered smile 13. The Antilibrary: Why Unread Books Are The Most Important 14. On Francis Collins: “He treats every person, young or old, educated or not, with the dignity and respect they deserve as human beings … his humble posture toward others speaks the loudest and gives the most life to people around him.” 15. Heather King: Ten ways to live for today    

It looks like the National Hockey League will be the first professional sports league to officially return to action — with 24 teams, rather than the usual 16 — competing for the 2020 Stanley Cup playoffs by early July. As I understand it, the players will undergo coronavirus testing, and then gradually enter training camps. The teams who were on the cusp of playoff spots when the season was cut short will then play in small round-robin tournaments to see who qualifies for the official post-season. This will be followed by traditional playoff series, played in two hubs, one in the east and one in the west.  As a New York Rangers fan, a team that found itself out of a playoff spot when the season was suspended, I should see little downside to NHL’s plan. My beloved team will be given the chance to compete in the postseason. Even if they lose, they’ll be rewarded in the upcoming draft (the formula for the lottery makes Chaos Theory look like simple addition), with the possibility of nabbing a highly promising young player. Yet, as much as I crave sports, and hockey in particular, I’m also somewhat torn over the idea. One of allures of professional sports is the continuum — the ability for fans to measure statistics and championships from year to the next. It’s not just about watching players, it’s about watching them play the same number of games, under the same set of rules and conditions. It’s true that the NHL doesn’t attach the same significance to statistical purity as baseball, but it is not irrelevant to fans. Is it fair for the NHL to add points earned by players in the round-robins to the season totals — where neither top playoff teams nor lottery teams are competing? It is fair for the NHL to disregard the stats of those who help their teams qualify?   I realize the NHL is concerned with generating revenue. I am sympathetic. I want them to play. But how can the league or fans consider the 2019–2020 season unbroken after such a long interval? The NHL broke up on March 12, two-and-a-half months ago. If the league starts up in July, players will have had a longer layoff than they do for a normal offseason. Some will find the notion trivial, but the league has a responsibility to preserve the integrity of the Stanley Cup. So perhaps the best answer is to put an asterisk next to the winner of the tournament, or better yet, call it the “2020 NHL tournament” rather than the Stanley Cup playoffs.  

The BBC — which receives public funding, so is bound by standards of impartiality — admitted today that it had “breached” its own guidelines in its coverage of the Dominic Cummings controversy. Last night, during the program Newsnight, host Emily Maitlis began by saying that “the country can see” that Cummings, chief adviser to Prime Minister Boris Johnson, had “broken the [lockdown] rules,” after the government insisted that he had not. After the program, the BBC released the following statement: The BBC must uphold the highest standards of due impartiality in its news output. We’ve reviewed the entirety of last night’s Newsnight, including the opening section, and while we believe the programme contained fair, reasonable and rigorous journalism, we feel that we should have done more to make clear the introduction was a summary of the questions we would examine, with all the accompanying evidence, in the rest of the programme. As it was, we believe the introduction we broadcast did not meet our standards of due impartiality. Our staff have been reminded of the guidelines. In addition, Emily Maitlis will be replaced on tonight’s program by Katie Razzall.  

On Wednesday, New York governor Andrew Cuomo accused columnists at the New York Post of wanting to “kill all Democrats,” while pushing back on accusations that he was attempting to blame President Trump for the outbreaks of coronavirus in New York nursing homes. Cuomo has come under fire for a March 25 executive order in which he compelled nursing homes to accept coronavirus patients discharged from hospitals. Since then, over 5,000 coronavirus deaths have been recorded among nursing-home residents in his state. The governor told the Post earlier this month that “the state followed President Trump’s CDC guidance” in implementing the policy.  “There are columnists who made this point at the Post who are 100 percent supportive of Donald Trump and that’s fine — but then believe, you know, we have to kill all Democrats,” Cuomo said on Wednesday. “I get it, I understand it. They’re open in their support of the Trump administration, and I guess their attitude is to be pro-Donald Trump, you have to be anti-Democrat, which I don’t really understand.” Despite signing the executive order requiring nursing homes to accept coronavirus patients, Cuomo said on Wednesday that nursing homes were “obligated” to transfer patients to other facilities if they could not provide “adequate care.” “The obligation is on the nursing home to say, I can’t take a COVID-positive person,” Cuomo said. “The regulation is common sense: if you can’t provide adequate care, you can’t have the patient in your facility and that’s your basic fiduciary obligation — I would say, ethical obligation — and it’s also your legal obligation.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Andrew Ross Sorkin’s frustration over having missed so much of the post-COVID realities in markets and economic life boiled over this morning in one of the more outrageous outbursts I have ever witnessed on financial media. Perhaps this outburst was rivaled only by his behavior during the March COVID market swoon, in which he — on a daily basis — worked hard to terrify viewers, making the most outlandish predictions one can imagine — when he wasn’t defending billionaire hedge funders who had gone on the network to say “hell is coming” with a massive short bet on the market.  One of the things that made CNBC so good coming out of the dotcom bust was the unleashing of their on-air personalities to express market and even political viewpoints. Larry Kudlow and others frequently voiced a center-right, pro-markets view, while David Faber and others held a center-left, market-skeptical view. The interactions for years were mostly mature, professional, and well-reasoned, even as they exposed different approaches and economic worldviews. What Sorkin did on CNBC throughout the COVID pandemic was not merely ideological — it was sensationalism taken to a level I never thought I would see on business media. And it proved to be divorced from reality.  But here is where I will extend the courtesy to Sorkin that he did not extend to Joe Kernen during this morning’s outburst: I will start by assuming that perhaps he actually believed his predictions, and that his motives were neither crass nor driven by politics. And that is a courtesy: To be frank, a big part of me does believe that Sorkin is too smart actually to have believed the gloom he was peddling throughout March and April. But his daily talking down of the market’s failure to behave in the way his apocalyptic forecasts might suggest, and his daily refusal to accept the systemically improving health picture in our country does lead me to believe that he is frustrated by the way that investors have not followed his script. (And his outburst did look to me as if frustration was at play — but judge for yourself). Could it be maybe, just maybe, Sorkin’s accusation of Kernen (that he has been covering for the president) might just be a little projection, in reverse?  So, take your pick — either Sorkin is sincere (if, in my view, self-deceived), or, on this topic, he is too ideological to come to an objective assessment. Or maybe the explanation lies with some combination of the above. But to accuse Kernen of shilling for Trump after the markets have moved in a way so differently than Sorkin had expected was unfair, unprofessional, and more than anything else, telling.  

Michigan senate Republicans are accusing Governor Gretchen Whitmer of trying to cover up the initial news of her husband’s attempt at leveraging her position to get their boat in the water in time for Memorial Day weekend. Whitmer’s husband, Marc Mallory, called NorthShore Dock in northern Michigan last week to see if his boat could be put in the water “before the weekend,” dock owner Tad Dowker wrote in a now-deleted Facebook post. When Mallory was told it was not possible, according to Dowker he said, “I am the husband to the governor, will this make a difference?”  After initially dismissing reports of her husband’s name-dropping as an internet conspiracy, Whitmer explained that the statement was a “failed attempt at humor” during a Tuesday press conference. Last week, Whitmer — who owns a home with Mallory in the Elk Rapids area — announced that northern Michigan could begin to reopen bars and restaurants in time for Memorial Day weekend, while the southern part of the state remains under stricter lockdown orders. “Keep your wits about you,” Whitmer warned. “Let’s not all go rushing out and force a closure eventually. What we want to do is keep moving forward.” One of Whitmer’s earlier lockdown provisions explicitly prohibited Michiganders from traveling between their primary residences and their vacation homes in the northern part of the state.   News of Dowker’s post, which was later deleted, was shared by state Republican Senator Tom Barrett on Friday. In an interview, Barrett told National Review that he posted the story after validating it through local contacts to highlight how Whitmer was “being hypocritical with the people, by telling us not to travel up to Traverse City when it appeared that she herself and her family were planning to do that.” But Barrett later took down the story after he was contacted by Whitmer’s office through Michigan Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey, who relayed the governor’s claim that the story was “100 percent false.” “Just as I was about to go to bed on Friday night, I was contacted by my chief of staff, who said the Governor’s office had reached out to the Senate Majority Leader’s office to get ahold of me to deny this story,” Barrett told National Review. “They were claiming it was 100 percent false, a total fabrication, it wasn’t true. And they were requesting that I take the post down because it was spreading misinformation.” Barrett said he complied with the request “out of an abundance of caution,” but the next morning traced the story back to Dowker and was able to “verify the information and hear that he was standing by the claim.” On Saturday night, NorthShore Dock confirmed Dowker’s account in a follow-up on Facebook.   Whitmer’s office originally refused to comment on the post, saying Monday that it was “not going to make it a practice of addressing every rumor that is spread online.” In a statement, Whitmer’s spokeswoman Tiffany Brown warned that “there’s been a lot of wild misinformation spreading online attacking the governor and her family.” On Tuesday, after the story had widely circulated, Whitmer admitted her husband had mentioned the encounter to her. “He thought it might get a laugh. It didn’t,” Whitmer said at a press conference, “and to be honest I wasn’t laughing either when it was relayed to me because I knew how it would be perceived.” The governor also said her family has been staying home “these last couple of months,” before admitting moments later that Mallory had been to their vacation home. “My husband did go up to our place in Antrim County and rake some leaves and came home,” Whitmer said. “He was there. We did not pile all into the car to go and enjoy our second home, although that would have been permitted.”  Barrett said he’s not convinced by the admission. “Why did she deny it so hard to my office to pull the post down, saying it was false and fabricated, if in fact it was true the whole time?” he pointed out. “It was only after . . . me insisting on getting to the bottom of it that eventually the governor had to crack and admit that it was true.” Shirkey backed up Barrett’s account in a statement on Michigan senate floor on Wednesday, saying that Whitmer’s staff had been “emphatic” that Barrett’s original post “was false and that it should be removed.” “The governor lied. Not only did she lie, but she directed her staff to lie on her behalf in order to cover up her own lies,” he stated. “Yesterday, the governor went in front of cameras and admitted to the lie. She referenced the exchange as a ‘failed joke’ — it would be nice if this governor was as quick to identify failed leadership. How can we trust the governor? How can the citizens of Michigan trust the governor? What else is she willing to lie about, if she lied about putting a boat into water?”  In a statement to National Review, Brown admitted that Whitmer’s office attempted to silence Barrett, but said it was “taken on staff’s own initiative” and “the staff member called, explained, and apologized” after the story was reported elsewhere.  “The governor was surprised by the senate majority leader’s comments made on the floor today. His comments were incorrect and unfair, and frankly, he owes the governor an apology,” Brown said of Shirkey’s statement. “She has been completely honest about the situation and she never directed her staff to mislead anyone or to contact his office.” Barrett said Whitmer should apologize over the whole affair. “I think the governor owes an apology to the people in the state of Michigan on this, an apology to the boat dock owner, and owes an apology to me and my staff about how they duped us into covering up their story,” he stated. Editor’s Note: This piece has been updated with a comment from Whitmer’s spokeswoman Tiffany Brown.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

New York governor Andrew Cuomo on Wednesday said that nursing homes are obligated to transfer coronavirus patients if they cannot provide “adequate care.” “The obligation is on the nursing home to say, I can’t take a COVID-positive person,” Cuomo said at a press conference. “The regulation is common sense: if you can’t provide adequate care, you can’t have the patient in your facility and that’s your basic fiduciary obligation — I would say, ethical obligation — and it’s also your legal obligation.”  Cuomo’s March 25 executive order forbid nursing homes from rejecting Covid-positive patients or even testing prospective patients for Covid after they were released from the hospital. “No resident shall be denied re-admission or admission to the [nursing home] solely based on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19. [Nursing homes] are prohibited from requiring a hospitalized resident who is determined medically stable to be tested for COVID-19 prior to admission or readmission,” the order states. New York health commissioner Howard Zucker said at the Wednesday press briefing that he was not aware if the state’s Health Department had received any requests from nursing homes to transfer coronavirus patients to other facilities.  Cuomo aide Melissa DeRosa said on Saturday that Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines recommend that nursing homes admit coronavirus patients. Those guidlelines state, “nursing homes should admit any individuals that they would normally admit to their facility, including individuals from hospitals where a case of COVID-19 was/is present.”  “Not could. Should,” DeRosa said. “That is President Trump’s CMS and CDC…There are over a dozen states that did the exact same thing.” The state has seen over 5,000 coronavirus deaths among nursing home residents. About 43 percent of all U.S. coronavirus deaths, or roughly 43,000 deaths as of Wednesday, have been recorded among residents of nursing homes and assisted-living facilities. On Tuesday New York’s Health Department appeared to delete Governor Cuomo’s March executive order from its website. Cuomo also signed legislation in April granting immunity to nursing home executives from coronavirus-related lawsuits. In 2018, the New York State Democratic Committee, which was involved in Cuomo’s primary race at the time, received a $1 million donation from health care lobbying group the Greater New York Hospital Association. The GNYHA represents several hospitals which own nursing homes.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A few items that caught my eye these past few days: First, just before the long weekend, this analysis of the virus’s genetic changes dropped. The results imply that just 1 to 10 percent of carriers cause 80 percent of secondary infections. (You can find a lot more research in a similar vein here.) This means we should think a lot more about “superspreading,” in terms both of superspreading events and of superspreading people.  Superspreading events tend to be situations where lots of adults come into close contact with each other for prolonged periods indoors, often talking or singing loudly. In such a situation, one infected person can pass the virus to many others at once. If superspreading is a big part of how this virus spreads in general, we need to be very careful about these situations. On the flip side, we might be a little less uptight about other interactions, where contacts are brief or outdoors, though masks and safe distances are still good when convenient. Another possible contributor to the study’s result is superspreading individuals. Maybe there’s some reason these folks expel the virus more, or maybe — owing to their jobs or what have you — they are just more likely to find themselves in the dangerous situations outlined above. The latter types of superspreaders could actually be good news: People with lots of close contacts were probably more likely to get the virus early and gain some immunity, meaning that the most prolific spreaders might be taken out of commission for future waves, and that “herd immunity” could come at a lower threshold than we previously expected.  Second: We already knew that the elderly were far more vulnerable to COVID-19 than the young, and of course that viruses spread more easily in close quarters. Add those together and it’s clear nursing homes are at serious risk. But Avik Roy has managed to put some numbers on the problem: Nursing homes and assisted-living facilities hold just 0.6 percent of the population but have produced 43 percent of COVID deaths in the U.S.   It is very difficult to completely isolate these places, because care workers need to go home for the night and family members want to visit. But as we reopen, nursing homes must be a high priority for testing, temperature checks, and the like. Most important, any nursing-home resident, worker, or visitor found to have COVID-19 must be removed or securely isolated immediately.  Third: Pew got some flak for this dumbly worded tweet, but I think the chart is important. Blue (largely urban) areas were hit harder than red (more rural) areas, but the epidemic seems to be fading more slowly in the latter. These dynamics have both political and epidemiological ramifications we should want to sort out. COVID-19 deaths have declined in Democratic congressional districts since mid-April, but remained relatively steady in districts controlled by Republicans. https://t.co/NnUcKYt67w pic.twitter.com/R3mdZ1l8c4 — Pew Research Center (@pewresearch) May 27, 2020  Mark Perry made a similar point this week about the severe damage to several dense urban areas, and the lighter toll elsewhere in the country (so far). One-third of U.S. COVID deaths are in counties that hold just 4 percent of the population, and another third are in counties holding 11 percent. As I’ve urged before, we obviously need to have different policies in different places.  

This week on The Editors, Rich, Charlie, and Jim discuss Trump’s tweets aimed at Joe Scarborough, Biden’s awkward exchange on The Breakfast Club, and how reopening is happening whether the experts think it should or not. ﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
  

The plan the president proposed for venturing back out so soon after the worst of the epidemic worried his advisers. If he followed such a course, they warned, he would go against the instructions of doctors and, worse, give fellow citizens license to do the same. Nevertheless, into the city the next day rode George Washington.  In search of parallels to the coronavirus, much has been written about the yellow-fever epidemic that chased the fledgling federal government from its then-capital of Philadelphia in the summer and fall of 1793. But the courage and independence that President Washington showed by returning to the city have gone largely overlooked — perhaps because the story does not conform to the mantra that medical expertise should always override political judgment during crises. With the death toll mounting — eventually about 10 percent of the city’s population would perish — Washington had reluctantly joined the exodus from Philadelphia on September 10. Sensitive to symbolism, he would have delayed his departure, which he knew would demoralize the city. But he realized that his wife would insist on staying for as long as he did. “I could not think of hazarding her . . . any longer by my remaining in the city,” he wrote. As Washington set off for his Mount Vernon estate in Virginia, he expected to be away for no more than 18 days, a period short enough that he carried with him, as he explained, “no public papers of any sort.” But he had underestimated the crisis facing Philadelphia. Two months would pass before he again saw the residence that served as the president’s house in the city.  At Mount Vernon, Washington struggled not only to keep the government operational but also to obtain accurate information about what was happening in Philadelphia. In truth, even doctors there did not understand what caused yellow fever, and they allowed party politics to infect their theories. One group blamed environmental factors; another faulted foreigners. Washington’s own advisers were also divided. They could not agree, for example, whether the Constitution empowered the president to convene Congress at a site outside the limits of Philadelphia.  
 There was no doubt Washington could convene his own cabinet elsewhere, as he finally did, in a town just outside Philadelphia at the start of November. Yellow-fever cases in the city had dropped with the temperature. People had begun to return. Hopes rose that Congress could, too. Washington made plans to ride into Philadelphia on November 11 to see for himself what was possible. But Attorney General Edmund Randolph begged the president to postpone his visit.  “The mayor and the physicians dissuade people from returning yet, and especially in great numbers,” Randolph wrote Washington the evening before. “You will hardly be at your door before your arrival will be rumored abroad, and multitudes, who will not distinguish between a momentary stay and absolute residence, will be induced by your example to crowd back and carry fresh . . . more vulnerable subjects into the bosom of infection.”  Randolph did not end his argument there. “Nor can I conceal a fear, which I have often heard expressed by the friends of yourself and the government, that your indifference about danger might push you perhaps too early into Philadelphia,” he added. But Washington would not wait. He did not need to stay in Philadelphia long — not even overnight — for word of his visit to spread widely. Just as his departure from Philadelphia in September had not gone unnoticed, his brief return also made news. In the Philadelphia Federal Gazette appeared this item: “The editor with infinite pleasure mentions the arrival of the President of the United States in town this day.” The next month, Washington would welcome Congress back to the city with his annual message. Philadelphia would remain the country’s capital until 1800. Yellow fever would return in the years ahead. But the American people had seen that their government could endure.  Concerning his own health, Washington would later say he was not “under any apprehension of the desolating fever.” But more than one man’s life was at stake on the day of Washington’s ride. The attorney general had been right that whatever Washington did would send a message but had been wrong about who should decide its content. The medical experts had an important role. But when to risk venturing back out into the streets was not exclusively a medical decision. It was also a political decision and, in this case, properly made by a president. 

States are reopening, some more speedily than others. For the time being, COVID-19 appears to be on the wane — and we can be cautiously optimistic that it won’t spread as quickly this summer as it did back in March. In the densest parts of the country, people are keeping their distance, taking things outdoors when possible, wearing masks, and quarantining themselves when they get sick. Temperatures are up, which could help. And in the hardest-hit areas, particularly New York City, a decent share of the population is likely immune to reinfection — not a big enough share to create “herd immunity,” but enough to help control the spread a little, especially if the folks who’ve already caught the disease are the ones with the most social contacts.  All this brings us to a multi-trillion-dollar question: How quickly can we get this economy moving again? The answer depends on how many people are willing to go out and spend money; how many businesses will survive, reopen, and rehire workers; and how the government handles the next round of stimulus funding. In terms of getting people out of the house, we have a ways to go, but it’s happening. Google’s cell-phone-tracking data for the U.S. indicate that Americans have made it about a quarter of the way back to their baseline degree of mobility. “Retail and recreation” visits were down more than 40 percent at the beginning of April relative to their level at the beginning of the year, but only 30 percent as of May 16. “Workplace” visits also improved, from a drop of about 40 percent to one of 24 percent. As the weather warms up and more and more states give the official go-ahead to (carefully) resume normal activities, these numbers should slowly climb closer to their previous level. What about businesses? Unfortunately, bankruptcy data are spotty and delayed, so it’s not entirely clear how many enterprises we have lost to date. Given that many businesses have less than a month’s worth of cash on hand, however, there are good reasons for concern. There are already stories of theaters, airlines, rental-car companies, and retail outlets seeking protection, though sometimes the Chapter 11 protection that allows businesses to reorganize rather than disappear entirely.   Meanwhile, April’s unemployment rate was a shocking 14.7 percent, so it’s clear that plenty of people aren’t working, even if their former employers haven’t gone fully out of business. At minimum, those businesses have a lot of hiring to do before things will be normal again. 
 Perhaps the biggest unknown here is how the federal government will act. It needs to strike a balance among the goals of helping companies stay afloat through this (hopefully) final stretch, allowing businesses to safely reopen without risking lawsuits, encouraging workers to get back to their jobs, continuing to help the unemployed at a time when jobs are scarce, and preventing a resurgence of COVID-19. The political parties are starkly divided on how best to strike that balance, but they need to act soon, because the mix of policies we have in place now is coming to an end. A $600 boost to unemployment benefits, which often makes being laid off more remunerative than work, expires at the end of July. The Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), which basically gives businesses money to keep their employees on the payroll, is tapering off, and participating companies have until June 30 to get their staffing levels back to where they were pre-COVID if they want their loans forgiven.  In a recent House bill, Democrats proposed throwing money at pretty much everyone. The $600 unemployment boost would continue until January. Essential workers would receive hazard pay. PPP would continue through the end of the year. Another round of stimulus checks would go out.  Some Republicans, by contrast, are leery of continued government involvement as businesses reopen — which is understandable because different states are taking different routes here, and a one-size-fits-all federal policy of subsidizing shutdowns is no longer appropriate. Other Republicans, though, support a counterweight to the $600 unemployment boost until it expires in two months, such as continuing to give people $450 a week of their unemployment after they return to work. On the PPP side, there are proposals to give businesses more time to return to their original staffing levels and more flexibility to use the money for non-payroll expenses. The White House is pushing a cut to payroll taxes, too. Big legislation in the Senate is not expected for about a month, though a targeted PPP fix could come sooner. Much is uncertain, but the big Senate bill is expected to include liability protections for businesses and to have a far lower price tag than the $3 trillion House bill. After that, both houses of Congress and the White House will have to figure out a compromise they can agree on.   How are all these factors going to add up? That’s up to Congress, the American people, and COVID-19. But this virus and the shutdowns we undertook to control it could cost us dearly for quite some time. Kiplinger expects 2020’s GDP to be down nearly 6 percent, and a full recovery to take until the beginning of 2022. Similarly, the Congressional Budget Office expects economic output in the fourth quarter of 2021 to be slightly less than the output from late 2019, which, should it come to pass, would mean that the pandemic destroyed more than two years’ worth of economic growth. It sees an average unemployment rate of over 9 percent next year. On the more optimistic side, former Obama adviser Jason Furman has made the case that we could recover quickly, but even he sees double-digit unemployment lasting through election time. We faced a situation where there was no good option, and we chose a strategy of temporarily pausing the economy, working to get ahead of the virus, and then restarting in a careful manner. I am hopeful that we can pull it off, holding the body count and the unemployment rate down at the same time. Whether that hope is warranted, we could know by the middle of summer — with the caveat that the fall, when our guard is down and temperatures have once again started to work against us, still looms. 

“Spike in South Korea virus cases shows perils of reopening,” declares the ominous Associated Press headline. You have to go to another article to find the number of cases and deaths in the country: “The Asian nation reported 40 new cases for Tuesday, the biggest one-day increase since April 8, according to data from Korea Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, or KCDC, with most of the cases connected to a distribution center of an e-commerce firm. This takes the total tally to 11,265 cases while the virus-linked deaths were unchanged at 269.”  By South Korean standards, with a population of about 51 million and having done an excellent job of controlling the spread, 40 new cases in a day looks pretty bad. By the standards of the United States right now, a day like that looks delightful. Reopening is perilous, but after ten and a half weeks of self-quarantines, lockdowns, closed businesses, and other restrictions, people are “voting with their feet” by going out more. The Atlantic magazine wonders why Americans can’t live almost entirely online the way the Estonians do. Syndicated columnist Ruben Navarrette laments that Americans can’t handle the freedom to leave quarantine. The weather is getting warmer and nicer. Demonizing people who go to the beach or the park is no longer a useful contribution to our search for a solution. “Keep everyone inside their houses for three months or more” was never a realistic response to this virus. Our society does not operate on the same principles and philosophies of the Chinese state. We’re not going to weld doors shut to keep people inside.  As Charlie and Rich observed on this week’s The Editors, the debate about reopening society proceeding at a slower pace than the actual reopening of society. Whether or not a person thinks Americans should be leaving their homes more frequently, they’re doing it. The question now is finding a way to live with the virus, to reach some level of economic and social activity necessary for other human needs while minimizing the risk of catching and spreading the coronavirus. Masks, partial-capacity of businesses, standing six feet apart while talking — Americans can take those steps. An order to shut down so-called nonessential businesses — every business is essential to the people who earn their paychecks there — and to go back into homes for another month is just not going to fly anymore, and the chattering class needs to come to terms with that fact.  

Ever the technocrat, bioethicist Ezekiel Emanuel — Joe Biden’s chief health-care adviser — now has coauthored a piece in the New York Times discussing how to force us all to wear masks. First, he supports laws requiring mask-wearing. From “Mask Wearing Needs to be Easy, Understood, and Expected”: The most obvious path to universal masking is to pass laws and punish infractions. But enforcing legal edicts to wear masks in public can be difficult and costly, and amid widespread ambivalence can lead to backlash and even violence. So edicts are not a complete solution. As experts in public health and human behavior, we propose a complementary approach: Make wearing a mask easy, understood and expected. Notice how the writers soft-pedal their call for a legal mandate, but that is precisely what they advocate. They write that “edicts are not a complete solution,” meaning they are part of what should be done. And they write that other “complementary” approaches should also be engaged — in other words, in addition to legal compulsion. The rest of the column focuses on technocratic efforts to manufacture social “norms” that would seek to shame us all — at the risk of social excommunication — to accept universal mask-wearing. I think that would be unwise. I am all for wearing masks where appropriate and have no objection to “leadership by example” efforts by admired people. But constructing a “norm” through social manipulation could unleash a form of unreasonable fear of the kind we saw the other day in a Staten Island grocery, where people howled and screamed in panic at an unmasked shopper, driving her out of the store. That behavior was far more alarming and socially unhealthy than the presence of woman who thoughtlessly didn’t wear a mask. Also, while the issue is mentioned, the authors skip over the science that mask- wearing outside is unnecessary if proper social distancing is followed. This is a problem with technocrats. They tend to approach issues with cudgels instead of scalpels. Give Americans accurate information, and most of us will do the right thing voluntarily. But as an individualistic culture, we get our backs up when “the experts” attempt to dictate individual behavior, whether through social or legal compulsion. Deploying legal and/or social coercion to induce universal mask-wearing is likely to cause more popular resistance, not less.  

On the menu today: some people need to get rid of their superiority complex; Dan McLaughlin writing on Gregg Jeffries; a new paper saying the virus didn’t spread from a patient in Washington State; and two astronauts are set to blast off today. Our Worldwide Need for Empathy  I can get as annoyed as the next guy by those allegedly encouraging video of celebrities declaring, “We’re all in this together,” allowing us glimpses of their just-opulent-enough Hollywood homes behind them.  But compared to almost every other problem in our society, the coronavirus really is universal. We may not all be at equal risk of succumbing to the virus, but we all have some risk of catching it. Some of us will get through infection with minimal effects, some will endure great pain and difficulty fighting it off. This virus attacks the body in variety of ways, and doctors still don’t completely understand how it assaults our systems. Even if you manage to completely elude the virus, the sweeping economic effects of the quarantines and shutdowns are likely to touch your life in some fashion. Some of our current arguments revolve around whether some segments of the population are scared. Fear is a way of knowing you care about something and don’t want to lose it. We don’t want to lose our lives, we don’t want to lose our loved ones, we don’t want to lose our jobs, and we don’t want to lose our businesses or life’s savings. Fear is rational — which is not to say we should allow fear to be paralyzing. This should be a unifying moment. No matter whom you can’t abide in American society, they’re feeling the same fear, anxiety, and uncertainty that you do. We can be angry at criminals for their crimes and simultaneously feel the need to save them from unintended and preventable deaths in their prisons. Members of the opposing political party have elderly parents and grandparents in nursing homes, too. People who voted for the other guy can get laid off or lose their businesses, too. Urbanites can feel like they’re going stir-crazy in tiny apartments, and that the streets of their cities are awash in danger. Rural citizens might feel safer — or maybe not, if they’re working in a meat-packing plant. People who have never needed to use a food bank before are waiting in line for hours for a couple bags of groceries.   Communities you might not hear about or think about often are getting hit hard. The Navajo Nation’s per-capita rate of infection was, at one point, higher than 48 of the 50 states. The Hasidic Jewish community in the New York area was hit hard and early. The River Park Towers in the Bronx are getting nicknamed “the death towers” with a reported 100 cases. Filipino-Americans make up a little over one percent of the overall population but are 4 percent of the nurses in the U.S., with the resultant high risk of infection in hospitals. In Rhode Island, Latinos, mostly working-class, are 16 percent of the population but make up 45 percent of the confirmed cases. In Michigan, blacks make up 15 percent of the overall population but 40 percent of the cases. There’s arguably never been a greater need for empathy in America, or the world.  And yet some Americans, largely magnified by the ubiquitous cameras of social media and the national media’s endless hunger for stories about conflict, are embracing this moment as the greatest opportunity to judge others and whip up and direct public scorn. As I fumed a bit on the recent taping of The Editors podcast, one of the ways people are seeking reassurance in this extraordinary stressful time is to seek out evidence that they are one of the good people — practicing the right steps to protect themselves and their loved ones — and that anyone who is doing something different is one of the bad people. If we cannot feel good, then we can at least feel superior. Staten Island grocery store shoppers swarm and berate a woman for not wearing a mask. (Graeme Wood observes, “If you are conducting your shaming in the frozen-food aisle, you’re already too late.”) Some of us have never heard of the Lake of the Ozarks before, but plenty of people enjoyed deriding the people who gathered there in large numbers in swimming pools. That failed political candidate wants to hand out body bags to people on the beach in Florida. California hairstylists, operating in the professional haircutting underground, insist they’re doing what they do because they need to make a living.  You probably heard about that woman in Central Park, who after arguing with a black bird watcher about keeping her dog on a leash, called the police and made it sound as if he was attacking her. Robert A. George observes that New York City mayor Bill de Blasio “encouraged residents to narc on their neighbors over social distancing violations. Given the larger health crisis (and its disproportionate impact on New York), that’s somewhat understandable. Unfortunately, it emboldens people to take the wise 9/11-era advisement of ‘If you see something, say something’ and weaponize it into ‘if you see anything, report anything.’”   This virus has no human face. We cannot punch it, kick it, or shoot it. The closest thing to a human perpetrator of this pandemic, the Chinese government, is probably the second-most powerful institution on earth and is not easily confronted. Hence some of us seek out a more convenient target, and also a more meaningful comparison to our virtue. If I tell you that you are wiser, more careful, more responsible, and more caring than Xi Jinping and the rest of the authoritarians in Beijing, you’re probably going to give an unenthusiastic, “Uh . . . thanks.” Being a better person than a Chinese autocrat is not a high bar to clear. All you have to do to qualify is not put a million people or so in concentration camps. No, we want to feel better about ourselves compared to other Americans, and probably in particular compared to our other peers. If someone who has nothing in common with us makes a wrong choice — say, the native tribes in the Amazon don’t consistently practice social distancing — we can’t feel that superior. But if Dick and Jane down the street are having houseguests over and everyone is within six feet of each other, then we can feel superior. Back when I wrote Voting to Kill, pollster David Winston mentioned an anecdote about a focus group of suburban moms discussing 9/11 that always stuck with me: One woman described that she had just dropped her child off [at school] and was driving away when the radio is describing what is happening. And at first she’s wondering whether she should turn around, but the message on the radio seems to be that everything’s okay, and she decides not to pick up her child from school [early]. Well, another mother sitting near her [in the focus group] turns around with this intense velocity and said, “I picked my kids up.” It was an icy exchange, almost as if saying, “I was a good parent.” They’re discussing this three years later and the emotion is as if it was yesterday. What that told me was that level of emotion and recall was still very much there. We judge others in part to reassure ourselves that our choices were and are the right ones. Psychologists are pretty unified on this: Public shaming rarely works in these circumstances. Those who are engaged in the allegedly shameful behavior don’t have enough faith in the judgment of strangers. If a friend or relative says, “You shouldn’t do that,” they might give it a little more consideration; there is a preestablished relationship and sense of trust. They are somewhat less likely to believe that this isn’t smug virtue-shaming, and that the recommendation to wear a mask or stay further apart is coming from a place of genuine care. No one should be surprised that “arguments” such as, “Is it okay to say that there is a special place in hell for rule breakers that prolong the effects of this virus, thereby depriving all of us a more expeditious return to normalcy?” are unpersuasive.  I wonder if in other circumstances, that speaker would ordinarily denounce the judgmental Christian Right and lament the ways America is turning into a theocracy. ADDENDA: Dan McLaughlin, a.k.a. Baseball Crank, writes about former New York Met Gregg Jeffries. Man, there was a summer where finding his rookie card in a pack of baseball cards was like discovering a lost treasure chest. A new research paper contends that the first reported coronavirus infection case in Washington was not the primary cause of the spread of the virus in the United States, or even in the state of Washington. “It suggests the person who ignited the first chain of sustained transmission in the United States probably returned to the country in mid-February, a month later.” NASA astronauts are now into ride-sharing; around 4:33 p.m. Eastern time, two astronauts are scheduled to blast off from the SpaceX craft Falcon 9 from Launch Complex 39A — the same place Saturn V launched humanity to the moon and from where the first and final Space Shuttle missions lifted off. The world could certainly use some hope and wonder right about now.  

At the end of March, when the U.S. began to shut down as the severity of the coronavirus pandemic increased, New York Times op-ed columnist and NR movie critic Ross Douthat put his finger on an uncanny psychological side effect of what was happening. “The strangest thing about this crisis,” he tweeted, “is what you might call the not-yet/but-already experience — where things that haven’t yet happened (symptoms, hospitalizations) are nonetheless settled facts, and we measure the way telescopes catch light from the past, from a dead star.”  When the news broke last week that mainland China’s rubberstamp congress planned to force a draconian national-security law onto Hong Kong, the former British colony that has been a Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China for the last 23 years, I thought of Douthat’s observation applied to a different context. No one knows what it’s like to live the not-yet/but-already experience better than the people of Hong Kong. From the day the Sino-British Joint Declaration, which stipulated the terms of the handover, was signed in 1984, Hong Kong’s fate as a future Chinese territory was already a settled fact, even if July 1, 1997, was over a decade away. When the handover did happen, and the Union Jack was lowered in the territory for the last time, the city knew its SAR status, which guaranteed freedoms of speech, assembly, the press, an independent judiciary, and other rights that didn’t exist for citizens on the mainland, also came with an expiration date — this time in 2047, when Hong Kong’s autonomous status was set to end.  Of course, far fewer than 50 years would elapse before Beijing and its loyalists in control of the local government began attempts to chip away at these rights and the autonomy supposedly protected under Hong Kong’s Basic Law, the portion of Chinese law that functions as the city’s de facto constitution. Although the details of the new national-security law have yet to be revealed, most analysts believe it to be a variation on the national-security bill the Hong Kong government introduced in 2003. That legislation was intended to fulfill the controversial Article 23, the so-called National Security Provision of the Hong Kong Basic Law, which stated that the city would, of its own accord, pass legislation to “prohibit any act of treason, secession, sedition, [or] subversion against the Central People’s Government.” The bill introduced into Hong Kong’s Legislative Council would have criminalized all the above acts and allowed warrantless police searches of those suspected of them. With fears that the law would be used to punish legitimate political dissent, the proposed legislation triggered massive protests, was quickly withdrawn, and until now, neither the Hong Kong nor mainland government had ever attempted to introduce it again. That Beijing has now done so is the culmination of a troubling acceleration over the past two years of the erosion of Hong Kong’s freedoms and autonomy, to the point where the situation on the ground seems to change day by day. For Western readers looking to get caught up on the political struggle for Hong Kong’s future, a good place to start is Jeffrey Wasserstrom’s Vigil: Hong Kong on the Brink, a short book published in February. In fewer than 100 pages, Wasserstrom, a professor of History at UC Irvine, deftly takes the reader through a concise history of the territory, beginning with the British acquisition of Hong Kong Island in 1841 and continuing with the subsequent additions of surrounding territory to the colony, all the way through to Hong Kong’s post–World War II boom as a center of international finance and its status as a SAR of China today. His focus, however, is on the protests of 2019, and to a lesser extent on the Umbrella Movement protests of 2014. Core to both was the question of the nature of the city’s relationship to Beijing.   The current arrangement between Hong Kong and the mainland is known as “One Country, Two Systems.” Yet as Wasserstrom and others have made clear, the problem is that the two sides of the political divide have incompatible interpretations of what that means. For Chinese president Xi Jinping and the pro-Beijing faction of the Hong Kong government, it’s only the first half of the phrase that really matters. For Hong Kong’s democracy movement, the second half is what legitimates the first. Every major political protest since the handover has related to this question in one way or another. 
 The 2014 Umbrella Movement arose from one of the most contentious issues of Hong Kong’s politics: universal suffrage. Hong Kong’s Basic Law stated that universal suffrage was the “ultimate aim” in electing the city’s chief executive post-handover. (As with the colonial-era governor, the chief executive was not a democratically elected position post-handover.) Yet a decade and a half after 1997, any progress toward universal suffrage was non-existent, with the chief executive still chosen by an election committee of just a few thousand, which all but ensured a candidate acceptable to Beijing would win. In response to a renewed push for democratic reform, the government proposed a process in which the chief executive would be elected by the populace, but only from a small pool of candidates pre-approved by a nominating committee. This constraint essentially guaranteed that anyone standing for election would be limited to those acceptable to Beijing, and it triggered an Occupy-style sit-in at the city’s center. It would come to be known as the Umbrella Movement because of protesters’ use of umbrellas to combat tear gas shot by police.   The period between the end of the Umbrella Movement and the start of the 2019 protests saw several ominous developments. Five booksellers from Causeway Bay Books, a Hong Kong bookstore that sold works banned on the mainland, were mysteriously disappeared in 2015, with several suddenly appearing on television in the mainland months later making obviously forced confessions to falsified crimes. When a new high-speed rail link to the mainland opened in 2018, the security at the Hong Kong end of the terminal was handled by mainland security agents, a first in the city’s history. And in circumstances eerily reminiscent of Beijing’s treatment of foreign journalists it does not care for, Financial Times editor Victor Mallet returned to Hong Kong from a trip only to find his visa revoked and his entry into the city barred. Although no official explanation was given, the likely cause of Mallet’s trouble was his hosting a luncheon featuring remarks by a member of the Hong Kong National Party, a pro-independence party that was on the cusp of being officially banned (and would be just a few weeks after the luncheon).   The integrity of One Country, Two Systems was also at the heart of the 2019 protests, which began in response to a proposed bill introduced by Chief Executive Carrie Lam that would have allowed Hong Kongers wanted on charges in mainland China to be extradited there and face prosecution under a draconian mainland justice system known for its subservience to the agenda of the Chinese Communist Party. A demand for the bill’s withdrawal led to the biggest demonstrations in the city’s history, with over a million of the city’s 7.4 million residents marching in June. These demonstrations continued throughout the summer and into the fall, after Lam had formally withdrawn the bill. (Protesters still had other demands the government had not met, including an independent inquiry into police brutality.)  Wasserstrom’s telling of the events leading up to and taking place throughout 2019 is strong on its own, but what adds appeal to the book is the personal dimension he weaves into his account of the city’s crisis. He has clearly long been an admirer of Hong Kong, usually traveling there twice a year or so. Each time he arrives, he notes with dismay the increasing signs of absorption into the mainland — more propagandistic language from the Xi era featured on billboards, fewer signs of a city distinct from its mainland counterparts — while taking heart in those elements of differentiation that have endured in city life and culture. Vigil is not without flaws. Abrupt shifts from expository narrative to personal anecdote leave the flow of the book choppy in a few spots. And whatever utility a historical comparison between Hong Kong in 2019 and Shanghai in 1919 made near the book’s end may have is fatally undermined by excessive hedging about the inexactitude of such comparisons and repeated admonishments that history does not repeat itself. But these are small quibbles with a strong, economical account of what the city has gone through — and where it may be headed. In a conversation with Sir Chris Patten, the last British governor of Hong Kong, who presided over the handover in 1997, Wasserstrom relays his puzzlement over why, after so long a period of more or less leaving the One Country, Two Systems arrangement intact, Beijing’s erosion of that system has accelerated in the last few years. Patten’s response: “When the snow starts melting, it melts quickly.” At its best, Antony Dapiran’s magnificent City on Fire: The Fight for Hong Kong (already available as an e-book but out in hardcopy on June 23) shows precisely how quickly that melting can occur. A gripping account of last year’s protests, the book relates how Hong Kong changed month by month, day by day, sometimes hour by hour in the course of 2019. Dapiran is an Australian lawyer who has lived in Hong Kong for the past 20 years. He is also a gifted writer who tells a compelling story of what the protesters have been up against, what they are fighting for, and how their tactics and goals have evolved over time.  Dapiran’s book begins with a chapter on tear gas — its chemical composition, the history of its creation, the early instances of its use, and ultimately its deployment in the 2019 protests. It’s a particularly effective way to start a book about the demonstrations because the use of tear gas is a troubling example of how the formerly unthinkable has become the quotidian in the Hong Kong of today. When police deployed tear gas against Umbrella Movement protesters six years ago, it elicited shock and outrage. By the peak of the 2019 protests, its use was an accepted fact of daily life, with protesters donning gas masks and finding other ways to quickly neutralize the compound. The creative and efficient ways protesters have adapted to coercive police tactics and brutality feature prominently in City on Fire. By 2019, they had come a long way from responding to tear gas with umbrellas. Small teams now existed to quickly approach a deployed canister, cover it with an orange construction cone, and douse the inside with water. When police got wise to the coordination of demonstrations that was happening on the Telegram app and began cracking down on moderators of pro-democracy groups, protesters began to use the air-drop feature on their iPhones to quickly spread information person-to-person about where the next march would occur, where police had been spotted, what kinds of weapons they were equipped with, etc. With Dapiran on the ground to witness almost all the book’s key moments in person, City on Fire relays the events of 2019 in harrowing detail. As the tensions between the demonstrators and police rose throughout the summer and into autumn, the spectacle became increasingly surreal. The November siege by police of protesters barricaded in Hong Kong’s confined urban Polytechnic University campus featured protesters “operating an improvised catapult to launch petrol bombs and rocks at the police lines.” Police in turn fired tear-gas canisters, rubber bullets, and sponge grenades, which could occasionally be heard ricocheting off makeshift shields. “This was no longer a protest, or even a riot,” Dapiran writes. “It was medieval siege warfare.” In addition to his strong descriptive powers, the author shows a keen understanding of human psychology and sociology, which adds another layer of depth to the reader’s understanding of the urgency of the demonstrations. Unlike previous generations, most of the youth composing the main body of demonstrators had grown up at a time when Hong Kong was in relative decline. Previous generations of the city’s residents defined their identity in largely material terms. Hong Kong in the ’80s and ’90s was far wealthier than the mainland, and punched above its weight not only in finance but in pop culture as well. The Cantopop music genre dominated the region, and figures of Hong Kong cinema such as John Woo, Wong Kar-Wai, Tsui Hark, and Jackie Chan became beloved throughout the world. (Indeed, the title of Dapiran’s book is a reference to a cult 1987 Hong Kong action film that, among other things, inspired Quentin Tarantino’s Reservoir Dogs.) The Asian Financial Crisis that followed the handover dealt a blow to Hong Kong’s economic and pop-cultural power. In recent years, Shanghai has begun to overtake Hong Kong as the financial hub of the Asia Pacific, and Hong Kong cinema has largely melded into the mainland’s. As Dapiran makes clear, the erosion of these previous pillars of identity has led Hong Kong’s youth to form their own based on what still differentiates the city from the mainland: namely, its political freedoms and liberal values. At one or two points in the book, Dapiran goes overboard on cultural-studies jargon. I found his discussion of the protests as a means for people to “participate in the production of urban space” more an exercise in abstraction for its own sake than a useful way to provide insight into what was animating the movement. And many readers will roll their eyes at his channeling of his inner Derrida when he describes 21st-century cities as “porous texts open to being rewritten.” But these blemishes are few and far between. This is the definitive account of China’s biggest political crisis since Tiananmen, and I look forward to a second edition that looks at all that has transpired since it went to print. Dapiran ends his book by acknowledging that Hong Kong’s future is inexorably tied to Beijing’s, and he makes the case that it is in China’s interest to maintain the integrity of One Country, Two Systems in order to provide a space for open and free communication between itself and the world. The example he cites to prove the utility of the arrangement is all too relevant to 2020, and leaves the reader cringing in despair: In 2003, it was Hong Kong that helped to gather and disseminate information about the SARS outbreak. This saved China — and, most likely, the world — from the devastating epidemic that might have ensued if the mainland’s instincts for suppression of information had not been undermined. Hong Kong keeps the entire ecosystem in balance. Well. Both authors finished their books before the COVID-19 pandemic overtook China and then the world. And when it comes to Hong Kong, coronavirus is a crisis China has not let go to waste. The timing of Beijing’s encroachment is no accident. Not only is the West preoccupied with fighting the coronavirus, but the social-distancing rules in place in Hong Kong mean it will be particularly difficult for demonstrators to respond to the move in the way they did last year. Despite the city’s having one of the best records of managing the disease in the world, with only four confirmed deaths to date, the government has extended bans on large-scale gatherings to the point where Hong Kong’s traditional June 4 vigil for the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre, the only such commemoration to take place within Chinese territory, will not be allowed to happen. Wasserstrom made a point to attend the vigil in 2019, wondering if it would soon “be added to the ever-growing list of things that used to be a part of the Hong Kong landscape but [have] subsequently disappeared.” He now has his answer. Washington will not sit idly by as Beijing deals the death blow to Hong Kong’s freedoms. Legislation passed in response to the protests last year requires the State Department to annually review Hong Kong’s autonomous status when it comes to trade. If Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s early comments are any indicator, that status will almost certainly not be renewed. Mainland officials involved in the law’s passing, meanwhile, will probably face harsh U.S. sanctions. But the United States cannot and should not lead the free world’s response alone. As the other signatory of the Sino-British Joint Declaration and the former colonial ruler of the city, the United Kingdom has both a political and moral obligation to condemn what Beijing is about to do. Both Wasserstrom and Dapiran argue that Hong Kong never stopped being a colony after the handover. The ruling power merely shifted from London to Beijing. Indeed, the legacy of colonialism has empowered the government to take actions it might otherwise not have been able to by invoking harsh (if rarely used) laws inherited from British rule. Reports have emerged of a quiet plan to allow political refugees from Hong Kong some form of asylum in the U.K., but Prime Minister Boris Johnson needs to be vocal in denouncing what is happening. Even with these steps, however, the outlook for the city is grim for the foreseeable future. Like Kurt Vonnegut’s Billy Pilgrim, Hong Kong has come unstuck in time—2047 has arrived 27 years early, and the colonial rule that allegedly ended in 1997 never went away, but merely changed hands. As Hong Kong enters the next chapter of its existence, all most of those concerned for its future can do is look on in horror and honor the example of a miracle city that continued to live free in the shadow of the world’s most powerful authoritarian government, hoping against all odds for a better tomorrow. 

If we have learned anything about COVID-19, it is that we are surprised every day by new advice on how the coronavirus spreads, its impact on our bodies, preventions, and treatments. The incredibly fluid development of knowledge about the pandemic elevates the risk that decisions we make concerning our own behavior will turn out to be wrong — and, in some cases, dangerous to us and to others.  Last month, former senator Blanche Lincoln and I wrote about the need to protect doctors and nurses from lawsuits related to very difficult decisions they make in treating COVID-19 patients. Trial lawyers are already soliciting plaintiffs so they can profit from these challenging and vulnerable times, and those on the front lines should not be made to pay the price. So we called on Congress to enact targeted liability protections for those fighting the battle in hospitals, nursing homes, and doctors’ offices. Congress has previously granted similar liability protections. Passed in 1997, the Volunteer Protection Act shields Americans who help their neighbors in a crisis from legal liability. The 2005 Public Readiness and Emergency Preparedness Act also grants tort immunity to manufacturers, distributors, and others providing medical treatment to the victims of epidemics and acts of terror.  Now that our nation is emerging from COVID-19 lockdowns, Congress must also limit the legal exposure of employers and organizations who follow guidelines to protect workers and customers. It’s inevitable that some people will become infected, but firms should not be sued out of existence for good-faith efforts that are not 100 percent effective against a virus that is 100 percent unpredictable. As we try to return to some aspects of normal life, we can’t allow ambulance-chasers to bring lawsuits that will crush our struggling businesses. Every business is struggling to adopt procedures to protect its customers from harm and itself from liability. And in a world saturated with social media, that struggle extends to our nation’s online-communications platforms. Twitter, Facebook, and Google have made changes to their content-moderation standards out of fear that they could be blamed — and sued — if people get sick based on user posts or videos that encourage potentially harmful behavior.  
 Recently, Facebook removed several user posts encouraging violations of certain states’ lockdown rules. While Facebook’s community standards have always prohibited misinformation that contributes to the risk of physical harm, the social-media giant has now announced that it is “consulting with WHO, CDC, and other health authorities to assess claims that may be false and likely to cause physical harm, such as increasing the likelihood that they contract or spread COVID-19.” YouTube has removed several user-created videos and ads that promoted ingesting bleach and other quack COVID cures that could be dangerous or even deadly. And well-known conservatives have run afoul of Twitter’s COVID-misinformation policy.  Despite the best intentions to prevent people from harm, social-media moderation of COVID-related content has become a flash point for conservatives who believe these companies moderate conservative content more harshly than progressive posts. Conservatives are outraged that social-media platforms would remove a user post inviting people to assemble and protest against COVID lockdown policies. I support the major social-media platforms’ commitment to free expression within responsible standards that are applied equally, but they are playing with fire if they appear to pick sides in the raging controversy over our nation’s COVID response and economic lockdowns. They do not have the expertise or the credibility to make these decisions. It is better for them to allow Americans the freedom to air our COVID disagreements on social media. But they are much less likely to do that if they face serious liability risks. If some user posts advice or a video advocating risky behavior, we can’t then turn around and blame the social-media platform for failing to block the post. And we especially can’t let trial attorneys exploit the actions of social-media companies’ users to create a lawsuit jamboree.  So that makes three kinds of COVID-liability protection this Congress and administration need to quickly enact: protection for medical professionals, protection for employers and businesses, and protection for the communications platforms where we debate how Americans should live and work amid this deadly pandemic. At such a time of widespread uncertainty and risk, our nation deserves nothing less. 

One of the reasons the coronavirus pandemic got out of hand in this country is the testing fiasco orchestrated by the Centers for Disease Control and the Food and Drug Administration. There’s a lesson here for those of us in higher education. When innovation is needed — and needed quickly — we shouldn’t put all our eggs in one basket.  In early January, Chinese scientists published the genetic sequence of the new coronavirus, which allowed laboratories to start designing tests. By late January, around 20 organizations in the U.S. were developing tests. The CDC was able to design a test for the virus quickly, which the FDA approved on February 4. Thus, in a remarkable display of government competence and bureaucratic flexibility, two federal agencies were able to create a test for a never-before-seen virus and approve it for nationwide distribution in less than a month. But they had also sown the seeds for a testing fiasco. While the declaration of a public-health emergency gave the FDA the ability to speed up testing approvals, it placed stringent burdens on non-CDC organizations. Those organizations that had been working on designing tests in January spent February trying to navigate a bureaucratic labyrinth, with one exasperated scientist being told that his emailed submission was not acceptable because the FDA needed a hard copy by mail as well. The FDA did not approve another test until February 29. The FDA’s foot dragging meant that for most of February, the CDC test was the only game in town. But the CDC test turned out to be broken — needing another three weeks to find a workaround. Thus, between February 4 and February 26, during which the virus was spreading exponentially, the country effectively lacked large-scale testing capability. And we lacked this capability because the FDA insisted on putting all the nation’s testing eggs in one basket: the CDC test, which the CDC botched.  Higher education should avoid repeating this mistake. The key lesson from the FDA and CDC testing fiasco is that we shouldn’t rely solely on existing institutions to get it right in the face of a new and rapidly evolving crisis. But unless changes are made, higher education will likely repeat the mistakes of the CDC and FDA, with colleges playing the role of the CDC and accreditors playing the role of the FDA.  
 It is possible that higher education can return to the status quo if the crisis is short-lived. But if we need to discover and implement a new normal, we shouldn’t rely solely on existing colleges. While on paper they are a natural choice since they already have many of the necessary components (a large pool of skilled teaching faculty, existing registration and grading systems, financial-aid offices, etc.), history suggests that many will be slow to react. Part of this is simply inertia by the previously successful (e.g., Blockbuster vs. Netflix). Another part is the difficulty any organization has when trying to change their business model, with unique handicaps in higher education because so many stakeholders have veto power over any change.  So while colleges should be encouraged to help discover and implement a new normal for higher education, we must open up higher education to new providers that may be more innovative and flexible. But just as the FDA hindered virus testing, accreditation can hinder educational alternatives because educational institutions need accreditor approval to participate in the federal financial-aid programs. Entrepreneurs can start a new college, but their students can’t use Pell grants or student loans to pay for it without an accreditor’s approval. In a new study, The Case for Escape Hatches from Higher Education Accreditation, we document some of the issues with accreditation, including the failure to assure quality and contributing to higher college costs. But during the current virus crisis, the most important problem is the recipe approach of accreditation, where accreditors insist on a set of inputs and processes that colleges must use.   Accreditation’s recipe approach presents a huge barrier to innovation. But we should not get rid of accreditation either because without accreditors, there is little to protect against fly-by-night schools that do not educate their students. We would also likely witness a dramatic increase in federal and state government interference in higher education as they seek to fill the accountability void if accreditors are removed. A partial solution to this dilemma is to introduce escape hatches from the accreditation system.  While accreditation focuses on inputs, and is largely agnostic regarding outcomes, escape hatches would reverse this, focusing on outcomes while being agnostic about inputs. Under the escape hatch plan, Congress and the Department of Education would set benchmarks for learning and/or labor market outcomes, and any students attending an educational institution that met these benchmarks would have access to federal financial-aid programs without their program needing to be accredited as well. For fields with outside certification exams, benchmarks for learning outcomes could be introduced. Consider accounting, a field in which many graduates take the Certified Public Accountant (CPA) exam. An accounting program could be given access to the federal financial aid programs if a set percentage of its graduates pass the CPA exam, or if the value-added contribution to their students’ CPA passage rate exceeds a set level. Similarly, labor-market outcomes could focus on reducing unemployment or increasing the earnings of students by set amounts.  This escape-hatch plan is a good idea even in normal times. But it is crucial during this pandemic because if the crisis is severe, prolonged, or recurring, we very well may need to move to a new normal in higher education. But just as the CDC and FDA’s testing fiasco hobbled the country’s response to the virus, the accreditation system may hobble the search for and discovery of a new normal in higher education. Escape hatches from accreditation can help mitigate this danger. 

One wonders if it will be recorded in the history books that from March 30th to June 20th Hungary lived as the shortest dictatorship in European history, before voluntarily extinguishing itself. An odd act for a dictatorship. Prime Minister Viktor Orbán of Hungary had used the coronavirus to make himself dictator for life, it was said. But I guess he only had it in him to be dictator for life for less than three months.  Our most important experts on democracy and Eastern Europe knew that Viktor Orbán had really done it this time. Yasmeen Serhan, writing in The Atlantic this April, declared: “There is a line between using emergency powers and outright authoritarianism—one that Hungary has undoubtedly crossed.” “The brazenness of Orbán’s power grab is without any parallel in recent European history,” wrote Dalibor Rohac in the Washington Post, predicting confidently that absent a “strong pushback from Brussels and Washington — which are both understandably preoccupied by more urgent matters — Hungary is bound to emerge from the current crisis as a full-fledged dictatorship.” It was on March 30th that the Hungarian Parliament approved a state-of-emergency law to deal with coronavirus that gave power to Viktor Orbán’s government to pass laws by decree, and instituted severe-looking restrictions on the dissemination of fake news. Several European countries had already passed enabling acts of this sort — France has seemed to go in and out of such states of emergency regularly in the last decade. That the emergency powers were a feature of Hungary’s existing constitution, limited by that constitution not to touch fundamental rights and subject to a parliamentary check, troubled none of these analysts.  At the time of this great panic for Hungarian democracy, Hungarian opponents of Orbán spread ludicrous and easily-checkable claims about the legislation, saying that the parliament itself had been suspended and elections cancelled, a claim spread by people as eminent as Anne Applebaum. Other experts told us confidently that these powers were gathered by Orbán for the purpose of suppressing the inevitably disastrous performance of his nation’s health-care institutions. American political strategists predicted extravagant things, such as: “He’s going to wind up putting Gypsies in permanent detention…”  
 I predicted that Orbán would return the emergency powers back to Parliament roughly around the same time as France. This week, Hungary began the process, and all powers will be restored by June 20th. Currently, France’s emergency powers last until July 10th, but could be extended.  How did the predictions pan out? Hungary has seen just under 500 deaths out of slightly less than 3,500 cases, which, while serious, is nothing like the horrors visited upon Italy or Spain in recent months. Its hospital system, though far behind richer nations, did not break down. There was no great showdown with Brussels and Washington, D.C., needed to end the emergency. During the crisis, Orbán’s opponents often repeated a statement from the European Commission expressing “concern” about the emergency legislation and a determination to monitor it. What they often did not mention was that the statement came along with a preliminary ruling of EU legal experts that there were no concrete violations of fundamental democratic rights, and therefore Brussels had no basis for acting against Hungary.  Orbán is not immune from criticism for his use of the powers. He used the power to rule by fiat to pass a planned redevelopment of City Park, which his party desired to do but which has been blocked by the opposition in Parliament and by the mayor of Budapest. This is an abuse of emergency powers, and a bit of political hardball, though not one that touches on the fundaments of democracy. End runs like this are commonly done in the Western world. New York governor Andrew Cuomo used sweeping emergency powers to amend or rewrite hundreds of New York laws, including many unrelated to the response to COVID-19 that he couldn’t pass through the legislature. Among these was suspending the requirement that cities and towns publish certain legal notices, a serious source of income for local media that could lead to newspaper closures and will make it harder for citizens to know how their tax monies are being spent. This too is an abuse, but nobody outside of the letters to the editor section of newspapers seems to notice it.  It was widely reported that two persons were arrested under the new emergency law powers for criticizing government. Both were questioned and released, One of them, identified only as “Andras” in media reports, was told by police that he had not committed a crime. He gave an interview about his interrogation to one of the most-read news sites in Hungary.   In my book, the police were too zealous and the law too broad. Neither of those two men should have been questioned even if they weren’t charged. But overzealous and lunkheaded investigations are launched by the police frequently in free countries. And Hungarian speech restrictions, even in the emergency, are put into relief when contrasted with European peers with great liberal reputations. Hundreds of people in the U.K. face lengthy and expensive trials or even prison sentences for charges under the Communications Act, and police there regularly threaten the public to watch what they say on social media. Germany’s Network Enforcement Act defines dangerous speech so broadly it would give supporters of opposition parties a second thought about expressing themselves on the Internet. Non-liberal states such as Russia, the Philippines, and Singapore have all cited it as an example to be emulated. German politicians have demanded that the law be made more repressive and loopholes in it be closed. As for the predictions of indefinite detention, Hungary has not created its own version of America’s Guantanamo Bay, thank God. It’s remarkable that the same experts who were so sure Iraq would become a liberal democracy once a little force was applied are now so sure that Hungary will be a dictatorship by having elections and taking constitutional measures.  They will not be troubled by the failure of their certain predictions. Their opposition will just be repackaged in in some new theory. Well of course, Orbán can return the powers, they’ll say, he has a rubber stamp in Parliament. And besides, he’ll want those subsidies from Brussels. But then why did they believe it was the advent of dictatorship when they mistakenly thought Parliament was suspended? The same game is played with Hungary’s constitution. A rumor of a forthcoming transgression of that constitution is evidence of illiberal democracy run amok, but the evidence of following it interpreted as an empty gesture. Heads, tails. Etc. One suspects it’s just simple hatred of Christian conservatism, a fanatical projection of culture war antipathies to the near abroad. Liberal keyboard warriors such as Cas Mudde even suggested allying with the fascist Jobbick Party to unseat Orbán in 2018, even as that party was led by a man who had founded an ultra-nationalist paramilitary. Or sometimes it is mere class interest, as the worry about illiberal democracy almost always expresses itself in terms about the status of journalists and academics in Hungary. Most of this worry is done in pure ignorance about the leading online media outlets, such as Index and !!44!!!, which tend to be critical of the government. And perhaps it has blinded them to the real dangers lurking in this part of the world. Illiberal democracy has mostly been a chimera. But the ongoing tit-for-tat between Hungary and Romania should trouble anyone who knows something about history in this region. The Hungarian government is increasingly engaging with the diaspora of Hungarian speakers in Romania. This is overwhelmingly popular in Hungary and addresses some of Orbán’s often-stated fears of demographic collapse. But it is a serious agitation to a neighbor. The Prime Minister of Romania has recently called attempts to guarantee more rights to the sizable Hungarian speaking minority in his country “treasonous.” Most of Hungary’s Western detractors hail from the school of thought born from the title (if not the text) of Francis Fukuyama’s The End of History. But there are rages, resentments, and humiliations lurking around the 1920 Treaty of Trianon that radically shrunk Hungary. And we should not believe that in a world of collapsing native populations, these border disputes can remain submerged. If our foreign-policy experts could manage to read something longer than a hysterical tweet, they might be able to tell us something about it. In the meantime, they’ll have to put up with former dictator Viktor Orbán clowning on them and demanding apologies. 

After it was alleged that he broke the government’s lockdown rules, Dominic Cummings, chief adviser to prime minister Boris Johnson, has been charged with hypocrisy. His (many) critics and detractors have demanded (thus far, unsuccessfully) that he be fired. But do they really believe that any other person acting similarly, and for the same reason, would have been punished? I can’t imagine that they do.  Cummings’s troubles began shortly after the prime minister had tested positive from the virus and he and his wife began to develop coronavirus symptoms. As the parents of a four-year-old, they were concerned that, should they both become incapacitated, their child’s safety and wellbeing would be in jeopardy. Since March 23, the U.K. has been under a strict government-mandated lockdown, restricting all but essential movements. However, a caveat was also included: “If you have children, keep following this advice to the best of your ability, however, we are aware that not all these measures will be possible.” On March 24, England’s deputy chief medical officer, Dr. Jenny Harris, further clarified that there was leeway for parents of young children. “Clearly if you have adults who are unable to look after a small child. That is an exceptional circumstance,” she said. Clearly. “If the individuals do not have access to care support, formal care support or access to family, they will be able to work through their local authority hubs.” In the Cummings’s case, they did have access to family. In order to secure contingency childcare for his four-year-old, Cummings drove his family 260 miles from their London home to Durham where his parents live. There, his nieces (aged 17 and 20) had volunteered to care for his child, should this become necessary (which, in the end, it didn’t). Neither Cummings nor his wife had any physical contact with his parents, or any other person, during their trip. They stayed in a separate cottage on their property. After the 14-day quarantine was up, Cummings was cleared by medical experts to be able to go back to work. At the suggestion of his wife, Cummings drove his family 60 miles (round trip) to Barnard Castle to check that he was fit enough to drive back to London. This remains one of the most controversial aspects of his trip — though again, the family did not come into contact with any other people.  The facts of this case have been obscured by sensationalist, confusing, and inaccurate reporting. Take, for example, this “report” from CNN, which claims that Johnson’s refusal to sack Cummings “threatens to wreck Britain’s lockdown.” Or this flat-out false report from the Express that Cummings made more than one trip to Durham. Or this speculative piece from the New Statesman suggesting the reason for his trip was actually his maternal uncle’s death. Perhaps there would have been less outrage if the government had set the record straight sooner with Cummings’s press conference. Nevertheless, now that Cummings has explained himself to the press, the continued media circus (who swarm outside his home with no regard for social-distancing rules) is increasingly absurd.   “I believe I made the right judgment, but I can understand that others may disagree with that,” Cummings said at yesterday’s press conference. For now, his job is safe. Johnson has given his full support, stating that he merely acted as “any father would have.” Cabinet minister Michael Gove has said “caring for your wife and child is not a crime.” Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab has advised those condemning Cummings to “take a long hard look in the mirror.” What they are effectively saying, then, is that any person would be legally and morally justified to act in this way for this reason. But this isn’t a new standard. It’s the same standard that the law provided for to begin with. 
 Again, the real measure of whether or not Dominic Cummings acted hypocritically (and so ought to be fired) is whether any other person acting similarly would have, under the rules, been treated more harshly. As yet, the media have presented no such example of someone who has. It’s absolutely right to suggest that there should not be one standard for everyone and another for senior advisers. And by that logic, Dominic Cummings does not deserve to be punished. 

The New York Department of Health has apparently deleted a March order issued by Governor Andrew Cuomo that forced nursing homes to admit Covid-positive residents. The order, which was implemented on March 25, stated that “no resident shall be denied re-admission or admission to a nursing home solely based on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19,” and also prohibited nursing homes from requiring testing prior to admission or readmission. But the order is no longer visible on the state’s website.  Other outdated guidelines, including a February order stating “there is no need to cancel school or social events, and there is no need for students or school staff to wear surgical masks at school,” remain active on the site. The New York Department of Health and Cuomo’s office did not respond to requests for comment as to why the order was deleted. New York leads the country with over 5,000 nursing home deaths due to coronavirus, and earlier this month admitted to quietly changing its criteria to count only those cases in which the individual died at the nursing home, rather than at the hospital. News of the policy has resulted in calls for an investigation from conservative lawmakers. Today I joined my @NewYorkGOP colleagues in the House to call for a federal investigation of Cuomo's failed nursing home policies. NOW they admit they unethically changed the way they report nursing home deaths. An INEXCUSABLE tragedy for NY – NEED ANSWERShttps://t.co/pHY98zlTN2 — Elise Stefanik (@EliseStefanik) May 15, 2020  Cuomo, who said in April that he was not aware of his state’s own policy, reversed it earlier this month. “We’re just not going to send a person who is positive to a nursing home after hospital visit. Period. If there’s any issue, the resident must be referred to the department of health which will find alternative care,” he announced on May 10.   After coming under fire for the initial directive, Cuomo defended his actions by deflecting criticism to the Trump administration.  “New York followed the president’s agencies’ guidance,” Cuomo said Saturday at his press conference. “What New York did was follow what the Republican Administration said to do. That’s not my attempt to politicize it. It’s my attempt to depoliticize it. So don’t criticize the state for following the president’s policy.” The governor’s office pointed to a March 13 directive to the states from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) and Centers from Disease Control and Prevention (CDC): “Nursing homes should admit any individuals that they would normally admit to their facility, including individuals from hospitals where a case of COVID-19 was/is present,” it states. But the document also explains that a nursing home should only accept a Covid-positive patient “as long as the facility can follow CDC guidance for Transmission-Based Precautions.” Florida, which adopted a stance opposite to New York’s by keeping coronavirus patients out of nursing homes, has suffered only a fraction of the deaths.  “It was clear to me that there were much higher standards related to infection control being outlined by the federal CDC that well exceeded what our nursing homes traditionally have been expected to adhere to,” Mary Mayhew, secretary of Florida’s Agency for Healthcare Administration, told National Review. “So we never had false expectations.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Will you join the foster-care discussion the National Review Institute and Sheen Center for Thought & Culture are co-sponsoring tomorrow about the upcoming movie, The Ride? 
1. Chicago Sun-Times: Our national shame: COVID-19 in nursing homes 2. More coverage of this and less coverage of beaches please. https://t.co/8UbNO6FvFP — Daniel Darling (@dandarling) May 26, 2020  3. Sant’eGidio: THERE IS NO FUTURE WITHOUT THE ELDERLY. Appeal to re-humanize our societies.   4. New York Times: On a Scottish Isle, Nursing Home Deaths Expose a Covid-19 Scandal 5. Star Tribune: Despite deadly toll, Minnesota nursing home residents with COVID-19 still sharing rooms 6. Atlanta Journal Constitution: Guatemalan detained by ICE in Georgia dies of coronavirus 7. Wall Street Journal: As the Coronavirus Lockdown Eases, Italy Confronts an Epidemic of Poverty 8. Jennifer Lahl: Babies for Sale 9. The Next Pandemic: Homesickness 10. Jonathan Haidt on the Pandemic and America’s Polarization 11. Church, don’t let Coronavirus divide you  12. Luma Simms: What Does Conservatism Mean After The Iraq War? 13. On losing Kramerbooks 14. (Notre Dame president) Fr. John Jenkins: Why Science Alone Could Not Tell Us Whether to Reopen Notre Dame 15. New York Times: A 96-Year-Old Veteran Was Near Death. Then He Met His Social Worker. 16. Catholic blues legend takes a ‘train bound for heaven’ in new album 17. A 10-year-old girl has sent more than 1,500 art kits to kids in foster care and homeless shelters during the coronavirus pandemic  18. Letters in the Time of Covid: Reviving a practice at odds with everything around us  19. It’s My 100th Birthday. It’s Been Quite a Century. 20. Historians: Women Invented Grilling To Trick Men Into Cooking Plus: I mentioned tomorrow’s foster-care discussion. We’ll have another, with the Catholic Information Center, on Thursday night. Details here.  

London — In 793, a raid on the Holy Island of Lindisfarne marked the start of the Viking age and a terror that would pervade England for centuries. Successful attacks from Denmark washed ashore year after year, villages were ransacked, towns brutalized; few who stood in their path survived. Hopeless against these unrelenting assaults, King Æthelred in 991 paid the Danes in silver so they would leave his kingdom in peace. Delighted by the offer of payment, the Vikings returned every year to claim the “Danegeld” from the English coffers, a practice that did not end until Scandinavian prince Cnut won the crown in 1016.  Rudyard Kipling’s poem “Dane-geld” rightly points out that “if once you have paid him the Dane-geld, you never get rid of the Dane.” A millennium later, the British Right is finally learning the lessons of its medieval forebears. Dominic Cummings is Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s chief adviser, a role he has held since Johnson took office in July 2019. Cummings is credited with being the mastermind behind the Vote Leave campaign and the Conservatives’ strategy that led to their winning December’s general election with a stonking majority. Naturally, this makes him the ultimate bogeyman for the Left. And since the start of the weekend, he has been at the center of their attacks. Cummings has been charged with one of the most heinous crimes in British society: hypocrisy. Cummings was a key figure in devising the government’s lockdown strategy, so the front pages of every broadsheet and tabloid splashed the news that he had traveled some 250 miles north of London — his primary residence — to his family’s home in Durham for child-care reasons.   This episode is difficult for Cummings, who has moved the Conservatives away from being the party of pensioners, the private sector, and the middle classes into a political outfit most popular with the working class. It is an extraordinary transformation, and much of it has relied on painting the opposition as elite and out of touch with ordinary people. American readers will no doubt find some similarities with this approach and their own Republican administration. 
 But the portrayal of Cummings as an elitist who believes that the rules don’t exist for him is dangerous political territory for him and risks damaging the credibility of that platform. Fortunately, however, Cummings is smarter than most of his opponents, and in an unprecedented move in British political history, on Monday he gave a defensive statement from Downing Street’s Rose Garden and took questions from lobby journalists about the furor.  He outlined his case calmly and with humility. He acted within the rules, he did what any parent would have done — care for their children above all else — and he took necessary precautions to prevent anyone else from being needlessly involved or put at risk. To every claim of law-breaking, he had a response. To every lie that he had traveled up North multiple times, he cited newspaper falsehoods.  The view that Cummings’s lockdown drive has ruined his image as an anti-elitist has been diminished by those attacking him. Opinion pieces throughout the legacy media have called for his dismissal, followed by attacks from bishops in the Church of England, celebrities, a flurry of major activists, and even the most recent president of the European Council, Donald Tusk. To them, he is a virus threatening to diminish the rules and norms in their carefully curated political system. He must be spared no quarter. Cummings was an adviser to then–education secretary Michael Gove in the early years of the last decade, when Gove took on the alliance of teachers, civil servants, and unions who resisted conservative reform. They called this group “The Blob,” a reference to a Steve McQueen science-fiction film from 1958 about an amoeba consuming the world. The Blob has followed Cummings since his stint in education, as the revolutionary actions of his masterminded Brexit referendum success have been met with extraordinary resistance from a cabal of lawyers, politicians, journalists, and activists through the U.K. Now they have formed again to attempt to strike him down over his drive to look after his sick family.  There have also been some useful idiots on the Conservative side who align themselves with the Blob, such as MPs William Wragg and Caroline Nokes, who have been quick to join in with leftist campaigns in the past. Just last week Mr. Wragg called the government “immoral” for its health-care surcharge fee for migrant health-care and social-care workers, which earned him a gushing news story in the Guardian. Many commentators have argued that giving an unelected senior adviser a government platform to defend himself is the biggest break from the unwritten political norms that quietly govern us. They are wrong; the fact that Cummings is even putting up a defense in the face of round-the-clock establishment-wide assault is the true highlight here.   Conservatives in the U.K. have rarely given any resistance to media mobs and instead quickly pay the Danegeld. In the last year or so, there have been a number of high-profile cases where left-wing campaigning journalists have tried, often successfully, to ruin a conservative’s life. The first major recent case was that of Sir Roger Scruton, who was crudely misrepresented by journalist George Eaton in April 2019. Scruton was portrayed as believing that all Chinese people are the same, which some digging from Douglas Murray — who unearthed the tapes of the interview — revealed to be a scandalous misrepresentation. Nevertheless, before Scruton had a chance to put up a fight against the media onslaught, the Conservative government sacked him from his unpaid position as an adviser to an architectural commission, with Tory MP (and now minister) Johnny Mercer describing removing Sir Roger as a “no-brainer.”  The Danegeld was paid, but the raids kept coming. Daniel Kawczynski, a Conservative MP, faced calls to resign after a media campaign chased his scalp for the crime of attending a conference on conservatism where people whom Buzzfeed and the BBC found distasteful were also present. And most recently, a huge campaign was launched against a young government aide named Andrew Sabisky, who was slandered and misrepresented as a racist eugenicist on some of the country’s best-selling front pages. But now the Blob are faced with a target who has said that he hasn’t even considered resigning. Faced with the opportunity to cough up the geld, offer his resignation, and give the vampiric quarters that dominate the fourth estate the vial of blood they crave, Cummings has instead opted to stand firm and reject the Salem-style trial that has all too often scuppered figures on his side. Last month, the head of the Metropolitan Police, Cressida Dick, was filmed standing on Westminster Bridge surrounded by policing colleagues as they took part in the weekly national clapping for carers (this exercise really is as ridiculous as it sounds). A few journalists pointed out that she was breaking social-distancing rules, but there was no great media campaign, despite her lofty status in British society. The completely different reactions to these two “offenses” reveals the nature of Cummings’s complainants: They are politically driven by those who deeply regret his tsunami of victories over them. Resisting media pressure is only the start. If the conservatives want to kick on and reduce their fragility in future attacks of this kind, they must challenge the cultural power that pervades the publicly funded ivory towers of the universities — many of which are basically pointless — the Church of England, a vast range of dubiously funded NGOs and charities, pressure groups, and many other sources of anti-Tory hate. If we fail to fight back against the Blob, it will continue to threaten to consume us. 

North Carolina Governor Roy Cooper on Monday declined to say whether he will allow the Republican National Convention to move forward in August at full capacity after President Trump threatened to move it out of the state barring an immediate answer from the Democratic governor. “State health officials are working with the RNC and will review its plans as they make decisions about how to hold the convention in Charlotte,” said Dory MacMillan, a spokesperson for the governor, on Monday. “North Carolina is relying on data and science to protect our state’s public health and safety.”  Trump wrote in a Monday tweet that he may move to relocate the convention, scheduled to take place in Charlotte, N.C. from August 24 to 27, if Cooper refused to guarantee that it would be allowed to occur at full capacity. The convention is expected to draw at least 50,000 people. Cooper “is still in Shutdown mood & unable to guarantee that by August we will be allowed full attendance in the Arena,” Trump wrote. “In other words, we would be spending millions of dollars building the Arena to a very high standard without even knowing if the Democrat Governor would allow the Republican Party to fully occupy the space.” Attendees “must be immediately given an answer by the Governor as to whether or not the space will be allowed to be fully occupied,” the president continued. “If not, we will be reluctantly forced to find, with all of the jobs and economic development it brings, another Republican National Convention site. This is not something I want to do.”   North Carolina entered phase two of its reopening on Friday, when Cooper allowed more businesses including hair salons and restaurants to reopen. On Saturday, the state reported its largest one-day increase of positive cases. Trump added in a later tweet that he has “zero interest” in moving the convention to the Trump National Doral Miami in Florida, saying he “would like to stay in N.C., whose gov. doesn’t even know if he can let people in?”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

I’m not sure the political world has fully grasped how odd and different this upcoming presidential campaign is going to be, barring some sort of miraculous and rapid solution to the coronavirus pandemic. Joe Biden has probably shaken his last hand in 2020, worked his last rope line, and held his last rally. President Trump is no doubt itching to hold one of his traditional boisterous rallies, but that will depend upon whether it’s safe for people to get together in groups.  Modern campaigns are almost entirely focused upon getting the candidate in front of large groups of people, which is what we’re supposed to be avoiding in the era of “social distancing.” Candidates will be traveling significantly less; what’s the point of being in a particular state for a “virtual” rally? Will the Biden campaign even have a press plane? Will reporters want to spend a lot of time on planes, hopping from swing-state city to the next? Press conferences were already growing rarer in recent cycles. Will any reporter ask Joe Biden a question in person for the next five months or so? There probably won’t be any campaign rally/concerts featuring Jay-Z and Katy Perry for the Democratic nominee this year. Biden is unlikely to sit on the couches on the set of Jimmy Fallon or Jimmy Kimmel or Stephen Colbert; all his late-night joke-filled appearances will be by remote. The candidates will still hold photo opportunities, but the menu will be smaller. School classrooms are unlikely. Candidates may still “drop in” on iconic bars, restaurants and small businesses — if they’re still open — but presumably those establishments will have a reduced number of patrons at any given time. No more hanging out with the bikers, with a woman on Biden’s lap. There is likely to be a 9/11 ceremony in New York in September, but it may not be such a big gathering. Visiting a hospital will carry its own risks, and reminders of the candidates’ ages.  Getting-out-the-vote will involve fewer knocking on doors — or perhaps standing a safe distance away from the door. There will be fewer big gatherings such as festivals, sporting events, or concerts for voter-registration drives. Some college students will be back on campus, but some won’t, and they probably won’t be hosting big events. As noted in today’s Jolt, the party conventions will probably be nothing like what they have been in recent cycles. The next couple months of the campaign are probably going to look a lot like the previous few months of the campaign.  

The pathogen has had a serious outbreak in state and federal prisons — jails have proven to be the leading COVID-19 hotspots — and this side of the curve-bending seems to be a slow affair. The toll has been significant. The Marshall Project/Associated Press tabulates (through May 22nd) that nearly 30,000 prisoners have contracted the virus, with 415 deaths. As for prison staff, there are 33 reported deaths (only 16 states are releasing information about the virus’s toll on personnel).  What to do? One partial solution — which has caused some conservative angst — is the early release or pardoning of chunks of the population (typically those with non-violent records or on the verge of parole) to relieve pressure on the contamination spread, exacerbated by jailhouse density. An alternative to prisoner-release — and a sensible strategy for implementing general safety to contain viral spread — might be the aggressive use of masks and other safety devices. Which is exactly what is the intent of a joint effort by the National Sheriffs’ Association (sheriffs oversee the vast majority of U.S. jails) and the hip-hop-influenced REFORM Alliance. The two (unusually paired) organizations announced today the launch of a $10 million private-funded partnership to send millions of PPE masks to America’s prisons to protect the incarcerated and law-enforcement staff. The purpose is not only to provide protection, but to crush the contagion’s spread. Here’s hoping it works. 

This story in Politico will add fuel to the fire to the GOP argument that Democrats are rooting against signs of an economic recovery before November. Jason Furman, a top economist in the Obama administration and now a professor at Harvard, contends that “we are about to see the best economic data we’ve seen in the history of this country.” As the country gradually figures out how to function with the coronavirus, the sudden steep drop in economic activity will climb back up again. In fact, it may be happening already, although it may not show up in economic statistics for a while. The Wall Street Journal reports: “Truck loads are growing again. Air travel and hotel bookings are up slightly. Mortgage applications are rising. And more people are applying to open new businesses . . . . For the first time since the pandemic forced widespread U.S. business closures in March, it appears conditions in some corners of the economy aren’t getting worse, and might even be improving.” Furman believes “the months preceding the November election could offer Trump the chance to brag — truthfully — about the most explosive monthly employment numbers and GDP growth ever.” And Politico offers this eye-popping quote: Furman’s counterintuitive pitch has caused some Democrats, especially Obama alumni, around Washington to panic. “This is my big worry,” said a former Obama White House official who is still close to the former president. Asked about the level of concern among top party officials, he said, “It’s high — high, high, high, high.” If the opposition party’s argument against an incumbent president is strong and compelling and aligned with the values of the electorate, the economic conditions in the fall shouldn’t matter that much. Democrats believed they had a virtual encyclopedia of arguments against the president before the coronavirus hit. An economic rebound shouldn’t derail their argument against the president; if it does, maybe those arguments weren’t as strong as Democrats thought. Public approval of Trump’s response to the virus is falling along the lines of his overall approval rating. No matter what happens from here on out, Joe Biden and the Democrats will be arguing that President Trump fumbled the initial response to the coronavirus and will likely argue that Trump and Republican governors reopened parts of the country too fast, increasing the risk of more casualties from the virus. And Democrats will still argue that Trump is xenophobic, racist, ignorant, filled with rage, reckless, selfish, unhinged, etc.   Democrats might want to spend some time examining if the Biden economic agenda that was largely put together in a 2019 boom will look as appealing if the economy isn’t rebounding in autumn. Back during one of the debates, Tim Alberta of Politico asked Biden, “As president, would you be willing to sacrifice some of that growth, even knowing potentially that it could displace thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of blue-collar workers in the interest of transitioning to that greener economy?” Biden responded, “The answer is yes. The answer is yes, because the opportunity — the opportunity for those workers to transition to high-paying jobs, as Tom said, is real.”  Biden pledged “no new fracking” during a debate, then walked it back; he wants to set a price on carbon to be used for either a carbon tax or cap-and-trade; Biden endorsed California’s AB5, the anti-“gig” law; he would raise the corporate tax rate from 21 percent to 28 percent, and he insists he can raise taxes by $4 trillion over the next decade, without raising taxes on anyone making $400,000 per year or less. If the Democrats’ argument against Trump can’t work if there’s a partial economic rebound before November, they truly deserve to lose.  

Welcome to week eleven of life with the coronavirus pandemic. If someone is asking “Why aren’t people staying inside like they did before?” it means they are in denial of the fact that this is week eleven of life with the coronavirus pandemic. On the menu today: wondering just how either party can safely hold a convention under these circumstances; former senator and ambassador Max Baucus trashes the administration for Chinese state television; and Gretchen Whitmer’s husband appears to tank her chances of being Joe Biden’s running mate.  What Is the Purpose of a Political Convention during a Pandemic? How soon do you envision yourself indoors in a crowd of people, standing or sitting less than six feet apart? The president wants the 2020 Republican National Convention, scheduled for August 24 through 27 in Charlotte, to look like a traditional one. In a series of tweets Monday, the president fumed that Democratic governor Roy Cooper “is still in shutdown mood” and “unable to guarantee that by August we will still be allowed full attendance in the arena . . . Plans are being made by many thousands of enthusiastic Republicans, and others, to head to beautiful North Carolina in August. They must be immediately given an answer by the Governor as to whether or not the space will be allowed to be fully occupied. If not, we will be reluctantly forced to find, with all of the jobs and economic development it brings, another Republican National Convention site.” Yesterday, Trump added in another tweet that he has no interest in bringing the convention to his Doral property near Miami, Fla.  The lone response from the North Carolina governor’s office so far is a brief statement from Cooper’s press secretary, Dory MacMillan: “State health officials are working with the RNC and will review its plans as they make decisions about how to hold the convention in Charlotte. North Carolina is relying on data and science to protect our state’s public health and safety.”  Saturday evening, Jonathan Swan of Axios reported, “watch for a visual contrast between the two party conventions in August. Two sources close to the president said they hope to have a boisterous, live crowd. They want to have more people there physically than at the Democratic convention the week earlier, which will likely involve significant virtual elements.” The Democratic convention in Milwaukee is going to be on such a smaller scale: The city is hoping it wins the opportunity to host the 2024 Democratic convention.  Without the ability to bring lots of people together in the same place, it’s fair to wonder what the point of a party’s national convention is. Otherwise, it’s just a series of speeches. Since at least the 1990s, news institutions wondered how much actual news there was in conventions where the nominee is already known, the nominating process was a formality, and the prime-time speeches turned into a four-night informercial for the party. For local businesses, conventions are a bonanza, from the huge influx of delegates, alternate delegates, just about every major elected official in the party (in normal cycles; 2016 was a little different for the GOP), and tens of thousands of members of the media.  Increasingly, host cities welcome a lot of out-of-town cops, helping the locals keep everything secure. For donors and party officials, it’s four days of networking and four nights of partying. For political junkies, it’s Disneyland with every local university, think tank, activist group, and faction hosting open events. For protesters, it’s a moment to rally, beat their drums, and march around with their giant paper-mache heads. But few of those activities can be easily done while social distancing. (I suppose many of the protesters are used to wearing masks.)  Would Barack Obama’s address at the Democratic National Convention in 2004 have been as well received if there was no crowd in front of him? Would Ted Cruz’s “vote your conscience” closing line at the 2016 GOP convention in Cleveland have mattered without the booing from the delegates and the scowling reaction from the Trump family? Is there a point to dropping lots of red, white, and blue balloons and confetti if there’s no one beneath them? The good news is that late August should be one of the lowest-risk times of year. Research indicates summer heat will mitigate the spread of the virus, although it will be a secondary factor compared to people’s behaviors. Because being outdoors is considered safer than indoors, if there must be a gathering of lots of people, would it make more sense to hold events in an open-air football or baseball stadium? Maybe Obama was ahead of the curve with his columns in Denver in 2008. Charlotte’s basketball arena, the Spectrum Center — formerly known as Time Warner Cable Arena — has a seating capacity of roughly 20,000. Most football stadiums have capacity of at least 50,000; Bryant-Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa, Ala., has more than 100,000. You could have a large crowd and spread everyone out several feet.   You could envision more creative ways of taking the event out of one location and making supporters across the country feel like they have a role, no matter where they live. What if you asked every party supporter in America to go out onto their front porch or apartment balcony, put out their yard signs or homemade signs or paraphernalia, and listen or stream the speeches, so that the audience is coast-to-coast? And what if the conclusion of the nominee’s speech, instead of the balloon drop, people set off small fireworks or some other celebratory noise? If the GOP does go ahead with holding the convention in the Spectrum Center, many health experts will argue that large a gathering under one roof with ventilated air — with a decent number of senior citizens in attendance! — is unsafe. But to raise the question I’m asking more frequently lately . . . how much less safe is gathering in an arena than taking the New York City subway system right now? Or New York City Transit Port Authority buses? People are still getting on airplanes and standing on long lines in airports. One last thought: How many Americans will have had the coronavirus and have recovered by late August? Not every state is collecting data on those who beat the virus, but as of this writing, the count is 464,727.  Corrupt to the Max Our Zach Evans notes that the former senator and former U.S. ambassador to China Max Baucus is regularly denouncing President Trump on Chinese state television. Evans observes, “the former senator sits on the Board of Advisers to Alibaba Group. He also runs a consulting firm, Baucus Group LLC, which connects American and Chinese businesses.” Every now and then I marvel that former German chancellor Gerhard Schroeder is now pretty much a lobbyist for the Russian oil industry, and everyone in the West has more or less accepted it. Our media — and the U.K. media, and other western countries — is justifiably anti-Putin . . . but when a former head of state of a NATO country signs on to become a Putin stooge, they generate a mild “tsk-tsk” and move on. Considering all the ire at Trump for his swooning for Putin, you would think we could spare some more anger for a former head of state who’s signed an actual contract with Putin allies. Amazon is allegedly the bad guys in the eyes of many on the Left, but former Obama press secretary Jay Carney is making a good living as one of their senior vice presidents. David Plouffe went to Uber and the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative, EPA head Lisa Jackson went to Apple, and Eric Holder went to Airbnb. Corporate America is evil and greedy and the driving force behind worsening inequality . . . but if some former Democratic official wants to cash in, it’s all cool. Governors in Michigan, Illinois, and Virginia Prefer to Ignore the Inconvenient Rules I didn’t think Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer was a likely or good choice to be Joe Biden’s running mate. She appears even less likely to be the choice this morning: The owner of a Northern Michigan dock company says Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s husband wanted his boat placed in the water before the Memorial Day weekend as Whitmer urged residents not to rush to the region. “This morning, I was out working when the office called me, there was a gentleman on hold who wanted his boat in the water before the weekend,” Dowker posted. “Being Memorial weekend and the fact that we started working three weeks late means there is no chance this is going to happen.” “Well our office personnel had explained this to the man and he replied, ‘I am the husband to the governor, will this make a difference?'”… In a statement, Whitmer spokeswoman Brown didn’t specifically confirm or deny the company’s assertion. “Our practice is not to discuss the governor’s or her family’s personal calendar/schedules. And we’re not going to make it a practice of addressing every rumor that is spread online,” Brown said. When a governor’s office doesn’t deny a story like this, that’s pretty much a confirmation. This goes well with Illinois governor J. B. Pritzker’s family going to Wisconsin and Florida during lockdown and Virginia governor Ralph Northam out taking selfies without social distancing or wearing a mask. Apparently, very few governors think the restrictions they announced apply to themselves or their own families. Or maybe Governor Whitmer’s husband just ranks among the many, many spouses who choose to tune out their partner’s requests and recommendations. ADDENDUM: Our Robert VerBruggen offers readers all the studies they could ever want, whether they want to argue that lockdowns work to stop the spread of the coronavirus or they don’t.  

How much economic upheaval will COVID-19 cause? Nobody knows at this point. What the labor market will look like in a year or more is subject to enormous conjecture. And that being the case, the way most young Americans used to treat going to college — as the only conceivable option — should change. In today’s Martin Center article, Chloe Anagnos argues that it makes sense for them, whether they’ve already graduated, were in college when COVID-19 hit, or are still in high school, to look for work and training options that will give them immediate benefits. Laying out lots of money for college courses that might never pay off is a bad idea. Anagnos points to numerous alternatives to enrolling in a college or university now: LinkedIn, Google, and Hubspot, for example, have a mix of paid and free courses you can take that will make you more employable. From software development to basic digital tool training, those online classes offer students and recent grads a golden opportunity to stay relevant. By earning valuable marketing certificates and a variety of important skills such as video and social media marketing, SEO, public relations, branding, Google and Facebook advertising, proficiency in Google Analytics, and content drafting, you will be much more competitive when the labor market warms up again. At this time, it makes sense to put actual work experience on your resume rather than biding your time (and spending your money) for college, Anagnos argues. The best approach to our uncertain future is to adopt a “craftsman mindset.” She concludes: At the end of the day, employers will feel much more compelled to hire people who have put their time to good use during the lockdown by working instead of simply waiting or getting deeper in the red for a degree that might not make a huge difference.  

Dominic Cummings, the top adviser to British prime minister Boris Johnson and a key player in Brexit, argued that he “behaved reasonably” in driving 260 miles to his parents’ home, despite being exposed to his wife’s coronavirus-like symptoms. “I’m not surprised many people are very angry,” Cummings said in a Monday press conference. “I don’t regret what I did; I think what I did was reasonable in these circumstances.” Cummings, who himself contracted the virus after travelling, said he made the decision to be near family over worries he and his wife would not be able to care for their 4-year-old son.  “I think the people like me who make the rules should be held accountable for their actions,” Cummings explained, but refused to accept British media criticism that he had broken the lockdown by travelling, pointing to a clause in the guidelines that allows for exceptional childcare circumstances. Johnson dismissed calls for Cummings’s resignation, saying his adviser “followed the instincts of every father and every parent, and I do not mark him down for that.” “I believe that in every respect, he has acted responsibly, and legally, and with integrity,” Johnson, who himself contracted the virus, said Sunday.  The opposition Labour Party slammed the decision, saying Cummings “breached the lockdown rules.”  “It is an insult to sacrifices made by the British people that Boris Johnson has chosen to take no action against Dominic Cummings,” Labour leader Keir Starmer said in a statement. “The public will be forgiven for thinking there is one rule for the prime minister’s closest adviser and another for the British people.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

China raised the specter of escalated tensions with the U.S. over the weekend amid friction over the coronavirus pandemic, warning that the U.S. is pushing the relationship between the world’s two largest economies “to the brink of a new Cold War.” “It has come to our attention that some political forces in the U.S. are taking China-U.S. relations hostage and pushing our two countries to the brink of a ‘new Cold War,’” Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi said Sunday during a news conference.  “This dangerous attempt to turn back the wheel of history will undo the fruits of decades-long China-US cooperation, dampen America’s own development prospects, and put world stability and prosperity in jeopardy. People with wisdom and foresight on both sides must step forward to stop it,” the foreign minister continued. The Trump administration has blamed China for the global spread of the coronavirus, accusing the communist country of withholding vital information and of failing to control the spread beyond its borders in the early days of the outbreak. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo last month doubled down on his previous criticism of Beijing’s response, saying the U.S. “strongly believed” China flouted World Health Organization rules by neglecting to report on the outbreak in a “timely fashion,” and did not report on the community spread of the virus “for a month until it was in every province inside of China.”  Even after the Chinese Communist Party eventually reported the outbreak to the WHO, China did not share all the information it had on the virus, Pompeo said, but instead covered up the danger the disease posed, censored those who tried to warn the rest of the world, and halted the testing of new samples while destroying existing samples.  The U.S. intelligence community concluded in a classified report last month that China deliberately provided incomplete public numbers for coronavirus cases and deaths resulting from the infection. China meanwhile has claimed it is a “victim” of disinformation surrounding the pandemic and accusing the U.S. of “hiding something.” The U.S. signed a phase one trade deal with China in January. Continuing trade negotiations have been threatened as the two countries trade barbs over the pandemic.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				t is not necessary to agree with all of President Donald Trump’s foreign policies in order to agree with one of his foreign policies. His approach to China is a case in point. Since it emerged late last year, the coronavirus has brought into sharp focus the outlines of the international system and amplified long-standing tensions between Washington and Beijing. Many of Trump’s critics have identified him as part of the problem, arguing that an “America first” foreign policy — which was written into the official National Security Strategy that his administration published in 2017 — at best undermines international cooperation in the fight against the coronavirus and at worse obstructs it. A divided West, the argument goes, is ceding global leadership to China.  Yet the pandemic has highlighted something that Trump’s National Security Strategy identified three years ago. Instead of becoming a “responsible stakeholder” in the international system — a term coined by Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick in 2005 to describe the role that the Bush administration hoped China would play following its 2001 entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) — China has instead “expanded its power at the expense of others.” This is a point emphasized in the Trump administration’s report on “United States Strategic Approach to the People’s Republic of China,” published last week. The report argues that the Chinese Communist Party has “exploited” the advantages of WTO membership to advance a Marxist–Leninist political and economic system that is fundamentally at odds with the United States’s — and the West’s — free and open society. The wealth it has generated permits a full-spectrum approach to foreign policy that combines economic coercion, military saber-rattling, a mammoth state-sponsored media empire, and cohorts of witting and unwitting accomplices. The CCP has also plowed huge amounts of money into controlling global trade routes and stolen intellectual property on a massive scale.  All of this is undertaken to achieve Xi Jinping’s goal for China: to make it the world’s most powerful country by 2049. And there has already been some progress toward this. China has the world’s second-largest economy, a military-industrial complex and high-technology sector second only to those of the U.S., and the world’s largest population. Despite embracing capitalism to facilitate China’s rise, the CCP believes that it is engaged in an existential ideological–political battle with the West and that Communism will — and must — win out.  
 If the COVID-19 crisis has proved that Trump’s approach to China is the correct one, it has also proved that his emphasis on protecting U.S. sovereignty is — in part — correct. The process of hyperglobalization that has taken place since the end of the Cold War has not occurred in a geopolitical vacuum. China’s emergence a decade ago as the world’s largest manufacturer came at the expense of domestic industries in the U.S. and across the West, which have been hollowed out.  Its emergence has also not occurred on a level playing field. A 2019 report by the Mercator Institute for China Studies, a German think tank, and Rhodium Group, an independent research group, describes how Beijing’s financing practices have distorted global competition, claiming that China’s system of cheap credit allows “foreign takeovers, with relative disregard for commercial risks, allowing them to offer premiums for foreign assets if necessary.” As a result, the U.S. is now dependent on its main ideological competitor in ways that were simply unimaginable during the Cold War, when economic connections between the U.S. and the Soviet Union were limited. As a report by the Henry Jackson Society, the British think tank where I work, notes, the U.S. is strategically dependent on China for 424 categories of goods, including 114 that relate to critical infrastructure. This includes a host of metals, including manganese and tungsten; goods used in industrial processes, such as gantry chain and shipping containers; and other goods such as lithium-ion batteries.   The pandemic has made clear that the supply of goods from China is vulnerable to interruption, whether by mistake or design. China made more than 40 percent of the world’s surgical masks, gloves, goggles, visors, and medical equipment before the pandemic began, and it has vastly expanded production since. But throughout late March and early April, it claimed much of the production for itself. New export restrictions introduced by the CCP last month led to significant shortages of equipment in the West. When some of it finally arrived, it was useless. The U.S. is dependent on China for key ingredients of some drugs, including antibiotics that treat a range of bacterial infections, and other pharmaceuticals and medical supplies. This includes vitamin C, which also serves as a key food preservative. China controls over 62 percent of the world’s market for vitamin C, and almost three-quarters of the U.S. supply comes from China. As Rosemary Gibson, author of China Rx: Exposing the Risks of America’s Dependence on China for Medicine, has argued, China has had a clear strategy to control the supply and price of health-related commodities in the U.S. since at least the early 2000s, and successive administrations did little to address this.   This episode reveals a central fact about the West’s relationship with China. For decades, many in Western capitals turned a blind eye to Beijing’s behavior. The occupation of Tibet was overlooked; so too was the cultural genocide of the Uighurs and the slow crackdown in Hong Kong. When China picked on other Western countries, the U.S. did nothing. President Barack Obama may have criticized China before the G-20 for its currency manipulation, but he shied away from confrontation in the South China Sea. The greater danger, according to the conventional wisdom, was of overreacting rather than appeasing. President Trump has overturned this thinking — although his critics argue that he has remained quiet about human-rights abuses. Since taking office, he has made clear that he intends to pursue a policy of what the political scientist Andrew Michta calls “decoupling” the U.S. from China. He has reduced U.S. imports through higher tariffs, introduced more restrictive screening of Chinese investment in critical sectors, and expanded controls on exports to China of potentially sensitive technologies. Late last year, U.S. officials began discussing a plan to rebuild key supply chains that depend on China into a “global trusted network” that circumvents them.  U.S. allies are now following suit. Last month, Japan announced that it was devoting more than $2.2 billion of its coronavirus stimulus package to help companies move production out of China. Australia, Canada, the U.K., and other countries are also looking at ways to diversify their export markets and supply chains away from China. The experience of COVID-19 demonstrates that the U.S., as well as the West as a whole, cannot afford to depend on an authoritarian rival state for strategically important goods. On this front, however, President Trump still has work to do. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				f a regulation isn’t needed during a crisis, it was probably never needed at all. To his credit, President Trump signed an executive order on May 19 to encourage federal regulatory agencies to remove regulations hindering the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Federal, state, and local officials have already removed more than 500 regulations from the books in recent weeks. The Food and Drug Administration lifted restrictions on telemedicine, enabling millions of people to check in with their doctors without risking virus exposure, for example. The FDA has also promised drastically accelerated approval for coronavirus treatments as scientists develop them. And local authorities across the country waived permitting requirements for restaurants to offer delivery to customers who were unable to dine in. Now is the time to continue that process and speed it up. There has been plenty of talk about how the pandemic demonstrates the need for more government, but the advantages that can come from regulatory relaxation suggest that, on the contrary, it has made the case for rather less.  As it is, Washington’s response to the COVID-19 crisis so far has fallen short. Hasty “flash policy” has sprinted through Congress with little debate, costing trillions of dollars and likely with limited economic impact. The new executive order’s proposed actions on regulation send a positive signal at a time when it is desperately needed.  Politicians do not make medical supplies. Entrepreneurs, businesses, and workers do — when they can get the right permits. Politicians will not lead an economic recovery, either. Washington can best help by getting out of the way — though doing so will take considerable effort. Waiving regulations can take months or even years, even when they are clearly harmful. Trump’s new executive order is a start. It encourages agencies to use whatever emergency powers they have to speed along the cleanup process. Unfortunately, many drastic regulations are passed during emergencies, from unconstitutional national-security and surveillance policies to bailouts for favored big businesses. But fortunately, regulations can also be removed that way. We have a choice. The famous “ratchet effect” of government’s grabbing power during a crisis and keeping it afterward does not have to be an iron law. The executive order directs agencies to use discretion in enforcing rules they keep and to “decline enforcement against persons and entities that have attempted in reasonable good faith to comply.” It also directs agencies to issue rulings and clarifications in a timely matter where possible. This would be a welcome change. People have more important things to worry about during a pandemic than filling out forms in triplicate.   So far, most waived regulations are only being temporarily suspended. The executive order encourages agencies to look at making the suspensions permanent. The coming economic and health recovery could take years, and a longer-term approach to regulatory easements could save a lot of livelihoods and eliminate surprise policies. 
 There is a lot more to do. Executive orders can be easily undone by the next president, but legislation has more staying power. Congress and the president should jointly enact automatic expiration dates for new regulations to prevent them from gumming up the economy as they become obsolete. Existing regulations should be reviewed by a standing independent committee, modeled on the 1990s Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) commission, which saved billions of dollars by closing military bases no longer needed after the Cold War ended. A regulatory BRAC-style commission would send Congress annual omnibus packages of harmful and obsolete rules to get rid of, giving fresh economic boosts every year. President Trump and Congress also need to contain their own regulatory impulses, especially where the technology sector is concerned. We are fortunate that net-neutrality regulations were removed a few years ago, or else people in lockdown would have the same slow, throttled Internet speeds that Europeans are dealing with now. The new bipartisan anti-tech push on antitrust and media-content regulation would significantly harm economic recovery in the name of scoring political points.   Tariffs and buy-American requirements make medical supplies and other goods scarce and expensive, while harming agriculture, manufacturing, housing, and other essential industries. In public policy, the rule of thumb is that if you want less of something, you tax it. A tariff, after all, is a tax. Tariffs have been eased on some medical supplies from China since the spread of COVID-19. While there is now clearly pressure for a tougher trade regime with China for both strategic reasons and “to bring industry home,” we must consider the costs to Americans that would involve. Meanwhile, other policies, such as automatic FDA approval of treatments already approved by trusted foreign allies, could strengthen America’s response to the pandemic and, by lowering costs, help the economy. This principle, called mutual recognition, would not only speed up access to treatment for COVID patients, but would also deliver a diplomatic advantage. If the administration is intent on fighting an economic war with China, the U.S. will need allies. In its earliest days, the Trump administration withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Its current threats to leave the World Trade Organization would create a power vacuum that China would be delighted to fill. Gestures such as mutual recognition of coronavirus treatments would help put that process into reverse.     Trump’s executive order is welcome, but it is just a beginning. The coronavirus outbreak is far from over, and the economic recovery will likely take years. There is much more to do, but at least agencies now have some framework for getting rid of regulations that were likely never needed in the first place. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					A
				s the COVID-19 crisis has unfolded, it has opened our eyes to China’s rapidly expanding role in the international order and global economy. Beijing’s outsize role in the World Health Organization has come under attack, as has the muscular diplomacy used by China’s foreign ministry in responding to criticism. Three decades of American global hegemony after the Cold War led to complacency about the growing role of China. But changes to the U.S. National Defense Strategy in 2018 signaled a new willingness to confront China and Russia, shifting the focus from the Global War on Terror. China’s current role has historic parallels that may be closer to home than is often realized. At the start of the 20th century, the United States had emerged from a civil war and a period of rapid industrialization to become a global power almost overnight. By 1920, the country was beginning to chart a path similar to China’s today.  Comparing China’s rise in this century to that of the U.S. between 1920 and 1945 can provide us with clues to what’s coming next in international affairs. Today China is on the verge of being able to challenge the U.S. military in the Pacific. President Donald Trump has spoken of a new “super duper” missile that will help Washington keep up with the threat. Like the U.S., China has undergone a transformation from isolationism to a role of central involvement in international affairs. As Max Edling has written, America was a kind of “Hercules in the cradle” in the 19th century. During the era of the Monroe Doctrine, Washington sought to project power only in the Americas; by the late 19th century, the U.S. naval strategist Alfred Thayer Mahan was prophesying that the U.S. would become an international sea power. As a sign of American power, Teddy Roosevelt, known for his aphorism “speak softly and carry a big stick,” sent a fleet of battleships around the world in 1907. Similarly, as China grew more powerful in the 1990s, Deng Xiaoping’s motto was “hide your strength, bide time.” Last year, China showcased its massive new strength in a military parade brimming with stealth drones, missiles, and other technologies.  China is pursuing its Belt and Road Initiative to connect itself through Central Asia and the Middle East to Europe and increase its role in Africa. It has run up against some Western resistance, including concerns over Huawei’s 5G technology. This desire to use trade as a marker of power looks a lot like a darker version of Woodrow Wilson’s push for free trade and “making the world safe for democracy.” China’s model is to work with Russia and other authoritarian powers to build a multipolar world, thus reducing the U.S. role.  
 Salvador Dalí’s 1943 painting Geopoliticus Child Watching the Birth of the New Man shows a man being born by emerging from the North American continent on an egg-like world, as a child clinging to an adult figure watches apprehensively or excitedly. Painted during World War II, while the artist was living in America, the work evokes a sense of anxiety over what role the U.S. would take on in the postwar world. Today, as the world is confronted with the rise of a more assertive China, as in its threat to boycott Australia over criticism of its management of the coronavirus outbreak, Dalí’s painting has a new resonance — what are we watching emerge in Asia? China has been biding its time, but it has now become evident that its push for an expanded international role is barreling forward. Its imposition of a security law on Hong Kong last week, as the COVID-19 crisis continued, illustrated that the status quo is changing.  The pandemic looks set to accelerate China’s changing role. Much as the U.S. came to dominate the world relatively quickly, becoming one of the world’s two superpowers in the aftermath of the Great Depression and the devastation of world war, economic upheaval today could enhance China’s position. The pandemic may set in motion a series of events, over a much briefer period than U.S. strategists are prepared for, that ends with China atop the world order. If the U.S. or its allies are serious about preserving the liberal world order, they need to move quickly. Otherwise we may see in the next quarter century the rapid changes that took place 100 years ago, only this time they won’t end with U.S. dominance: They will end with China, along with Russia and Iran, in the driver’s seat. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he acting administrator of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) has written to the United Nations, asking the organization to remove “reproductive health” and support for abortion from its humanitarian plan responding to the COVID-19 global pandemic. “The delivery of essential health care is the first priority around the globe during this time. In addition, severe food shortages could represent a second, deadly impact of the pandemic in many countries,” acting administrator John Barsa wrote, noting that the U.N. “must remain focused on addressing the most urgent, concrete needs that are arising out of the pandemic.”  “Therefore, the U.N. should not use this crisis as an opportunity to advance access to abortion as an ‘essential service,’” Barsa added. “Unfortunately, the Global HRP [Humanitarian Response Plan] does just this, by cynically placing the provision of ‘sexual and reproductive health services’ on the same level of importance as food-insecurity, essential health care, malnutrition, shelter, and sanitation.” Barsa points out that the U.N.’s plan explicitly calls for the increased distribution of “abortion-inducing drugs and abortion supplies,” as well as for individual countries to promote elective abortion as part of the response to COVID-19 outbreaks. The letter echoes the theme of President Donald Trump’s remarks at the U.N. General Assembly last fall, where he emphasized that his administration aims to disentangle the U.S. from promoting abortion overseas, which the U.N. does routinely. “We are aware that many United Nations projects have attempted to assert a global right to taxpayer-funded abortion on demand, right up until the moment of delivery,” Trump said. “Global bureaucrats have absolutely no business attacking the sovereignty of nations that wish to protect innocent life.”   Barsa’s letter is also in line with a joint statement that the U.S. presented at last year’s General Assembly on behalf of itself and 18 other member countries, insisting that there exists no “international right” to abortion and asking the U.N. to cease using euphemistic terms such as “sexual and reproductive health and rights” in its official documents and proposals. 
 “There is no international right to an abortion,” Alex Azar, Secretary of Health and Human Services, said in remarks at the assembly, “and these terms should not be used to promote pro-abortion policies and measures.” Azar said that these ambiguous terms allow for misinterpretation in the implementation of policy, which lends the U.N.’s imprimatur to expansions of abortion on demand. Azar also acknowledged in his speech “the sovereign right of nations to implement health policies,” pointing out that the U.N.’s insistence on promoting abortion is in conflict with the pro-life practices of many nations. Barsa’s letter makes a similar point: “Indeed, the U.N. should not intimidate or coerce member states that are committed to the right to life. To use the COVID-19 pandemic as a justification to pressure governments to change their laws is an affront to the autonomy of each society to determine its own national policies on health care.”  In just one example of this problem, pro-life groups in Ecuador have recently orchestrated protests because the U.N. humanitarian-response plan conflicts with the country’s abortion policy. Abortion is illegal in Ecuador, except in cases where a woman’s life is at risk, but because the U.N. plan requires countries to implement a program training health-care personnel to promote “access to contraception including emergency contraception, safe legal abortion and post-abortion care,” pro-lifers fear that the country will be forced either to adopt these policies or to forgo U.N. aid.  “To achieve global unity . . . it is essential that the UN’s response to the pandemic avoid creating controversy,” Barsa’s letter continues. “Therefore, I ask that you remove references to ‘sexual and reproductive health,’ and its derivatives from the Global HRP, and drop the provision of abortion as an essential component of the UN’s priorities to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic . . . [which is] among the most polarizing issues raised in UN negotiations.”  Though some news outlets have covered this letter as if Barsa’s request is merely an effort to “avoid creating controversy,” the aim of his missive and of the Trump administration more broadly is obvious and understandable. Abortion is perhaps the most highly debated issue both in the U.S. and when it comes to global aid, and it would be a mistake for the U.N. to continue imposing its progressive view of the question on countries that insist on protecting unborn human life. 

‘We want God.” Do you remember when Pope John Paul II went back to his native Poland, about eight months into his pontificate? The Communist officials couldn’t not let him in — he was too beloved. But when they did, they didn’t stand a chance. And, as Pulitzer Prize winner Peggy Noonan, author of John Paul the Great: Remember a Spiritual Father, has written, from the moment he arrived there, “the boundaries of the world began to shift.”  Despite the government’s attempts to keep Poles from getting too emotionally invested in the visit, the people lined the streets to see him. During his first Mass there, in Victory Square, the crowd thundered the declaration that “we want God,” stopping a powerful homily with a cry from the human heart so deep and insistent — and resilient — that the coming victory over the evil of Communism was beginning to be seen, in the victory of Christ over death. It was the vigil of Pentecost, when the Apostles were given the Holy Spirit to set fire to the world. And the Poles were ready, too. Their Polish pope was a sign like no other that freedom was coming, that God was not leaving them orphaned in their suffering. In his sermon, Pope John Paul II said: “Christ cannot be kept out of the history of man in any part of the globe, at any longitude or latitude of geography. The exclusion of Christ from the history of man is an act against man. . . . The history of the nation is above all the history of people. And the history of each person unfolds in Jesus Christ. In him it becomes the history of salvation.”  He went on to say: “It is right to understand the history of the nation through man, each human being of this nation. At the same time man cannot be understood apart from this community that is constituted by the nation. Of course, it is not the only community, but it is a special community, perhaps that most intimately linked with the family, the most important for the spiritual history of man.”  
 He was talking about Poland, but he could have been talking about us, today.  On Ascension Thursday in New York, Cardinal Timothy Dolan announced plans for getting the Church back opened, making clear to anyone in doubt that the Church is essential. That needed to be said. For months now, supermarkets and liquor stores have been opened, but many church doors have been locked. Not all of them, but none of them have had regularly scheduled public Masses. In Poland, as I understand it, they didn’t close churches or cancel Masses, but they had more Mass so people could continue to pray the greatest prayer in person, be full participants, and still follow the universal social-distance guidelines. They know what they want.  Do we know what we want? Do we know what is most important to us? It takes a time of loss sometimes to help us realize. Cardinal Dolan and other priests will tell you that they have been hearing from people how deeply they long to be present at Mass again, to receive the Eucharist, to go to confession. They miss the sacramental life of the Church. I confess I don’t even know who I am without it. Of course, during this time, there have been myriad opportunities to connect with the Mass virtually. But that isn’t the same. It isn’t the same, of course, because of the community aspect of gathering for Mass as the Body of Christ. But there also is the fact of what Catholics believe: in the Real Presence of Jesus in the Eucharist. Now, over recent years, we’ve learned from Pew and elsewhere what was probably obvious to anyone who has been in a Catholic church in recent decades or knows fallen-away Catholics: Many don’t get the doctrine. Whether they never learned it or they chose to reject it, some don’t believe in the Real Presence. Of course, if you do believe it, you would walk over hot coals, or broken glass, as they say . . . Will the reemergence of the Church from quarantine change something? Over the past weeks and months, there has been a clamor for the sacraments. An open letter to bishops pled early for some creativity so that an “Easter people” could celebrate the season properly, albeit prudently. It was one of many 2020 U.S. versions of “We want God.” For sacramental encounter with Him is essential for loving as we ought.  These days have left people on edge, needless to say. Can the gradual reopenings of churches — most slow, perhaps, in the Northeast — lead us to a spiritual reawakening? This month marks the 100th anniversary of the birth of Pope John Paul II. Can the courage of his people who suffered the tyranny of Communist atheism be an inspiration? To courage? To a new Pentecost? To loving people out of loneliness and anxiety?  We want God, don’t we? Let’s get back to churches, to come to know Him better in His sacrament of mercy, especially, and show Him to people who need Him. This column is based on one available through Andrews McMeel Universal’s Newspaper Enterprise Association. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					S
				ince the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, former U.S. ambassador to China Max Baucus has given a series of interviews to Chinese state media outlets in which he criticized the American response to the crisis in a rather provocative manner. Notably, he cast the Trump administration’s insistence on assigning blame to Beijing for the coronavirus pandemic as the rhetorical equivalent of Nazism in the 1930s and the “Red Scare” of the 1950s.  Baucus, a Democrat who also served as a U.S. senator from Montana from 1978 to 2014, first compared Trump’s attacks on Beijing to the rhetoric used by Joseph McCarthy and Adolf Hitler in a May 6 appearance on CNN. Subsequently, he became very popular with Beijing’s propagandists and has since repeated the accusation in at least four interviews with Chinese state media. “Joe McCarthy [and] Adolf Hitler were making statements based on nationalism . . . riling people up, making people believe things that were really not true,” Baucus told the state mouthpiece Chinese Global Television Network on May 12, initially reported by the Washington Free Beacon. “The White House and some in Congress are making statements against China that are so over the top and so hypercritical, they are based not on the fact, or if they are based on fact, sheer demagoguery, and that’s what McCarthy did in the 1950s.” The U.S. is entering “a kind of an era which is similar to Joe McCarthy” and “a little bit like Hitler in the ’30s,” Baucus told China’s state run Global Times from his home in Montana a few days earlier. “Today, people kind of like to see China get criticized, which is unfortunate, because I think, basically, the American people like the Chinese people, just like Chinese people . . . like American people.”  The media appearances raise the question of why an American citizen with a long and distinguished career in government has gotten cozy with Chinese propagandists. An answer is hinted at in a 2013 comment by Russ Sullivan, a former Democratic staff director for the Senate Finance Committee that Baucus chaired, who at that time told the Wall Street Journal that the senator held a kind of fascination with the country.  
 “There were times when I said, Senator, I know you love China, but we need to allocate appropriate time vis-à-vis the time you spend on China and trade issues versus what you spend on [other issues],” Sullivan said, adding that Baucus did not heed his advice. Sullivan said that Baucus’s interest in China was noted in other quarters: “If you were in the multinational business community interested in China, you knew Max Baucus was going over there.” In the wake of his long political career, Baucus has parlayed his familiarity with China into number of lucrative business roles. According to Baucus’s biography on the website of the University of Montana’s Max Baucus Institute, the former senator sat on the Board of Advisers to Alibaba Group until May 2019. He currently runs a consulting firm, Baucus Group LLC, which advises American and Chinese businesses. (The firm does not appear to have a website or readily available contact information.) The former ambassador also currently sits on the Board of Directors of Ingram Micro, an information technology company based in Irvine, Calif., that in 2016 was acquired by Chinese conglomerate HNA Group. Amid financial woes in 2018, HNA director and founder Chen Feng said the company would “consciously safeguard the Communist Party’s central authority with General Secretary Xi Jinping as the core” and “unswervingly follow the party.” The conglomerate has been completely taken over by the Chinese government during the coronavirus pandemic.  Baucus has managed to keep one foot in government: until July 2019, he served on the External Advisory Board to the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency.   Baucus’s sympathy for Beijing surfaced often during his political career. In the mid 1990s, he was among the leading Democratic supporters of increased trade with China, and he advocated delinking the issues of human rights and trade in American policy on China. At the time, the U.S. gave most-favored-nation (MFN) trading status to China, meaning it considered China one of its top trading partners, but Washington annually threatened to revoke the designation because of the Chinese government’s human-rights abuses. Baucus argued that revoking MFN status for China would be counterproductive, because tariffs on Chinese goods would immediately rise and trade with the country would be curtailed. “Perhaps even more troubling are the implications of revoking M.F.N. for reform in China,” Baucus told the New York Times in January 1994. “Nothing can set freedom back farther than revoking M.F.N.” The Montana senator argued for targeted pressure on specific high-profile contracts and businesses to push China toward human-rights reforms, instead of threatening to change the status of the U.S.–China economic relationship.  Baucus continued to push for delinking the issues of human rights and trade, a position that was increasingly espoused by U.S. government officials. In 2000, then-president Bill Clinton hailed passage of a bill in the House to normalize trade relations with China. “Our administration has negotiated an agreement which will open China’s markets to American products made on American soil,” Clinton said at the time. “By this agreement, we will also export more of one of our most cherished values, economic freedom.”  Baucus helped facilitate China’s introduction into the World Trade Organization, which was finalized on December 11, 2001. At a hearing of the Senate Finance Committee on June 6, 2002, Baucus expressed hope, tempered with some skepticism, that China’s entrance into the WTO would spur “greater opportunities” for U.S. businesses as well as the reform of governance inside China. “[One] reason WTO accession is so important to the United States involves the potential broader impact of the reforms China must undergo,” Baucus wrote in his opening statement. Reforms implemented to bring China into compliance with WTO regulations “should contribute to the development of a more open, market-oriented society in which not only are the people bound by the laws and regulations, but so will be the government.” In late 2013, President Obama nominated Baucus to the post of U.S. ambassador to China. This was after Baucus had strongly criticized the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, of which the Montana senator was the “chief architect,” according to his Chamber of Commerce biography; there was speculation at the time that the appointment was made partly to stymie the senator’s criticisms.  During his confirmation hearing in January 2014, Baucus told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, “I’m no real expert on China.” Eventually confirmed as ambassador despite his stated lack of expertise, Baucus took up the post at a sensitive moment in U.S.–China relations. Human-rights lawyer Chen Guangcheng, who had attempted to prosecute state officials for implementing a policy of forced abortions, escaped house arrest by fleeing to the U.S. Embassy in 2012, and was eventually granted asylum in the U.S. along with his family. Baucus continued to highlight human-rights concerns during his tenure as ambassador. Speaking of his time as ambassador in early 2017 after President Trump replaced him, Baucus called Trump’s decision to speak with Taiwanese president Tsai Ing-wen, and willingness to publicly question the One-China policy, “a major blunder, huge mistake.” (China views Taiwan as an inseparable part of its territory, while Taiwan guards its status as an independent nation.) Trump “has forgotten diplomacy is a lot more complicated than that,” Baucus told the Washington Post. “He’s forgotten Taiwan and one-China is nonnegotiable. . . . Tibet is not negotiable to China. But we have to ask ourselves: ‘What are our bottom lines?’” The former ambassador also offered criticism of the Obama administration for being “weak” and lacking strategic vision with respect to China, warning that the “authoritarian” country was “going to test us.” These statements reveal an underlying tension in Baucus’s comprehension of U.S.–China relations. On one hand, the ambassador was not ignorant of China’s human-rights abuses and believed that the Obama administration did not condemn them strongly enough. On the other, Baucus accepted as “nonnegotiable” policies that to this day underpin China’s authoritarian nature (on “One China” and Tibet). He called for more pressure on China but consistently sought to keep the overall U.S.–China trade relationship intact. Thus, Baucus implicitly rejected using one of the strongest sources of leverage available to the U.S. It was the Trump administration that rebelled against the premises of the U.S.–China trade relationship. By 2018, the U.S. was running a $378.6 billion trade deficit with China, and in 2019 both countries began imposing extensive tariffs on imports from the other in an escalating trade war. In the middle of these developments, Baucus opined that the Chinese could become even stronger than the U.S. “The Chinese are so tough, they can withstand more pain, in my judgement, than can Americans,” Baucus told CNBC’s Squawk Box. “The Chinese respect strength more than any other people. . . . I think they can smell weakness better than any other people.”  The U.S. is currently grappling with the fallout of the two-decade outsourcing of business and manufacturing to China. It is undeniable that these policies have resulted in an economic windfall for certain American businesses. However, the idea that the introduction of American business practices would simultaneously “export” American values to China has been dashed. As the National Basketball Association discovered in fall 2019, when you play in China, you play by Chinese rules. With the spread of the coronavirus pandemic, American voter sentiment has turned sharply against China. Both Republicans and Democrats have questioned why supply chains of essential goods, especially medical equipment needed to fight the coronavirus, remain anchored in China. Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.), who has established himself as one of the foremost skeptics of the global-trade regime’s status quo, has even called to disband the World Trade Organization that Baucus and countless U.S. officials helped China to join. In light of these developments, it is possible that Max Baucus believes that he can play a role in diffusing U.S.–China tensions. But if so, comparing Trump to Hitler, or to McCarthy, is an odd way of going about it: Baucus is feeding Chinese state propaganda outlets exactly what they want to hear. The former ambassador did not respond to National Review’s request for comment. Editor’s Note: A previous version of this article stated that Max Baucus currently sits on both the Board of Advisors to Alibaba and the External Advisory Board of the CIA. After publication, the former ambassador’s biography was updated to state that Baucus ended his tenure with Alibaba in May 2019 and with the external board of the CIA in July 2019. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				’m irritated. I’m an art critic with an unorthodox point of view, so that’s not surprising. And my husband, who knows me best, would agree that my capacity to irritate ranks with the sun’s to warm. One much-adored friend, who’s known me for 30 years, said I was smug in my COVID-19 coverage. Another said I was too political. Why am I writing so much about it, anyway?  Well, it’s the biggest story of the year, and if there’s an angle, I’ll write about it. It’s certainly the biggest art story of the year. A toxic trio of government, press, and public-health bureaucrats — incompetent on nearly every level — fused its few remaining strands of skill and cunning to nuke the art world. Every museum and theater in the country is closed. Art finances are in the ICU, which Mr. Deficit, if he were in Vermont, would share with exactly zero COVID-19 patients. Smug? Well, Since it’s Memorial Day weekend, I’ll tell you that I’ve selected my tombstone and epitaph — yes, I’m concerned about afterlife aesthetics and, yes, I plan ahead, and, yes, though I know my risk of dying from COVID-19 are the same as getting hit by a farm tractor falling from the sky, die I will, someday, somehow. Unlike the nuts who want a guarantee of safety, everywhere, anytime, I know that humanity exists on the edge of a cliff, always, and I have a sane attitude toward risk. I said “sane.” I’ll pass on skydiving lessons, which, by the way, are banned in Vermont. “Might spread the virus,” our masters would say. Those damn droplets, they’re like bombs in the Blitz.  Back to my demise. My tombstone is Danby Imperial marble, Vermont stone from the country’s marble capital, as fine as Carrara marble. It reads: He Knew He Was Right. I’ll leave the asterisk “on most things, most of the time” unwritten. I’m not beyond spoofing myself. One tries to beguile in life and ought at least take a stab at it after death. Eternity is a long time to be a boring line of statistics. I hope those who don’t think, “Boy, he must have been a pain in the ass” will say, “Well, he must have had a very strong personality.”   Find me an art critic who isn’t smug. St. Francis of Assisi would have made a terrible art critic. Saints are too nice, and too often either saving the world or feeding the birds. It’s hard to see an economic, social, and psychological disaster unfold and not, as a good citizen, feel alarmed, if not sickened. As a journalist, which is what I am, it’s a fascinating story, and alarming as well as sickening. How every sector of the visual-arts world has faced the government’s response to the Chinese coronavirus is a topic for commentary. But this soup of panic, quackery, conformity, and aggrandizement that we’re being force-fed is moving or at least tinting the reaction of the visual-arts world. 
 I think it’s important for people in the arts who are writing criticism to remind whoever among our masters thinks about the arts that “this is the mess you bozos created.” It bears repeating, especially since those masters rarely think about how much the arts enrich their cities and our country. The frightened politicians, lazy reporters, and public-health ciphers who’ve trashed our economy to fight a poor excuse for a plague have visited a weird, unrivaled fiscal-and-fear plague upon the arts. As one of the handful of art critics writing for conservative journals, I have an unusual platform. Given a platform to express my views, I’ll use it. I have many strong opinions after 30 years in the arts, a good and long career. That said, I don’t really need anything from anyone, and, especially given my pointed criticism, nobody is going to do anything for me. That explains my approach. I read three pieces about Chinese-coronavirus fallout today. Digging through last week’s U.S. Labor Department jobs report, the good people at Nate Silver’s FiveThirtyEight outfit found that employment in museums, historical societies, and house museums dropped 26 percent in two months. It’s a raw number and mostly reflects layoffs at the low end of the museum pay scale: visitor-services people. As the financial impact of the COVID-19 shutdowns oozes into the entire museum organism, the curatorial, fundraising, marketing, museum education, and the new diversity HR mafia will all feel the pain. The budget and job cuts at MoMA I reported last week were broad and deep. That’s the future.    One feature in the Labor Department report surprised me at first but seemed right after I thought about it. It’s worth noting, as a talking point for arts people dealing with a boisterous, intrusive, power-drunk government as it tries making our economy and prosperity a punching bag: The report pegs employment in the museum sector nationwide at only about 200,000 people. It’s a tiny number in a U.S. workforce of about 165 million. I’d dicker with it, in that it doesn’t count the college-museum contingent, counted among higher-education employment. Still, it’s a small band sitting on our vast visual-arts heritage and hundreds of billions of dollars in assets. These 200,000 or so people do important, irreplaceable work. In another survey, the venerable Art Dealers Association of America, whose fairs I cover, estimated second-quarter art sales in purchase prices would drop 73 percent. This sounds reasonable to me. My dealer friends tell me business is moribund. Again, in another surprise, the drop in sales in the first quarter was 31 percent. We were already in an art-market recession.  A third bit of news involved the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which announced that it won’t reopen until mid-August at the earliest. As I’ve said many times, the Met is as big and complicated as a university. Moreover, its timetable is governed in part by the state and local governments. I’ve suggested that the Met open its permanent collection as soon as health officials allow. This summer’s tourism in New York will, I suspect, be quaint in numbers. The Met can manage the traffic and, as the country’s museum titan, it needs to be seen as welcoming the public. If it drags its feet through the entire summer, I hope other New York museums don’t follow its bad example. I believe that the Met might have maneuvered itself into an odd spot. Like a fancy New York restaurant or the Queen Mary 2, it loses money unless it’s full. That’s an entirely unforeseen and ironic consequence of its two-year-old policy of charging a hefty $25-per-head admissions fee on tourists to balance its budget.  The longer museums stay shut, the less defensible it is to pay anything more than a bare-bones staff. Keeping a full complement of curators and administrators on the Met payroll for the past two months, for instance, was generous, and I suppose many of them had work to do. The press office, I know, has been as unfailingly responsive as always. At some point, though, keeping a staff as big as the Met’s on a full-time salary will seem an unwise use of a charity’s money. I’d say that about any museum. I was a curator for years, and I can’t imagine working from home, without a library, files, or my collection at hand, on a serious full-time basis for more than a couple of weeks. At some point after that, the trustees should start to squirm, some among them arguing that spending money to pay people who are mostly doing nothing is negligence. The responsible way to shepherd a museum’s assets under these circumstances is to furlough a broad portion of the staff, which is why the unemployment-compensation system exists. The Met’s leaders might argue that the staff will return to work earlier in the summer, but if the place can open for the staff, it needs to open for the public. These are only some of the ugly consequences of the COVID-19 lockdown fiasco. I find it appalling as a citizen and journalist that so little thought went into weighing the costs of crashing the economy and quarantining hundreds of millions of healthy people, something never done before in human history. Arts people, as a rule, get news from the New York Times, Rachel Maddow, CNN, and Vox — we all know the ilk — so, as a rule, they’re blinkered. I hope in writing about COVID-19 to offer some nuggets contrary to the received wisdom. Arts venues, especially theaters, are going to be asked to make lots of changes, many, I suppose, giving their viability a fatal beating. Theaters of all kinds, for instance, engage audiences. That’s the financial, aesthetic, and pedagogical model from the days of Homer. All arts organization should question the apocalypse crap and push back mighty hard. Who, for instance, died and left precisely six feet the supreme flower of socially acceptable distance? Now’s not the time to be supine.  Who knows whether or not coronavirus will raise its ugly head and toss its curls in the fall? It’s with us, and it’s hubristic to assume we’ll have a vaccine when none exists for any other coronavirus. Arts leaders need to get some spine in the event that another lockdown comes down the pike. Challenging authority and convention ought to be a good artist’s expertise. After the Trump election, the arts took pride in their starring role in that new genre, part madcap, part tearjerker: the Resistance. Turns out, they’ll lay in front of a steamroller with nary a peep. I’ve written a few times about the need for museums to reopen, which they are. Another much-loved friend said, “Well, there’s a lot we don’t know about the virus.” There’s a lot we don’t know about almost everything, and we still get up in the morning and get on with our lives. The longer we’re paralyzed with fear and submission, the closer we get to the Stone Age. I’m an art historian, and as a historian, I think we know enough. I see the very good Houston Museum of Fine Arts has already opened, and many others will follow this weekend. It’s the right thing to do, and here I definitely do know that I’m right. Big New York, Boston, Detroit, or Philadelphia museums? Probably not now, in my opinion. Lots of other places, including my three local museums — the Bennington Museum, the Clark, and Mass MoCA? There’s no reason for them to be closed. I feel this way for philosophical as well as practical reasons. My philosophy on the world is old-school, possibly even Victorian. I see museums and libraries as mastheads for a civilized society. That they exist and thrive shows we respect heritage, cherish and promote philanthropy, and see access to culture as a right for all that is not to be compromised. Museums, like libraries and, I would add, schools, should never close their doors, barring a calamity, and in the case of museums, I would say “extraordinary calamity.” Museums are not-for-profits and tax-exempt because they serve the public. They’re not private clubs. On 9/11, I was in charge of the Clark while the director was away, in New York, as it happened. I wouldn’t close the museum as many of my colleagues wanted. Aside from feeling confident that we were safe from the crazies — the Clark was in the country surrounded by woods and a cow pasture — I believed that if one person wanted to look at art on that terrible day, our doors would stay open. This is a sticking point for me because I believe museums have a broadly egalitarian mission to educate and serve the public. It might surprise readers to hear that this is not a universally accepted view among museum people. There are the snobs, to be sure. They think the public is too dense to enjoy a lovely, incisive, challenging cultural scene. They think museums are for connoisseurs and for “people like them.” Then, in the current sad crisis, there’s the “we’ll take our own sweet time” crowd, which is more arrogant and lazy than snobby. They’re the ones who make museums seem as if they operate on biblical time — you know, the “Methuselah lived 969 years and spent 968 in meetings” kind of time. Most curators would be shocked to hear they have a public-service mission. And there’s management that caters to every fear of every neurotic on the staff. Museums can’t stay closed to accommodate any of these people. It’s irresponsible. The key job of museum director now is to reopen. The key job of every trustee is to ask “why not” when faced with navel-gazers. People have been needlessly frightened by politicians and public-health bureaucrats who think we’re too dumb to be moved by anything more subtle than fear, and this terrible governance is bad for society, which, I think, has to get back to normal.  Here, again, I’m unorthodox among art critics. I think about jobs, tax revenue to pay for programs, and whether or not our children have a healthy attitude toward risk. I like risk-takers in the arts. We won’t enjoy cultural vibrancy if the public is a bunch of safe-space blobs. States and cities are already cutting grants to the arts. Art lovers are angry but, duh, where do they think the money comes from? Trash the tax base, we trash programs getting tax money. Trash the economy, we give philanthropy a kick in the butt. After months of Black Death propaganda, and what we’re seeing is a form of atrocity propaganda, people need to be coaxed back to public spaces and communal living. Museums have a responsibility to do their part in advancing the irrefutable fact that Dracula, Freddy Kruger, and Jaws aren’t hiding behind every Giacometti bronze, or every dress rack or hot dog stand, or under every beach blanket, or next to us, in every seat at every concert, play, or lecture. Since I write for National Review, a broadly conservative journal, it’s no surprise that I have a Burkean view of society as an organic whole that’s not atomized. That’s one element of the conservative mind. I’m no Ayn Rand follower. The public places that can open — and museums as marquee civic spaces are the top of the heap — need to reopen in simple solidarity with the millions of people in farming or essential factories, the service sector, and safety, health, and transportation fields who weren’t furloughed and continue to work. They can’t do Zoom work, and they aren’t among the lucky-ducky government employees who are sailing through COVID-19 with minimal unease and unperturbed — or even fattened — paychecks. Hiding under the bed while they labor isn’t right. Beyond philosophy, there are no practical reasons for museums to stay closed. I was a museum director for ten years. The hygiene steps and training needed to reopen aren’t of Moon-landing complexity. At this point, with an economy in shambles and after a reign of terror and recklessness by government, failed models, and a doom-hungry press, public places need to take those steps that are reasonable. They need to communicate what they’re doing. If those among the population who are susceptible to COVID-19 feel that they don’t want risk, given reasonable steps, they can stay home. Museums are fortunate in that they’re the best-suited spaces for a safe, happy cultural experience. Theaters, symphonies, and opera and ballet companies will be hammered by pandemic fears, real and imagined. Museums need to lead the way toward making communal-arts activities enjoyable without terror and without wearing a COVID-19 burka. One last tidbit that isn’t news but a revelation. Last week, I wrote about new guidelines from the art-museum-directors’ association forgiving museums if they tap acquisitions endowments for operating-budget relief or if they sell art to fund not the purchase of new art but “collection care,” which means operating-budget relief. I was shocked, and I don’t shock easily, to hear from curator friends reporting that their museums already divert acquisitions endowment money to general-fund use. They’ve been doing it for years as spending exceeded fundraising. Times have changed since I was a curator. Then, not in the too-dim-past, that was a huge no-no. Director scruples, evidently, have atrophied along with curatorial cojones. Finally, why do I call this awful bug the Chinese coronavirus? Well, it’s from China, isn’t it? If it were from Greenwich, I’d call it the Greenwich grippe. I love the precision of the English language. That’s its debt to German. “Wuhan” would, I suppose, modify the disease more accurately, but English doesn’t accommodate words beginning in “wu.” They’re not naturally easy to pronounce or remember. The only one I can think of quickly is “wussy.” Language-wise, we live in a time of denial and obfuscation. In many fields, this is the case, like saying a “him” is a “them.” Of course, it’s fashionable, too, to call everything racist. There’s an obsession with not “giving offense,” and that’s wussy. “COVID-19” is obscure. Even as a technical term, it’s slang and an abbreviation. Do many people know that it means “coronavirus discovered in 2019?” The word, a new one, doesn’t clarify. It’s too murky. Why would we want to make things murky? What’s brought our economy to its knees is the grossly incompetent management of a new virus coming most likely from a Chinese Communist Party–owned and –operated lab, and our pickle is partly the consequence of CCP lies. Using clear language to underscore this simple fact is useful for the reckoning that needs to occur. “Chinese coronavirus” is both precise and expansive. It tells us who, what, where, and how.  “It is what it is” is a popular slogan, I know, but it’s useful in expressing a salubrious, serene acceptance of things we can’t change. Words help us make sense of the world, and “Chinese coronavirus” is, well, what it is. Enjoy Memorial Day, in numbers fewer than ten. Next week, I’ll write about a good, ongoing show at London’s Victoria & Albert called “Concealed Histories.” It considers the museum’s provenance history program, focusing on the Nazi past of some of the silver, miniatures, and gold boxes in the Gilbert collection. Arthur Gilbert was a genius collector, British but based in Los Angeles, where he made a fortune. His collection is superb, and everyone would say about him as I hope people say about me: “He had a very strong personality.” 

Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer extended the state’s stay at home order on Friday to last until June 12 even as she faces pushback from Republican state lawmakers and some residents over the social distancing restrictions aimed at controlling the spread of the coronavirus. “While the data shows that we are making progress, we are not out of the woods yet,” Whitmer said. “If we’re going to lower the chance of a second wave and continue to protect our neighbors and loved ones from the spread of this virus, we must continue to do our part by staying safer at home.”  “If we open too soon, thousands more could die and our hospitals will get overwhelmed,” the Democratic governor said, adding that, “we ﬁnally have more protective equipment like masks” but the state “can’t run the risk of running low again.” Whitmer also extended Michigan’s state of emergency until June 19. Both orders were set to expire on May 29. The stay at home order will keep certain businesses shuttered including theaters, gyms and casinos. Some bars and restaurants in the northern part of the state were allowed to open Friday at half-capacity.  The Republican-led state legislature sued Whitmer unsuccessfully earlier this month over her extension of Michigan’s state of emergency, arguing that she lacked authority to extend the order without the approval of the state legislature. The Michigan Court of Claims ruled Thursday in Whitmer’s favor. Whitmer acknowledged the urgency of allowing the economy to revive and emphasized that some social distancing restrictions have already been lifted.  “All of us know the importance of getting people back to work and the economy moving again,” she said. “We’ve already loosened some restrictions on construction, manufacturing, landscaping, retail and more. But the worst thing we can do is open up in a way that causes a second wave of infections and death, puts health care workers at further risk, and wipes out all the progress we’ve made.” Whitmer has attracted harsh criticism for her strict coronavirus lockdown polices, which prohibited residents from visiting their second residences and banned the sale of paint, furniture, and garden equipment. The strict policies prompted several demonstrations at the state Capitol by residents protesting the restrictions. Earlier this month, dozens of protesters, some of them armed, went to the Michigan Capitol and stood in the Senate gallery, which is open to the public. Michigan State Police troopers blocked the demonstrators clamoring to enter the House chamber.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A virtual event on Wednesday at 3 N.Y. time with NRI and the Sheen Center for Thought & Culture: A Ride Through the Real Life of Foster Care and Adoption: A Conversation on the new Roadside Attractions Film The Ride. Details here. 1. Words that appear in The Nation: “I would vote for Joe Biden if he boiled babies and ate them.” 2. Investigation: Over 4,300 virus patients were sent to NY nursing homes. I wonder if ⁦@NYGovCuomo⁩ will be asked more questions now?  https://t.co/tK8quJHsag — Janice Dean (@JaniceDean) May 22, 2020  3. Jillian Kay Melchior: China seeks to imprison a Hong Kong newspaperman and bankrupt his tabloid. 4. Religious freedom receives a small boost in Sudan 5. (Minnesota): Archbishop Hebda: Catholics ‘depend on the Eucharist,’ and Masses will resume 6. Abby Johnson: Our Coronavirus Response Is Making Us Lose Our Humanity  7. California doctors say they’ve seen more deaths from suicide than coronavirus since lockdowns 8. Catholic doctor chooses to live with homeless people to protect them from coronavirus 9. After spending months apart due to the coronavirus pandemic, 89-year-old Jean and 91-year-old Walter Willard, who have been married for 70 years, were reunited at their nursing home in Troy, New York. pic.twitter.com/wrdGDEbLjH — CBS This Morning (@CBSThisMorning) May 21, 2020  10.  Chad Pecknold: The Idea of the Catholic School 11. Maureen Ferguson: As COVID-19 Kills Catholic Schools, Dems Play Politics 12. Rachel Anderson & Lyman Stone: A Child-Focused Paid Parental Leave Policy for the U.S. 13. The most surprising thing about being married is how much I feel like myself. I thought I'd have to adjust to a whole new way of being. Instead, I feel more like "me" than I ever have. I suspect that's a good indicator that God has you right where he wants you. #newlywed #blessed — Mary Beth Giltner (née Baker) (@m_b_baker) May 22, 2020  14. The Given Institute has an online event coming up in early June for Catholic women of all ages — details here. It’s called Discover the Gift. 15. Unleashing Fire: An Online Pentecost Retreat PLUS: Next Thursday at 6 p.m. Eastern time: Foster Care: An Essential Call, a virtual event with NRI and the Catholic Information Center. Details here. 
  

Although COVID-19 continues to pose much less risk to children than to adults, reports in March that not a single child had died from the disease were apparently too good to be true. Earlier this month, government officials in New York State became aware of about 100 children who had come down with a serious condition called Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome (MIS-C), likely due to earlier coronavirus infections.  “The condition, called pediatric multisystem inflammatory syndrome, has been reported in about 100 children in New York State, including three who died, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said this week,” the New York Times reported on May 13. “Cases have been reported in other states, including Louisiana, Mississippi and California, and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said it will soon issue an alert asking doctors to report cases of children with symptoms of the syndrome.” In the past ten days, two dozen children with the syndrome were admitted to Children’s National Hospital in Washington, D.C. “On May 13, we had five [cases]. Yesterday, we had 23. Now we have 28,” a spokesperson for Children’s tells National Review. “Most have tested positive for COVID-19 or COVID-19 antibodies, and some tests are pending.” The spokesperson adds that the hospital had seen no children admitted this year for the condition before those initial five cases. The Centers for Disease Control describes MIS-C as follows: Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children (MIS-C) is a condition where different body parts can become inflamed, including the heart, lungs, kidneys, brain, skin, eyes, or gastrointestinal organs. We do not yet know what causes MIS-C. However, we know that many children with MIS-C had the virus that causes COVID-19, or had been around someone with COVID-19. MIS-C can be serious, even deadly, but most children who were diagnosed with this condition have gotten better with medical care. Although the percentage of children who develop the syndrome after a coronavirus infection is likely low, the precise figure remains unknown, because the SARS-CoV-2 virus is so new. “Is it hundreds of thousands or millions of children that have had the virus and we’re seeing, you know, maybe a hundred or 200 of these cases? Or have only thousands of kids had the virus, and we’re seeing hundreds of cases? That would be deeply concerning if the incidence was that high,” former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said on Face the Nation on May 17. “This was first detected by the British [on] April 26. The Italians have reported on a cluster. And then New York City doctors and health officials were the first to report on a cluster here in the United States,” Gottlieb added. “There was a study in Science Magazine about two weeks ago that said that children are probably a third as likely to get infected with coronavirus as adults. So that means that kids are getting infected, but probably at a much lower rate than adults. But they’re still getting infected and if you figure maybe upwards of 20 million people in the U.S. have had the infection at this point — and that’s possible — that means a lot of kids might have had it as well.” 

President Trump on Friday said he would move to define houses of worship as essential services to be opened during the coronavirus pandemic. “I am identifying houses of worship — churches, synagogues and mosques — as essential places that provide essential services,” Trump said at a press briefing. “I call upon governors to allow our churches and places of worship to open right now… If they don’t do it, I will override the governors.”  Trump continued, “Ministers, pastors, rabbis, imams and other faith leaders will make sure that their congregations are safe as they gather and pray….They love their congregations. They love their people. They don’t want anything bad to happen to them or to anybody else.” Trump lacks the authority to override state decisions regarding closures of businesses and institutions since the Constitution delegates police powers to the states. Trump has clashed with governors in the past over the authority to reopen businesses, and received pushback from both Democratic and Republican lawmakers when he argued that he had absolute authority over the status of business closures. At the Friday briefing, Trump said that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention would be “issuing guidance for communities of faith” to reopen religious facilities. In many jurisdictions, certain restrictions on communal worship have already been lifted. New York revised its lockdown policy on Thursday to permit religious services of 10 people or fewer and drive-in services with larger congregations.  The Justice Department has weighed in on cases involving the closure of churches during the pandemic. Judges in Oregon and Kansas have also nixed some of those states’ restrictions on worship, provided that religious institutions adhere to social distancing requirements and other measures to mitigate the spread of coronavirus.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				e are going to be arguing about the COVID-19 lockdowns for a long time. It’s the kind of topic that gives academics and pundits alike lots of variables to play with. They can reach whatever conclusion they want — and they’re bound to take advantage of the situation, because extraordinary claims require extraordinary . . . media coverage.  But as the lockdowns end, I wanted to offer a brief overview of the work that’s already been done, specifically on the question of whether lockdowns reduce the toll of the virus. Of course, this is just one piece of the puzzle, because lockdowns also harm the economy, damage mental health, and sometimes discourage important medical care. It will probably be years before we even begin to put all that together. On the narrow question of whether lockdowns control COVID-19, though, I rounded up everything I was aware of, including findings I very much doubt. And I did my best to dredge up more work with Internet searches, though there is so much of this stuff that the studies cited below cannot possibly be all of it. My own read of the evidence is that government restrictions make a difference — but that voluntary social distancing rooted in fear of the virus does a lot of the work too. Which isn’t that surprising when you think about it, because, at least in democratic countries, it’s very hard to lock down unless the public wants to. By the time U.S. states told everyone to stay home, their restaurant traffic (as measured by OpenTable) had already fallen by more than half.  I know a lot of readers are going to go hunting for studies that support whatever they already think, so I’ve organized the research according to the conclusions it reached, from pro-lockdown to anti-lockdown. It’s the scientific method!  
 Lockdowns Work in the U.S.
“Strong Social Distancing Measures In The United States Reduced The COVID-19 Growth Rate.” This is probably the most spectacular claim on the pro-lockdown side: “Holding the amount of voluntary social distancing constant, [our] results imply 10 times greater spread by April 27 without [stay-at-home orders] (10 million cases) and more than 35 times greater spread without any of the four measures (35 million).” “Differential Effects of Intervention Timing on COVID-19 Spread in the United States.” This is the study recently trumpeted by the New York Times, which finds that locking down a week earlier could have reduced the death toll by more than half.  “When Do Shelter-in-Place Orders Fight COVID-19 Best?” Lockdowns make people a bit more likely to stay home full-time, and “approximately three weeks following the adoption of [an order], cumulative COVID-19 cases fell by 44 percent.” The benefits were biggest for states that implemented their policies early or had high population density. “Comparison of Estimated Rates of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Border Counties in Iowa Without a Stay-at-Home Order and Border Counties in Illinois With a Stay-at-Home Order.” This paper compares bordering counties in Iowa and Illinois. The trends were similar before Illinois issued a stay-at-home order, but “after that, cases increased more quickly in Iowa and more slowly in Illinois.” The difference represents “30.4% of the 716 total cases in those Iowa counties by that date.”  “Price of Delay in COVID-19 Lockdowns.” These researchers looked for “natural experiments” where “similar neighboring states” pursued different policies. “Those states that locked down late suffered a 15% to 25% higher penetration of the disease, per week late in date of shutdown, as of May 1st 2020.”  “The Effect of Stay-at-Home Orders on COVID-19 Cases and Fatalities in the United States.” Stay-at-home orders “are associated with a 30.2 percent (11.0 to 45.2) reduction in weekly cases after one week, a 40.0 percent (23.4 to 53.0) reduction after two weeks, and a 48.6 percent (31.1 to 61.7) reduction after three weeks. Stay-at-home orders are also associated with a 59.8 percent (18.3 to 80.2) reduction in weekly fatalities after three weeks.” “Impact of policy interventions and social distancing on SARS-CoV-2 transmission in the United States.” States that had a stay-at-home order at the time they saw their 500th case tended to have slower spread thereafter. “Causal Estimation of Stay-at-Home Orders on SARS-CoV-2 Transmission.” This study finds that the orders reduced mobility, and in turn estimates “that reductions in movement have causally reduced SARS-CoV-2 transmission rates by 49%.”  “Effect of Mitigation Measures on the Spreading of COVID-19 in Hard-Hit States.” This paper looks at New York, New Jersey, Michigan, Massachusetts, Illinois, and Louisiana, finding that their overall mitigation efforts worked to slow the virus.  “Stay at Home to Stay Safe: Effectiveness of Stay-at-Home Orders in Containing the COVID-19 Pandemic.” “We use eight states that did not implement the order as a control group and six neighbor states that implemented the order as a treatment group to estimate the effect of the stay-at-home order. We find that, though residents in both groups have already voluntarily stayed at home, the order reduces the number of new COVID-19 cases by 7.6%.” Lockdowns Work in Other Countries
“Do Lockdown and Testing Help in Curbing Covid-19 Transmission?” Looking at 69 countries, this paper finds that the use of shutdown measures, in the aggregate, “significantly affects the number of confirmed cases after 7 days.” “Accounting for Global COVID-19 Diffusion Patterns, January-April 2020.” “With a lag, more stringent pandemic policies were associated with significantly lower mortality growth rates.”  “COVID-19: Government Interventions and the Economy.” These researchers say that lockdowns are effective, though “countries may avoid lockdown by imposing school closures, mask wearing and centralised quarantine simultaneously to reach similar COVID-19 infection mitigation outcomes.” “Shut It Down: A Cross Country Panel Analysis on the Efficacy of Lockdown Measures.” “Our results confirm the efficacy of such measures, and that the average time to have effects in terms of a reduction of cases is of about ten days.” “Estimating the Number of Infections and the Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European Countries.” European efforts to control COVID worked, per this paper, but the estimates are imprecise and the methods “assume that changes in the reproductive number — a measure of transmission — are an immediate response to these interventions being implemented rather than broader gradual changes in behaviour.” “Analysis of the Impact of Lockdown on the Evolution [of] Covid-19 Epidemics in Spain.” “The estimated number of cases shows a sharp increase until the lockdown, followed by a slowing down and then a decrease after full quarantine was implemented. Differences in the basic reproduction ratio are also very significant, dropping from 5.89 . . . to 0.48.” “Measuring the Impact of the German Public Shutdown on the Spread of Covid-19.” This paper finds “a trend break on 20 March that is in line with the expected lagged impact of the German policies and which reduces the growth rate by 48.2%.” “One-Month Impact of the French Lockdown on the Epidemic Burden.” France’s lockdown “prevented 587,730 hospitalizations and 140,320 ICU admissions at the national level. The total number of ICU beds required to treat patients in critical conditions would have been 104,550, far higher than the maximum French ICU capacity. This first month of lockdown also permitted [France] to avoid 61,739 hospital deaths, corresponding to a 83.5% reduction of the total number of predicted deaths.” “The Impact of a Nation-wide Lockdown on COVID-19 Transmissibility in Italy.” Key finding: “Fourteen days after the implementation of the strategy, the net reproduction number has dropped below the epidemic threshold.” “The Human Cost of Delaying Lockdown.” This modeling finds that an additional week of lockdown could have cut the toll by 30,000 in the U.K. and was waved about by the Telegraph despite being just a blog post. “Analysis of 25,000 Lab-Confirmed COVID-19 Cases in Wuhan.” This presentation finds that a lockdown helped to control the initial outbreak, but that further, harsher quarantine measures were needed to squelch it. It Depends What the Meaning of ‘Lockdown’ Is
“The Estimated Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions on Documented Cases of COVID-19: A Cross-Country Analysis.” This study finds little to no impact for “lockdowns” — i.e., stay-at-home orders — and school closings, but does find a big impact for shutting down non-essential businesses, banning gatherings and events, and closing borders. “Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions against COVID-19 in Europe.” This one finds an effect from school closures and certain business shutdowns, but “stay at home orders, closure of all non-[essential] businesses and requiring the wearing of facemasks or coverings in public was not associated with any independent additional impact.” “Health vs. Wealth?” In an international sample, this study finds evidence that restricting workplaces, public transport, and travel reduces case growth, but the results are less clear when it comes to deaths. The authors also analyze U.S. states and find that stay-at-home orders reduce case growth. “Social Distancing is Effective at Mitigating COVID-19 Transmission in the United States.” This study finds that social distancing works, but stresses that a lot of it happened without government mandates.  Lockdowns Don’t Work
“Do Lockdowns Work? A Counterfactual for Sweden.” This study compares Sweden with a “synthetic” version of Sweden, a mix of other countries that had similar trends pre-lockdown: 39 percent Netherlands, 26 percent Denmark, 19 percent Finland, 15 percent Norway, and 1 percent Portugal. The upshot is that the real Sweden had no more deaths than the fake Sweden. The real Sweden saw a lot of voluntary social distancing, but its mobility rates didn’t fall quite as much as the fake Sweden’s did. “Tracking Public and Private Responses to the COVID-19 Epidemic.” This paper focuses on whether lockdowns reduce mobility, not whether they have a concrete effect on virus transmission, but finds “little evidence” that “stay-at-home mandates induced distancing.” More effective were “first case announcements, emergency declarations, and school closures.” (Elsewhere on this list I’ve avoided studies that focus on mobility without tying it explicitly to COVID-19 outcomes, but see here and here for contrary takes and here for a supportive one.) “The End of Exponential Growth.” This brief study from last month argues that the exponential growth of COVID-19 burns out quickly no matter what policies countries pursue, and that “lockdown policy can be stopped within a few days and replaced by a policy of moderate social distancing.” “Lockdowns Don’t Work.” This is an online article for the public, not an academic study, but it’s written by the economist Lyman Stone and reports some of his own modeling efforts. His results suggest that school closings and bans on large gatherings work, but stay-at-home orders do not. “There Is No Empirical Evidence for These Lockdowns.” Like the Stone piece, this is an informal article that reports some regressions. “The impact of state-response strategy on both my cases and deaths measures was utterly insignificant.” “Full Lockdown Policies in Western Europe Countries Have No Evident Impacts on the COVID-19 Epidemic.” This one looks at “full lockdown strategies applied in Italy, France, Spain and United Kingdom” and finds “no evidence of any discontinuity in the growth rate, doubling time, and reproduction number trends.” Finally, Carl Quintanilla of CNBC recently circulated an analysis from JPMorgan pointing out that the states that have reopened haven’t seen the virus take off. This could imply that the lockdowns never did anything, that these states’ replacement policies were adequate, or simply that a spike is still to come. Choose your fighters, everyone! The battle of the statistics has only just begun. 

The theme of today’s Morning Jolt is that our response and reopening programs are designed for obedient, easily programmed robots, not human beings, and that the group of Americans who are bearing one of the toughest burdens of our failures in leadership are our children. Shortly after sending the newsletter, I saw this story: Students in the nation’s capital should not return to full, in-person learning until there is a reliable vaccine or cure for the novel coronavirus, according to recommendations released Thursday by a group of advisers appointed by D.C. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser. . . . before that, students should return to campuses on modified schedules, switching between in-person and distance learning depending on the day. Even if schools can accommodate them, families should not be required to send their children to school buildings — and will have the option of distance learning — if they feel unsafe. The D.C. plan calls for no more than 10 students in a classroom in Phase Two, along with staggered arrival and dismissal times, and no cafeterias. (The city hopes to start Phase One at the end of next week.) Other potential plans include having students attend school one or two days a week and participating in remote learning on the others, or having kids attend school one week out of every three weeks. Public schools will need a plan for something much better and closer to “normal” before a vaccine arrives. (The one caveat is the report that Oxford scientists are hopeful their vaccine will work and be widely available by September, which would be near-miraculous.) Our ability to treat the disease keeps improving, and there are some promising signs on the vaccine front. Eight vaccines are in human trials, the Oxford effort is expanding to a trial of 10,000 people, and Dr. Anthony Fauci says he’s “cautiously optimistic” about the early results from the Moderna trial: Even though there was only eight individuals, we saw neutralizing antibodies, at a reasonable dose of the vaccine and the titers [the measure of antibodies in the blood] were high enough to get us to believe that if we attained that in a large number of people, you could predict that that vaccine would be protective. So although the numbers were limited, it was really quite good news, because it reached and went over an important hurdle in the development of vaccines. But a reliable vaccine may not be ready until the end of the year, or early 2021, or the middle of 2021 . . . or ever. And even if one is developed, it will take considerable time to manufacture and distribute it throughout the population. As mentioned in today’s newsletter, distance learning is probably working okay for some kids, not so great for others, and it is disastrous for the kids who need the most help. And the D.C. plan amounts to continuing distance learning . . .  indefinitely.  

Yesterday morning, I reported that two dozen Republican senators, including Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), are calling on the Department of Justice to investigate Planned Parenthood for fraud, after 37 of the organization’s affiliates claimed $80 million in small-business loans for which they were ineligible. The loans came from the Paycheck Protection Program, created by Congress in the CARES Act, to help small businesses meet payroll and pay rent during COVID-19 shutdowns.  Despite the fact that mainstream news organizations have entirely ignored this story, Planned Parenthood apparently felt the need to defend itself, because the organization tweeted yesterday morning: “Some independent Planned Parenthood organizations applied for and were awarded loans subject to eligibility rules established by Congress and the Small Business Administration (SBA), which they met.” This is false for several reasons, not least of which is that Planned Parenthood itself has already openly admitted its lack of eligibility for the loans. After the CARES Act passed, Planned Parenthood Action Fund (the group’s political-action arm) issued a statement condemning the legislation for excluding the organization from its funding: “The bill gives the Small Business Administration broad discretion to exclude Planned Parenthood affiliates and other non-profits serving people with low incomes and deny them benefits under the new small business loan program.” Planned Parenthood would have us believe both that Congress should be condemned for excluding the group from funding and that Planned Parenthood’s affiliates were in fact eligible for that funding when they later applied for and received it.  In fact, there is no gray area on this question: The text of the CARES Act makes it exceptionally clear that nonprofit organizations such as Planned Parenthood are not eligible for loans under the PPP, and that fact was highly publicized at the time of the bill’s passage. The part of the bill outlining eligibility for the loans was a particular point of contention during congressional debate precisely because the final wording would determine whether the abortion provider would be able to claim federal funding.  Republicans won that fight, as illustrated by the bill text, reporting at the time, and subsequent clarifying statements from Trump-administration officials. Section 1102 of the CARES Act states that nonprofits are eligible for PPP loans only if they and their affiliates have no more than 500 employees. Planned Parenthood has about 16,000 employees, a whopping 32 times as many as the maximum-employee cap outlined in the bill. There is no argument to be made that the bill actually allows groups with Planned Parenthood’s governing structure to receive small-business loans. And, given the organization’s own open opposition to the CARES Act, there is no argument to be made that the group was unaware of its affiliates’ ineligibility for the program.  

This is the last Morning Jolt until May 26; enjoy your Memorial Day weekend. Our Response and Reopening Plans Are Designed for Robots Jason Pargin is the former editor of Cracked.com. He usually writes comedy, but also often offers really keen insights on human nature, which is arguably one of the purposes of comedy. Pargin asked for the right term for the fallacy that a policy, plan, or idea will work as long as human beings act like perfectly programmed robots, instead of the myriad, unpredictable, flawed, flesh-and-blood creatures that we are. (A strong contender for the right term, but perhaps not quite on the nose, is “the engineer’s fallacy,” the idea that the logical solution is the best solution, regardless of how that solution actually works in the real world.)  Pargin observed, “Whatever it’s called, I feel like some of us have strayed into it in the pandemic — assuming that humans would simply go without real-life contact with other humans for months on end. Assuming they function on a cold, machine-like calculation of risk rather than emotion/impulse.” The “It is too risky to reopen now!” crowd needs to come to terms with the fact that we are wrapping up week ten of the restrictive measures, and the public mood and willingness to obey those measures is going to be really different now than it was in week one or two. As of this writing, the highest Rt factor in the country right now is North Dakota at 1.02.  Earlier this week, South Korean high-school seniors returned to classes. But almost any measure, South Korea’s response to the coronavirus ranks near the top. Compared to Americans, South Koreans have much more respect for authority, much higher levels of social trust, and much more willingness to sacrifice for the good of their community. That country’s preexisting habits for mask-wearing, respecting quarantine, and avoiding dumb risks are pretty much a health-policy expert’s idealistic fantasy. And this happened: Students at 66 schools in Incheon, just west of Seoul, had to leave after two students at one of the schools tested positive for the virus Wednesday. The two students didn’t attend classes on Wednesday, but authorities decided to temporarily close all schools in their area, according to the Incheon Metropolitan City Office of Education. The two students had been in a karaoke room visited by another student who tested positive for the virus after taking private classes from a person who visited an Itaewon club, according to Incheon city officials. Teenagers are going to sneak out to the karaoke clubs — or someplace to get together, particularly when protective measures stretch into their third month. Ironically, South Korea didn’t try a full-spectrum lockdown like some states here; they quickly put together a comprehensive test-and-trace program, with considerable cellphone-based tracking and monitoring.  Here in my neck of the woods, some kids have been playing in the tunnels of the Authenticity Woods storm-drain system. I might not have believed the stories from neighbors if I hadn’t seen it myself; during one of my walks recently, a couple of kids popped out of a manhole like ninja turtles. I wouldn’t encourage any kids to do that, but I can’t entirely begrudge their appetite for mischief and some rule-breaking. Since mid-March, their lives have been overtaken by once-unthinkable rules.  You can keep kids out of school and away from all organized activities in order to keep them and their loved ones safe from a potential infection with the coronavirus. But some South Korean kids are going to end up in the karaoke bars, and some American kids are going to start wandering through the storm drains. There is no “everybody avoids all risky behaviors” option, so we need to find “the fewest number of people take the least-consequential risks” option. I can’t begrudge those kids in my neighborhood because in-person school classes have been canceled since mid-March, along with all afterschool activities, Little League, flag football, performing arts, church groups, you name it. Playgrounds are fenced off, the gym is closed, everyone is supposed to social distance from Grandma and Grandpa, restaurants and ice cream parlors only do take-out . . . you’re left with the public parks. On top of it all, the weather’s been lousy most of this spring. A couple families are trying socially distancing play dates. This week, just about all the summer camps and programs were officially canceled, too, ensuring the next few months will be more of the same. (Apparently outdoor summer camps are too dangerous, but the New York City subway system is still running. I suspect fear of lawsuits is influencing our decisions as much as fear of the virus.)  By mid-March, no one could deny we were facing a seriously disruptive threat. Now we’re heading into Memorial Day weekend, and the message to the nation’s children is, “Sorry kids, we may have had nearly three months, but our leaders can’t figure out any solution that gets us back to anything resembling normal human interaction. Forget everything we said about too much screen time and how Fortnite turns your brain to oatmeal.”  There are few responses less helpful than the ill-considered cry, “Kids today are overscheduled! The summer of 2020 will be like summer when we were kids! They’ll be unsupervised!” This coming summer will be nothing like when we were kids — assuming your summers were Stranger Things-ish without the monsters. Back when you were a kid, no one expected you to stay six feet away from other people! You could get together with your friends without their parents freaking out. Back when you were a kid, your world had plenty of places where people gathered in large groups with no risk — movie theaters, arcades, carnivals, theme parks, water parks, public pools, baseball games, museums, zoos, aquariums. Most of those places will either be closed this summer or greatly curtailed. Back when you were a kid, the local grown-up who seemed determined to make sure no one was having any fun was the odd one; today we have no shortage of “Karens.”  It’s not all gone. We can still do backyard barbecues. We’ll still have popsicles on a hot day. If you live near a beach or lake, most of them are reopen or will reopen soon. Maybe the mini-golf courses will reopen with metered use? We might be able to salvage this summer, but that doesn’t mean shoehorning this global catastrophe into our preexisting narrative about how these darn kids today are spoiled by their helicopter parents.  Our state, local, educational, and societal leaders’ inability to put together a good solution for our kids for the summer raises real doubts about the ability to put together a good solution for our kids for the autumn. Hopefully your child is doing fine in distance learning; a lot of them aren’t. It is mostly disastrous for kids with special needs. We laugh at the comedy videos of parents struggling with the insanities of distance learning, because they’re true. Teaching is a full-time job, and a lot of parents are expected to take on that job while trying to do their other full-time job from home. Over at Slate, they fairly ask what the point of distance learning for kindergartners is. ADDENDUM: “If Americans had known we had thousands of infections on February 29, people would have accepted a lockdown on March 1!” William Saletan argues. Yes, and if pigs had wings, they would fly. That counterfactual is pretty moot to the question I attempted to answer, which was whether it was realistic to expect Americans to go into lockdown on March 1. People weren’t going to alter their behavior until they perceived danger, and the danger was not as easily perceived then. We can argue that it should have been — I’d argue that it should have been; you probably read what I was writing back then — but it wasn’t.  It didn’t help that for most of January and February, many voices in our national media had confidently declared that the common flu was more dangerous than the coronavirus. A Wired headline helpfully informed us, “Travel Bans and Quarantines Won’t Stop Coronavirus.” You’ll notice that quite a few responses to that piece angrily reacted as if it was an attack on Trump. He’s not really the focus of the piece; the focus is that the Columbia study is wishing we had taken a course of action the public would have been unlikely to support at the time, based upon what was known. Then there were the angry responses that thought the piece was a defense of Trump. I suspect they stopped reading before the paragraph that includes, “President Trump’s management of this crisis has been pretty bad.” Quite a few people in the comments sections angrily contended that lockdowns don’t work. Again, this is a separate question from whether Americans would have accepted those orders on March 1. One of the more frustrating aspects of our public discussion at this moment — particularly on social media — is that whatever part of the pandemic is being discussed, people want to steer it back to their preferred aspect of it: “Yes, but Trump is bad!” “Yes, but Bill de Blasio is bad!” “Yes, but China is bad!” “Yes, but Fox News said the virus wouldn’t be that bad!” “Yes, but the WTO said it wasn’t contagious!” “Yes, but Amazon is making a lot of money!” “Yes, but masks don’t work unless they’re used properly!”   

Congresswoman Vicky Hartzler (R., Mo.), who represents Missouri’s fourth congressional district, has introduced a piece of legislation to extend liability protections to nonprofits as states begin to lift their stay-at-home and shutdown orders across the country. “I think it’s very important for our churches and nonprofit organizations to have assurance as they reopen that they will be able to continue to provide services to the needy with confidence,” Hartzler said of her legislation in an interview with National Review. “There’s a concern that some individuals may try to cherry-pick certain guidelines or other provisions and sue these organizations, and they are at the forefront of providing the services that communities need, whether it be food pantries or handing out clothes or working in homeless shelters, and certainly holding churches services.”  The bill, known as the “Service Assurance Act,” provides that “a nonprofit organization shall not be liable under Federal or State law for any act or omission of the organization with respect to any harm arising from exposure to, or infection by, the virus that causes COVID–19 during a public health emergency with respect to COVID–19.” Hartzler’s legislation also provides that nonprofits will not be free of liability if the “harm was caused by an act or omission constituting willful or criminal misconduct, gross negligence, reckless misconduct, or a conscious flagrant indifference to the rights or safety of the individual harmed.”  The bill establishes that the liability protection it provides would supersede state laws that are inconsistent with its provisions, unless they provide greater protection from liability. Hartzler says she already has the support of a few cosponsors and is hopeful there will be bipartisan backing for the proposal.  “We want to reopen America,” she said. “We want to do it safely, but we also want to make sure that our businesses, or in this case our churches and our charities, are able to do that soon. Churches are vital to the spiritual health of this country and worthy of protecting from lawsuits.” Hartzler says she has spoken with House minority leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) about having the language of her legislation included in the next round of CARES Act legislation and notes that Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) also has expressed support for liability protections. McCarthy and McConnell recently released a joint statement on the GOP priorities for the next phase of CARES Act legislation, stating that “healthcare workers, small businesses, and other Americans on the front lines of this fight must receive strong protections from frivolous lawsuits.”  “We cannot let a second pandemic of opportunistic litigation enrich trial lawyers at the expense of Main Street and medical professionals,” they said. “Senate and House Republicans agree these protections will be absolutely essential to future discussions surrounding recovery legislation.”  

The doctor in charge of a Bay Area, Calif. trauma center said the state should end its lockdown orders after an “unprecedented” spike in suicide attempts amid the coronavirus pandemic. “We’ve never seen numbers like this, in such a short period of time,” Dr. Mike deBoisblanc, head of trauma at John Muir Medical Center, told local station ABC7. “I mean, we’ve seen a year’s worth of suicide attempts in the last four weeks.” He added that he thinks “it’s time” to end the state shutdown.  “I think, originally, this was put in place to flatten the curve and to make sure hospitals have the resources to take care of COVID patients,” he explained. “We have the current resources to do that and our other community health is suffering.” Trauma nurse Kacey Hansen, who has worked at John Muir Medical Center in Walnut Creek for over three decades, said she had “never seen” so many attempts, most being young adults. “I have never seen so much intentional injury . . . it’s upsetting.” John Muir Health said in a statement that while “there are a number of opinions on this topic, including within our medical staff,” the organization supports the state’s shelter-in-place order. California governor Gavin Newsom is currently putting his state through a phased reopening, with counties in the Bay Area moving slower than other parts of the state. On Tuesday, the Department of Justice warned Newsom in a letter that his state’s banning of in-person worship “facially discriminates against religious exercise.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				hen Sweden’s government took a more lax approach than other western countries to fighting the coronavirus — it banned events with more than 50 people and shuttered secondary schools and universities but imposed few other restrictions — it was operating on the theory that stricter lockdowns couldn’t do much to save any lives in the long run. The Swedish society and economy would ultimately benefit, the thinking went, by reaching herd immunity more quickly than other countries that locked down.  “About 30 percent of people in Stockholm have reached a level of immunity,” Karin Ulrika Olofsdotter, the Swedish ambassador to the United States, told NPR on April 26. “We could reach herd immunity in the capital as early as next month.” The extent and duration of immunity that antibodies provide remains unknown, but even if herd immunity is possible, a new study testing for coronavirus antibodies shows Sweden may still be “a long way off” from reaching it, according to one Swedish epidemiologist. Reuters reported on May 20 that 7.3 percent of Stockholm residents tested positive for coronavirus antibodies in late April — far below the 30 percent cited by the Swedish ambassador on April 26. (To put these numbers in perspective, studies in the United States found that about 6 percent of Miami-Dade County residents and about 21 percent of New York City residents tested positive in late April for coronavirus antibody, and the United States itself remains a long way off from herd immunity.)  The Swedish government’s chief epidemiologist now estimates that closer to 20 percent of Stockholm residents have antibodies, but given how Swedish officials wildly overstated the numbers a month ago, that estimate should be taken with a grain of salt. Some experts in Sweden think the country is far from achieving herd immunity.  
 “I think herd immunity is a long way off, if we ever reach it,” Bjorn Olsen, professor of infectious medicine at Uppsala University, told Reuters. At present, Sweden’s coronavirus death toll, adjusted for national population, is much higher than that of its Scandinavian neighbors. According to the Worldometers website, Sweden’s death rate per capita is four times that of Denmark, seven times that of Finland, and nine times that of Norway. Sweden’s per capita death toll is 33 percent higher than the United States’.  As for Sweden’s economy? “Economists at Swedish bank SEB estimate Sweden’s GDP will drop 6.5 per cent this year, about the same as the US and Germany, but a little better than Norway and ahead of 9–10 per cent falls in Finland and Denmark, all of which have had lockdowns,” the Financial Times reported May 10. A Reuters poll from April found economists predicting the Scandinavian economies would all fare about the same in 2020. Was the Swedish approach a mistake? It’s still too early to make a final judgment. These are just economic forecasts and predictions, and there remain many unknowns. Could Sweden’s economy bounce back sooner than those of its neighbors? Will the death tolls in Scandinavian countries ultimately look the same? Perhaps, if there isn’t an effective vaccine or treatment developed in the next year.  But there was good news on the vaccine front this week, as Moderna announced promising results in a preliminary round of testing.  Former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb cautioned during an appearance Sunday on Face the Nation that “when you try to scale up and get volume, a lot of things can go wrong, a lot of things can be delayed. It’s very hard to get to the point where you’re manufacturing at high, high quantities.” “I would say that’s probably more likely a 2021 event that we’re going to have a vaccine available in sufficient quantities to mass inoculate the population,” Gottlieb added. At the same time, he thinks the prospects are good that we could have a vaccine to “ring fence an outbreak” in a city if there is a second wave this fall. The number of lives ultimately saved by a vaccine or treatment would depend on what percentage of the population has already been infected by the time a vaccine or an effective antiviral drug hits the market. So there remain many unknowns about treatments, vaccines, and the economy. It will take some time to have a full understanding of how the Swedish model fares compared to other western countries. But at the moment, with so little apparent economic benefit and a much higher death toll per capita than its Scandinavian neighbors, it isn’t looking so hot. 

It’s not March anymore. The coronavirus has taken a heartbreaking toll on Americans, but the course of the virus is not the same as it was a few months ago. We are on the other side of the curve. There are encouraging signs all over the country, and no early indications of a reopening debacle.  The question now is whether the media and political system can absorb good news on the virus, which is often ignored or buried under misleading storylines. The press has a natural affinity for catastrophes, which make compelling viewing and good copy. The pandemic is indeed a once-in-a-generation story. So, the media are naturally loath to shift gears and acknowledge that the coronavirus has begun to loosen its grip. Meanwhile, progressives and many journalists have developed a near-theological commitment to the lockdowns, such that any information that undermines them is considered unwelcome, even threatening. This accounts for the widespread sense that no one should say things have gotten better . . . or people are going to die.  
 Usually, when it is thought the public can’t handle the truth, it is a truth about some threat that could spark panic. In this case, the truth is information that might make people think it’s safe to go outside again.  Almost all of the discussion about reopening is framed by worries that we will reopen too soon, not that we might reopen too late. That is literally unthinkable, even as we have entered a new phase. As data analyst Nate Silver pointed out the other day, the seven-day rolling average for deaths is 1,362, down from 1,761 the previous week and a peak of 2,070 on April 21. That’s still much too high, but the trend is favorable. Testing capacity, such a concern for so long, has really begun to expand after hitting a plateau for weeks. Testing nationally on some days has been in the high 300,000s or over 400,000. The issue in some states now is not capacity, but actually finding enough people to test.  Scott Gottlieb of the American Enterprise Institute notes that the positivity rate, or percentage of people testing positive, has continued to fall throughout May.  The reopenings could certainly still go awry, but so far there is no clear indication of it. Cases are still falling in Austria, Denmark, and Norway, despite those countries’ being relatively far along on reopening. Denmark has been mystified why it is almost five weeks into reopening and hasn’t yet seen increases in infections. The press has often, out of sloppiness or willfulness, tried to create negative news around the reopenings. CNN tweeted last weekend, “Texas is seeing the highest number of new coronavirus cases and deaths just two weeks after it officially re-opened.” As Sean Trende of RealClearPolitics pointed out, the seven-day rolling average of new cases had indeed been trending up, but the seven-day rolling average of the number of tests had gone up, too — which would naturally turn up more cases. The key indicator is the positivity rate, and it was down in Texas.  A North Carolina TV station tweeted, “Breaking News: NC sees largest spike in coronavirus cases since pandemic began.” That referred to 800 new cases over the past 24 hours on May 16. But tests had been going sharply up and the positivity rate trending down. Headlines noted that Florida recorded 500 new cases in one day. It generated fewer headlines, and perhaps none, when Governor Ron DeSantis explained that the state had received a dump of 75,000 test results, yielding the 500 new cases, for a minuscule positivity rate of 0.64%. It’s not as though we haven’t had a cataract of unassailably legitimate bad news over the past few months. We’ve been experiencing a wrenching public-health crisis and a steep recession on top of it. There shouldn’t be a need to obscure favorable trends. We can handle the truth. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate 

A preprint study by Columbia University researchers finds that if U.S. officials had imposed lockdowns one or two weeks earlier, they could have reduced the COVID-19 death toll by tens of thousands. Over on the homepage, Jim Geraghty observes that it would have been a heavy political lift to impose lockdowns on March 1 or March 8, as the public hadn’t yet come to see the virus as dangerous and the confirmed case count remained low. But, he writes, “our government, at every level, is expected to see these problems clearly even when the public cannot.”  Indeed. But I think the government’s failure to see the problem and to call attention to it vitiates the argument that public opinion would have thwarted the faster imposition of lockdowns. Two reasons come to mind. First, the testing failure meant the public did not have enough data to accurately perceive the threat. As William Saletan points out on Twitter, a lack of tests concealed the true number of cases across the country. Wouldn’t New Yorkers, who unknowingly seeded outbreaks across the country, have been receptive to lockdowns by March 1 had they known there were already thousands of infections in their state? Second, elite cues on hard issues that require technical knowledge, like pandemics, can be enormously influential. But political elites systematically understated the threat until it was too late, ignoring politically inconvenient warnings and embracing dubious advice. So public opinion could have been different. Maybe most Americans didn’t know how dangerous the virus was by March 1 (Jim and Michael Brendan Dougherty excepted). They might have known if we had had better leadership — from New York, from the CDC, and from the White House.  

Next Thursday night, Melissa Buck, Sarah Zagorski, and Andrea Picciotti-Bayer will join The Catholic Information Center and the National Review Insititute in a virtual event on foster care. Details and RSVP here. 1. ‘Everything they knew is gone’: Distance learning in a homeless shelter 2. China is using covid-19 to throttle Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement 3. How to Reduce Your Risk of PTSD in a Post-Covid-19 World 4. The Man Who Coaches Husbands on How to Avoid Divorce 5. Brad Wilcox: For as long as our love shall last: No recipe for happily ever after 6. Can Professors ‘Only Connect’ In The Age Of Zoom? 7. Dealing With Depression During COVID-19  8. Ines A. Murzaku: Surrogacy: A Problem of Human Dignity 9. Destiny Herndon-De La Rosa: Those of us in the pro-life movement failed Norma McCorvey 10. Dana Gioia: On a spiritual level this pandemic has shocked many out of the self-absorbed cultural complacency that has characterized recent art. Solitude and reflection in an atmosphere of death and danger changes lives.  

Six months into the global coronavirus pandemic, and more than two months into the widespread lockdowns of American public life, we have lots and lots of data. But what have we learned? The hard data we have today remains flawed, and it can tell us a lot more about the “where” of the pandemic than the “why.” But just knowing the “where” is a start. One of the chief lessons we can take is the difficulty of comparing very different regions of the world. America isn’t South Korea or New Zealand, and never could have been. Another is quite how uniquely bad the situation in the New York metro area has been.  For today, let’s focus on a single metric: deaths per capita. It is the ultimate bottom line: How many of your people have you lost? It is still not a perfect measurement: It relies on accurate reporting (something not all governments can be trusted to do), it still has a time lag, and there remain varying standards in how different locales decide which deaths are “COVID-related.” But unlike infection rates, the numbers are not as sensitive to the availability of testing. And death rates are not only more available than hospitalization rates, they also measure the ultimate success or failure of hospitalization. Methods  I’ll use the data from the COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU), which is as good a source for comparable data as any. The numbers are pulled from the Johns Hopkins site as of the morning of May 20, 2020. U.S. data is available on a state-by-state basis, which allows us to compare variations within the United States to national data elsewhere. I’ve color-coded countries by broad geographic regions, which requires lumping together some places — for example, I included Australia and New Zealand with East Asia, despite major differences in their societies, on the basis of geography. Also, 14 countries with populations of a million or more are listed as having zero COVID-19 deaths; presumably, most or all of these are just not reporting data or are refusing to admit they have cases: Vietnam, Mozambique, North Korea, Cambodia, Rwanda, Laos, Papua New Guinea, Eritrea, Central African Republic, Turkmenistan, Mongolia, Namibia, Lesotho, and Timor-Leste. Regional numbers for Italy are via Statista. The World in Regions Before analyzing individual countries and states, it is worth considering the data on a cumulative basis, by regions of the world: The divergence is dramatic — and illustrates the different baselines for judging the responses of different national and local governments. The outbreak in North America and Europe — the most advanced and prosperous parts of the world, all situated in the Northern Hemisphere where the outbreak came at the tail end of winter, overwhelmingly in temperate zones — has been four times the global average. At the opposite end of the scale are East Asia, South Asia, and Africa, all with a fraction of the cases. Government and social responses may have a greater role in East Asia, a region that contains a lot of densely packed, cosmopolitan countries with advanced economies. As I’ve noted previously of New Zealand (which, like Australia, is in the Southern Hemisphere, where the weather was still warm in February), there are a number of potential factors in play, from geographic isolation to low population density. That’s not true of Japan or South Korea. It is, in any event, hard to explain the scale of variation between East Asia and Europe or South America solely on the basis of different government policies. What is more debatable is how much relates to demographic conditions (age, genetic factors, rates of obesity, and other risk factors) and how much to social practices (acceptance of public mask-wearing is more culturally ingrained by now in many Asian societies.) The Worst Here’s the 33 jurisdictions (nations or U.S. states) with the highest per-capita death rates:  As you can see from the above, the top of the global list is dominated by European countries and American states. The United States, with the largest raw number of reported deaths in the world, drops to eleventh when ranked on a per capita basis, behind ten European countries. Two of the top three are tiny microstates, but Italy, Spain, France, and Britain have all been hit worse than the United States. So has Sweden, with its much-vaunted experiment in developing herd immunity by keeping the country open. Ecuador is the lone representative of the Southern Hemisphere on the worst list. New York also stands out on its own, well ahead of the rest of the world, with its neighbors New Jersey, Connecticut, and Massachusetts all above any nation of more than 100,000 people. In fact, outside of tiny San Marino, New York’s per capita death rate is nearly double that of any nation on earth. The national U.S. death rate drops from 280 per million to 167 per million outside of the Tri-State area. That’s still a high rate on a global basis, a bit higher than Canada’s, but it’s also lower than the regional average for Europe. The Northeast is really in its own category from the rest of the country, and is an enormous driver of the overall national numbers.     There’s a natural temptation to focus narrowly on the red/blue divide, given that the top of the list of states is heavily dominated by deep-blue states, their governments long run at many levels by Democrats. It’s fair enough to assess with hindsight what kinds of governments and reactions led to worse results, but even aside from my distaste for reducing tragic deaths to a red/blue divide while people are still dying, party and ideology are only one piece of what happened. The deep-blue Pacific coast, for the most part, came out better than the Northeast did. 
 Bad leadership, however, was clearly a major accelerant to why the New York metro area has suffered the worst outbreak on the planet. Infighting between Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio, Cuomo’s catastrophic policy of sending infected patients back to nursing homes (with a death toll the state has been covering up), de Blasio’s long record of statements telling New Yorkers to keep going about their business, and the insistence on keeping the subways open all made the New York area a unique vector for disease even atop its unusual population density and dependence on closely packed mass transit. Here’s the next-highest list:  American states are still grouped around European countries, with even Germany — one of the European countries that has done relatively well — above Florida, Arizona, California, and Wisconsin. Iran is the worst-hit country outside of Europe and the Americas. That undoubtedly is due in part to the fact that, like Ecuador and Peru, Iran’s topography is more mountainous, elevated, and temperate than that of its neighbors. Here’s the third list, including the last few jurisdictions above the global average:  The American states below the world average include the southern border (Texas’s death rate is comparable to that of neighboring Mexico), the West Coast (Oregon) and some states in the interior that are (with the exception of Utah) comparatively less connected to global travel and migration. Now, the countries with the fewest reported deaths per capita:  Somehow, I doubt that many thinkpieces will be written on how we should all try to emulate Ethiopia. Undoubtedly, many of the poorest countries are also underreporting, not on purpose, but because people there are likelier to die at home, and the health-care system is less able to devote resources to classifying deaths. The presence of Thailand and Taiwan, however, is interesting. Thailand was one of the world’s first countries to have COVID-19 cases, due to direct travel from Wuhan. But it also has a tropical climate, with high humidity and temperatures in the 90s in February. Here’s the complete list of states:  Region by Region Let’s look more closely region by region. First, Europe:  Even allowing for the questionable reliability of, say, Russian reporting of deaths, the pattern in Europe is quite clear: The countries hit hardest have been the most connected and advanced economies, even though those are the countries with the most advanced health-care systems and the most sophisticated governments. A closer regional look at Italy offers a comparison point for New York:  Even in Italy’s brutalized north, only Lombardy had a higher death toll per capita than New York state, and not by much, despite the fact that a big chunk of New York is more spread-out upstate. The north–south pattern of the virus in Italy parallels that in the United States; the southern part of the country is hotter, wetter, poorer, less crowded, and less elderly. Now, Central and South America, including the Caribbean:  Venezuela’s very low death toll is probably due to some of the same factors as in the poorest parts of Africa. Brazil, the region’s population colossus, has not suffered nearly as much as Ecuador, but for a country with so much tropical jungle, delta, and seacoast, it is doing quite poorly compared to the rest of the region. The Middle East and Central Asia:  By now, we should not be surprised to see the wealthiest and most globally connected countries atop the list — even places such as Israel and Saudi Arabia that took dramatic early steps against the pandemic — while ravaged areas and police states such as Syria and Gaza are at the bottom. East Asia and the Pacific:  This is where the virus started, yet every single country in the region — even the Philippines, hardly known for its efficient government, and Japan, with one of the world’s oldest populations — has suffered fewer than a fifth of the global average of deaths per capita. Even if we assume, reasonably, that Wuhan’s real death toll was understated by a fraction of ten, China would be well below the world average. (Then again, China has just reimposed a lockdown on over 100 million people in the northeast of the country). South Asia:  The region has only a handful of countries — but almost 1.8 billion people — yet fewer than 5,000 reported COVID-19 deaths. India took early, draconian measures to seal its borders, but even Pakistan, which appeared badly unprepared for a public-health crisis, looks nothing like neighboring Iran. Finally, Africa:  Sao Tome and Principe’s high death rate may be partly a statistical fluke due to its small size. Algeria’s presence near the top of the list is undoubtedly at least partly a factor of its continuing close ties with neighboring France. The main takeaway from the massive disparities in death rates so far is their regional patterns. Those patterns may shift as the seasons turn over, but it seems likely from what we know so far that the pandemic will continue to have its greatest effect in the temperate and urbanized regions of the world. 

The coronavirus pandemic has taken lives and wealth, but it presents another challenge as well: a challenge to our form of government. An election is coming in November. The pandemic will not be over. Just as our medical and economic systems must rise to their respective tests, so must our political system. We must ensure an election based on the principle that Americans should be free to vote without imperiling themselves or others.  The principle is high-minded, but the methods of accomplishing it are practical. The key is to massively expand two existing and proven systems: absentee voting and a suite of safe methods by which to vote in person (e.g., drive-through voting and augmented hours at the polls to reduce standing in line). The tough part is to get political leaders on board and to take the necessary action in time. To that end, American political leaders and citizens need to take eight steps. First, recognize that we risk a Wisconsin-style election debacle if we don’t act. Last month, Wisconsin insisted on going forward with in-person voting in the middle of the pandemic. The result? Turnout in some counties dropped by over 40 percent relative to 2016. Poll workers, who tend to be elderly, stayed home, forcing Milwaukee to close 175 polling locations (leaving just five) and Green Bay to close 29 (leaving just two). That meant absurdly (and dangerously) long lines at the few polling stations that stayed open. Meanwhile, absentee voting spiked by 70 percent compared with the 2016 primary. Since the state wasn’t prepared for the additional million absentee requests it received, thousands of absentee ballots weren’t mailed in time, weren’t counted, or were simply lost in tubs. (One of the illusions in this debate is the notion that absentee versus in-person voting is completely up to politicians. It’s not. Tens of millions of voters already have the legal right to vote absentee at will. Their states just aren’t ready for the numbers they’ll see in November.) Finally, confusing last-minute litigation marred the sense of certainty that elections are supposed to provide.  In the end, Democrats came out ahead, picking up a key state-supreme-court seat. That fact alone should spur Republicans to reconsider whether insisting on in-person voting is good for the party, at least during an election that has liberals fired up and the elderly inclined to stay home. But the larger story in Wisconsin was an election “almost certain to be tarred as illegitimate.” All Wisconsinites lost that day. All Americans will lose if similar dysfunction happens nationwide in November. Legitimacy questions are bad for the country in the best of times. They can be catastrophic during a medical and economic crisis.   Second, realize that this election is a matter of national pride and international power. American elections matter beyond U.S. borders. China and the United States are competing for influence in the world today. Prior phases of the competition were about economic productivity and military might. The present one is about which political system can deal more effectively with a pandemic. The world is watching, and the results could affect the future prospects of democracy itself. 
 Third, overcome Republican partisanship based on bad facts. Political observers often assume that absentee voting helps Democrats, but that assumption might be wrong even in ordinary times. Florida’s absentee-voting system is key to Republican turnout; it helped Donald Trump in 2016 and Ron DeSantis in 2018. Existing vote-by-mail systems in Colorado and Utah have had no clear advantage for either party. Empirical studies suggest that expanding absentee voting, even greatly expanding it, would be party-neutral. Knight Foundation data suggest that higher turnout would help Trump in some swing states.  In any case, these aren’t ordinary times. A recent Ohio study found that 50 percent of likely voters in that swing state “definitely won’t vote in person” or would be “less likely to vote in person” if coronavirus remains a concern in November. With numbers that big, the party effect is unpredictable. Old assumptions don’t hold when facts on the ground change, and this pandemic changes the underlying facts. Perhaps most important, the more information we get about COVID-19, the clearer it becomes that the disease threatens the elderly to a massively disproportionate extent. The elderly tend to vote Republican. If they stay home while young, highly activated liberal voters show up, Republicans will probably lose.  Fourth, overcome Democratic partisanship based on political opportunism. Some Democrats want to seize on the crisis to make permanent changes to our voting system. Republican opposition would defeat that effort. Nothing would get done. Instead, both parties should agree that any alteration to the voting system in November should include sunset clauses stipulating that the changes are a one-off.   Fifth, Congress must provide funding. States can’t afford the necessary steps otherwise. And since this election is for national offices, the federal government should take some responsibility for it, as a matter of principle. Sixth, states must take legal action to prevent hacking and voter fraud. Such steps are, again, both right as a matter of principle and necessary to overcome partisan wrangling. In the fight against voter fraud, signature-matching, ballot-tracking, and a commitment to prosecuting wrongdoers are proven tools. Affording voters the opportunity to prove questioned signatures is, of course, equally necessary. As to hacking, experience has shown that paper ballots are the most effective means of prevention. There is no system of e-voting that can’t be hacked, but paper ballots work, and absentee ballots are paper ballots. Seventh, states must prepare quickly. Five states — from blue Hawaii to red Utah — already have robust vote-by-mail systems. Twenty-nine more states and the District of Columbia allow absentee voting at will but aren’t prepared for the volume they’ll see in November; they need to ramp up capacity. Of the remaining 16 states, some allow early voting but restrict absentee ballots, some restrict both, some impose requirements (e.g., notarization of mailed ballots) that don’t make sense during a pandemic, and some allow different municipalities to set different policies. These states will need both to make legal changes and to ramp up capacity. Some won’t be able to make all the necessary changes in time but could nonetheless make some useful policy adjustments, such as allowing drive-through voting and expanding the hours or days that polls will be open.  Finally, American citizens must remind their politicians that a representative works for the people who voted him or her into office, not for the party, and not for the president. The American people want options for absentee and safe in-person voting in November. A poll in late April found that 70 percent of Republicans support giving all voters the option to vote absentee in November and that 67 percent want the federal government to cough up the money to make expanded absentee and safe in-person voting possible. On the Democratic side, the numbers are even higher. Elections are sacred. Americans have shed blood for the right to vote, and many would put their lives on the line for democracy again. But why should they do so needlessly? No party and no representative worthy of the name should demand that. Joshua Kleinfeld is a law professor at Northwestern University and a winner of the Federalist Society’s Bator Award. Rachel Kleinfeld is a senior fellow in the Democracy, Conflict, and Governance program at the Carnegie Endowment and a member of the bipartisan National Task Force on Election Crisis. They are brother and sister. 

Today on The Editors, Rich is joined by David Bahnsen to discuss the state of the economy, unemployment, and how he thinks the U.S. will emerge from this crisis. Listen below or subscribe to this podcast on iTunes, Google Play, Stitcher, TuneIn, or Spotify. ﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
  

An increasing percentage of native-born men ages 25-54 (“prime age”) are neither working nor looking for work. The trend has been ongoing for decades, but recessions seem to accelerate it. As the figure below indicates, after prime-age men dropped out of the labor force in large numbers during the 2001 and 2008-2009 recessions, many never returned. Will the same thing happen after the COVID-19 downturn? The situation is worrisome:  The figure is adapted from a new report I coauthored for the Center for Immigration Studies. The blue line shows that the percentage of native-born prime-age men who are not in the labor force rose from 12 percent in April 2019 to a record 14 percent in April 2020. Prime-age men without a bachelor’s degree (the orange line) are now at 18 percent, up from 15 percent a year ago. Perhaps this recession is unique, caused as it was by a virus and a lockdown rather than by structural problems with the economy as a whole. Perhaps “out of the labor force” is a misleading category right now for men who are unable (rather than unwilling) to look for work during the lockdown. Perhaps these men will go right back to work after the threat of the virus recedes and the states fully reopen. Time will tell, but the historical pattern is ominous. If states continue to clamp down on business activity, one consequence could be labor-force dropout that persists long after the economy has officially recovered.  The situation among male youths ages 16 to 24 is an additional cause for concern. As the green line indicates, over a quarter of young men who are not in school are also not in the labor force. They are the prime-age men of the near future, but they are losing potential experience that could be crucial for acclimating to the world of work. Caveats about the data apply again here, since school closures appear to have added about 2.5 percentage points to the normal fraction of youth who are listed as “not in school.” Nevertheless, the risk of men suffering a long-term separation from the labor market is real.  So what to do? First, let’s continue the phased reopenings. A second wave of the virus is possible, but permanent economic harm to millions of families is also possible. Once we acknowledge that there is significant downside risk to reopening and to not reopening, it becomes even more imperative to seek the least disruptive measures necessary to control the virus. A full lockdown should be a last resort.  Second, I’ve written extensively about how low-skill immigration serves as a kind of band-aid over the problem of labor-force dropout among natives. The availability of immigrants allows us to ignore the social and economic problems that cause native men to drop out of the labor force in the first place. Given the restrictions on immigration currently in place, now is a good time to start rethinking what immigration policy should look like when life goes back to normal.  

I have a column up at Politico today on how the press is ignoring or distorting encouraging COVID trends: The question now is whether the media and political system can absorb good news on the virus, which is often ignored or buried under misleading storylines. The press has a natural affinity for catastrophes, which make compelling viewing and good copy. The pandemic is indeed a once-in-a-generation story. So the media is naturally loath to shift gears and acknowledge that the coronavirus  has begun to loosen its grip. Meanwhile, progressives and many journalists have developed a near-theological commitment to the lockdowns, such that any information that undermines them is considered unwelcome, even threatening. This accounts for the widespread sense that no one should say things have gotten better . . . or people are going to die. Usually when it is thought the public can’t handle the truth, it is a truth about some threat that could spark panic. In this case, the truth is information that might make people think it’s safe to go outside again. Further to this point, our friend David Bahnsen shared these charts with me today, which show steady or declining cases in reopening states even as testing goes up:   

The lead story in the New York Times today is a new study from Columbia University disease modelers, which finds that starting lockdowns and social distancing a week or two earlier could have saved many, many lives: If the United States had begun imposing social distancing measures one week earlier than it did in March, about 36,000 fewer people would have died in the coronavirus outbreak, according to new estimates from Columbia University disease modelers. And if the country had begun locking down cities and limiting social contact on March 1, two weeks earlier than most people started staying home, the vast majority of the nation’s deaths — about 83 percent — would have been avoided, the researchers estimated. While some school districts closed as early as March 13, most states closed their schools between March 16, which the Columbia study uses as the rough start date of our pandemic-control measures, and March 23. State lockdowns went into effect from March 24 to April 7. The study is undoubtedly right that we would be in much better circumstances if we had started locking down on March 1. But it’s fair to wonder whether that could realistically have been accomplished. Imagine that President Trump or Dr. Anthony Fauci had gone before the country on the evening of February 29 and declared: My fellow Americans, a new virus that first arose in China has now infected 68 people and killed one. We must immediately close all nonessential businesses and schools, postpone all non-life-threatening medical care, cancel every public event and gathering, and remain inside our homes, leaving only for brief periods of exercise and grocery shopping. We must stay six feet apart from everyone except our immediate families. These extraordinarily disruptive and strict measures will be maintained until further notice, even though they will almost certainly create a level of unemployment on par with the Great Depression. This is a terrible burden, but if we wait even another two weeks, we will bear witness to the deaths of 100,000 Americans by Memorial Day. Would Americans have willingly complied? A lot of them probably would have, but a significant number of them would have thought the measures were a wild, paranoid overreaction. The public might have been more receptive to a dire warning by March 8; by then, the United States had 541 cases and 22 deaths, and the exponential growth was starting to show in the figures and charts. But if any date represented a turning point for the coronavirus in the U.S., it was March 11, when the World Health Organization officially declared a global pandemic, the NCAA announced plans to play its later-canceled basketball tournament without fans, the National Basketball Association suspended its season, and the president announced travel restrictions on visitors from Europe. And even with all of that shocking news, across the country, people still gathered in large crowds for early Saint Patrick’s Day celebrations on the weekend of March 14 and 15. “Normalcy bias” — the idea that tomorrow will be like today, because today was like yesterday — is an extremely powerful force in human psychology. For most Americans, the idea of a strict national lockdown until further notice in response to a virus was the stuff of sci-fi movies. SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, Zika — we were warned about all of those infectious-disease threats, but most of them barely affected our lives. There was always going to be skepticism that this was that bad, and that sweeping, draconian precautions were necessary. With all of that said, our government, at every level, is expected to see these problems clearly even when the public cannot. We spend an enormous amount of money to get the best information possible to policymakers. President Trump’s management of this crisis has been pretty bad. His long list of comments downplaying the potential danger, from “We pretty much shut it down coming in from China” to “The 15 [cases] within a couple of days, is going to be down to zero” to “It’s going to disappear one day, it’s like a miracle,” were ludicrously naive and uninformed. The reports that he simply ignored or didn’t understand the warnings from the intelligence community are deeply disturbing. 
 And Trump wasn’t alone. New York City mayor Bill de Blasio was arguably even worse, telling his constituents to go about their lives normally until March 11. On March 2, New York governor Andrew Cuomo assured his state, “We have the best health-care system on the planet right here in New York. So, when you’re saying, what happened in other countries versus what happened here, we don’t even think it’s going to be as bad as it was in other countries.” Just about every elected official wanted to believe that the outbreak wouldn’t be so bad and that their government was well-prepared to handle it. It is indisputable that most places enacted lockdowns far too slowly. But those who want to fight pandemics with strict quarantines will always be fighting the nature of both communicable diseases and human psychology. Paradoxically, a virus is most easily contained when it seems like it isn’t a threat; as the danger becomes clearer over time, stopping the spread gets more difficult. Successful quarantines always seem like an overreaction, because the danger they were meant to prevent never manifests. We might be comforted by the notion that we can take the hard lessons of the early days of this virus with us into the future and try to apply them to the next pandemic. But there’s a catch: The “luckier” we are — the longer we go without another deadly pandemic after this one passes — the likelier it is that members of the public will forget those lessons, and react with the same nonchalance and skepticism that initially greeted this pandemic. 

Certain governors, including Governor Tim Walz of Minnesota, seem to apply one standard for reopening “non-essential” secular services and another for religious. This week, Walz made the bizarre announcement that while bars, restaurants, and barbers can reopen on June 1, churches can’t. From the Wall Street Journal: The churches are asking for equal treatment not special treatment, and the decision to reopen came only after efforts to work out an arrangement with the Governor were ignored. As a result, starting June 1, while a restaurant or bar can serve up to 50 people outdoors, churches remain restricted to gatherings of 10 or fewer—indoors or out. As the Becket Fund notes, these Minnesota churches plan to reopen with only 33% capacity, rigorous social distancing and hygiene protocols. The editors are the Journal are right. If it’s safe enough to reopen businesses — provided they adhere to new protocols — it would be unconstitutional to deny religious organizations the same opportunity. Both the attorney general and the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals have already made this clear. 

A former Florida state health employee who says she was dismissed from her position for refusing to “manually change data to drum up support for the plan to reopen” had multiple performance issues that led to her removal, according to Florida Department of Health officials. Rebekah Jones, who worked as a data manager for Florida’s DOH, sent a May 15 email informing subscribers to the state’s COVID data listserv that she had been removed from the team overseeing the state’s data “for reasons beyond my control,” and implied that “accessibility and transparency” would suffer in her absence.  “As a word of caution, I would not expect the new team to continue the same level of accessibility and transparency that I made central to the process during the first two months. After all, my commitment to both is largely (arguably entirely) the reason I am no longer managing it,” reads Jones’s May 15 to the public listserv. Jones said she was reassigned on May 5, the same day that the Palm Beach Post reported that 171 positive COVID-19 cases, which were reported in January and February, had been removed from the dashboard. The data was offline for less than a day: According to a review of the dashboard by the Tampa Bay Times, the information — which Jones argued was deleted as part of a cover-up effort — was removed on the afternoon of May 4 and reinstated by the evening of May 5. The Times also reported that Jones was asked by Department of Health I.T. director Craig Curry to “disable the ability to export the data to files from the dashboard” at the request of Dr. Carina Blackmore, the state epidemiologist and director for the Division of Disease Control and Health Protection, who wanted to review the data’s veracity before restoring it to the dashboard.   “This is the wrong call,” Jones replied in an email to the request, before complying. Approximately an hour later, Curry gave Jones the go-ahead to “re-enable” the data. “10-4,” Jones replied. Much of the mainstream political press gave credence to Jones’s claim that she was fired as an act of retaliation by her superiors. According to Jones’s version of events, she was reassigned from the data team over her refusal to cooperate with her superiors’ effort to manipulate COVID data — and was subsequently fired from the DOH for alerting the public to that effort in her email to the listserv. Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Nikki Fried, the only Democrat holding statewide office, followed suit, calling the decision to fire Jones “extraordinarily dangerous to public.” But Florida deputy health secretary Dr. Shamarial Roberson, who orchestrated the state’s expanded COVID-19 tracing force, told National Review that a request to take down and verify data is common, as reviews of the dashboard happen “every day.”  “That data is checked for quality assurance to ensure that it is correct,” she explained. “If the state epidemiologist made the determination that a data field wasn’t properly approved through the approval process, she has the discretion to take something down and quality review it. So data-quality review is always an ongoing process at the department, and senior epidemiologists, they can at their discretion, make that decision to review additional fields based on new information and other things.”  After Jones’s email announcing her reassignment — and the subsequent press storm implying that her superiors were engaged in a coverup — she misrepresented the contents of her email to the public listserv in a May 16 message to Curry, her supervisor. Jones told Curry that her email to the listserv had been an innocuous message informing the public that she was taking a vacation because she “was tired and needed a break from working two months straight.” A copy of the original listserv email reviewed by National Review shows that Jones made no mention of fatigue or vacation; she instead announced that she had been taken off the data team and implied her transfer would harm the health department’s transparency.  “Is this one of those stupid things I shouldn’t have said?” Jones asked Curry, according to a copy of the email obtained by National Review. “I really don’t want this to be a story.” Multiple national and local outlets also falsely claimed that Jones was the “architect” and “manager” of the dashboard in the course of their sympathetic coverage. Jones did publicly assert that she “built” the state’s coronavirus dashboard for a profile in the Syracuse University alumni magazine. “I started from scratch and decided what I thought was important,” Jones told Syracuse University, where she studied geography and journalism. The alumni post also claimed that Jones “initially consulted the global coronavirus map produced by Johns Hopkins University” to come up with the “basic idea.” But the dashboard was not built by Jones and is not even proprietary to the Florida Department of Health. Instead, the department relied on a dashboard built by ArcGIS, a map-making software used by Johns Hopkins for its widely-cited coronavirus map. Jones was part of a team of three people who worked on updating the dashboard with new data.   Other outlets, including MSNBC and NPR, reported that Jones was a “scientist.” While Jones was enrolled for over two years at Florida State University in a geography Ph.D. program, a university spokesman told the Tampa Bay Times the school had not posted any degrees for her, and Jones’s personal blog shows she is not set to complete the doctorate until 2021. Helen Aguirre Ferré, communications director for Florida governor Ron DeSantis, explained that Jones’s “function” was “to load the data into the graphics.” “That is not an accurate assessment, that she built [the dashboard], she participated in putting the dashboard together, she played a role in the development of the website dashboard,” Ferré told National Review. “She’s not a content creator. She doesn’t she’s not a data analyst, she’s not an epidemiologist, she wouldn’t have access to the raw data, much less how to interpret the raw data of the information that she was receiving.” Ferré added that it was Jones’s “insubordination that led to her dismissal,” and that her notice of termination was delivered on Monday.  “She was forever clashing with her team, because she was not a team player. She was erratic. She changed information without consulting with the epidemiological team or her supervisor, and, in short, she was insubordinate,” she explained. “She perceived that she had ownership of this dashboard, which is completely inaccurate.” Jones did not respond to a request for comment about her dismissal. She told CBS12 on Monday that her removal was “not voluntary” and stemmed from her refusal to “censor” data. DeSantis himself told reporters Tuesday that Jones was “not involved in collating any data,” and suggested the media was making a “bogeyman” out of the story. In addition to misrepresenting the contents of her email to the public listserv and inflating her role in the DOH, Jones also published state COVID-19 data on her personal blog without going through the proper channels established to ensure their reliability. “If you haven’t checked out my fantabulous online dashboard, officially the state’s public face of Florida’s coronavirus response, you should do so,” the March 30 blog post reads. The post breaks down the state’s coronavirus testing data by age — a feature that has not been made available on the state dashboard. “I made some charts for the data that there’s simply no room on the dashboard for, so I’m presenting them here for your pleasure,” Jones explains, followed by her own personal analysis of the numbers. It is unclear whether the data is accurate, as well as if Jones’s sharing of the data broke the law or violated her government contract. Roberson explained, however, that while data can be requested for public release, any “human subjects research” requires a review by a health department board, as well as a review of a data-use agreement by the appropriate data custodian, before public consumption. “If this is tried and true and it is scientifically relevant, then that data is released through a data-sharing agreement, and that’s how we make data available,” she explained. “There’s a lot of ongoing projects throughout the state, with universities, with researchers from other states, so it is a regular process at the department to make different data available to the public in a very transparent way. But there is a protocol.” While speaking to reporters on Tuesday, DeSantis also said that Jones should not have been working for the government in the first place because she is facing active criminal charges. “I’ve asked the Department of Health to explain to me how someone would be allowed to be charged with that and continue on, because this was many months ago,” DeSantis stated. “I have a zero-tolerance policy for sexual harassment.” Leon County court records filed in July 2019 show that Jones faces a misdemeanor charge of cyberstalking and a misdemeanor charge of sexual cyberharassment. In 2016, Jones was also arrested while working at Louisiana State University for battery on a police officer and resisting arrest.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

This morning, Republican senators — including Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) — sent a letter to Attorney General Bill Barr, calling on the Department of Justice to open an investigation into Planned Parenthood for improperly claiming coronavirus-relief loans designed for small businesses. The letter was spearheaded by Senator Tom Cotton (R., Ark.) and signed by more than two dozen GOP senators.  Earlier this week, news broke that dozens of Planned Parenthood affiliates had applied for and received a total of about $80 million in forgivable loans from the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), established by the CARES Act for small-business relief, despite the fact that Congress explicitly excluded nonprofit organizations set up as affiliates — large, nonprofit organizations such as Planned Parenthood — from applying for that funding. Based on its most recent financial report, Planned Parenthood had total net assets close to $2 billion and total revenue of about $1.7 billion last fiscal year. The group operates hundreds of clinics across the country, organized into dozens of affiliates, and employs about 16,000 workers, far exceeding the 500-employee cap applied to the small-business loan program. According to this letter, a copy of which was provided exclusively to National Review, more than two dozen GOP senators want Barr to investigate and prosecute “those who would fraudulently steal millions of dollars in taxpayer funds during this pandemic.”  “These Planned Parenthood entities self-certified eligibility for these loans despite the clear ineligibility under the statutory text of [CARES Act],” the senators write. “It was also well-publicized at the time that the CARES Act did not allow Planned Parenthood affiliates to utilize these loans.” They point out that Trump-administration officials publicly clarified that the affiliate restriction meant no funds from the PPP could go to Planned Parenthood.  Despite that, dozens of Planned Parenthood affiliates applied for these loans, and 37 received them. The letter demonstrates that Planned Parenthood executives themselves appeared aware that the program excluded them from applying for the loans: “Most damningly, Planned Parenthood’s own political action committee, Planned Parenthood Action Fund, issued a statement on the CARES Act after the Act’s passage in the Senate, saying: ‘The bill gives the Small Business Administration broad discretion to exclude Planned Parenthood affiliates and other non-profits serving people with low incomes and deny them benefits under the new small business loan program.’” In other words, the organization publicly acknowledged that it was excluded from the loan program, and complained about that fact, just before dozens of its affiliates self-certified as eligible for the loans and claimed them.  “Based on these statements, it seems clear that Planned Parenthood knew that it was ineligible for the small business loans under the CARES Act long before its affiliates fraudulently self-certified that they were eligible,” the senators continue. “As you know, fraudulent loan applications can trigger both civil and criminal penalties.”  The letter concludes by stating that the PPP was designed to assist small businesses and nonprofits in meeting payroll and retaining their employees during the COVID-19 shutdowns. “It was not designed to give government funds to politicized, partisan abortion providers like Planned Parenthood,” the senators write. “Planned Parenthood fraudulently taking tens of millions of dollars that were intended to help keep those small businesses and nonprofit organizations afloat cannot stand and must be addressed.” The letter was signed by Cotton and McConnell, along with Senators Marsha Blackburn (Tenn.), John Boozman (Ark.), Mike Braun (Ind.), Bill Cassidy (La.), John Cornyn (Texas), Ted Cruz (Texas), Steve Daines (Mont.), Mike Enzi (Wy.), Joni Ernst (Iowa), Lindsey Graham (S.C.), Cindy Hyde-Smith (Miss.), Jim Inhofe (Okla.), John Kennedy (La.), James Lankford (Okla.), Mike Lee (Utah), Kelly Loeffler (Ga.), David Perdue (Ga.), Jim Risch (Idaho), Mitt Romney (Utah), Mike Rounds (S.D.), Ben Sasse (Neb.), Rick Scott (Fla.), Tim Scott (S.C.), John Thune (S.D.), and Todd Young (Ind.).  Read the full text of the letter here. Editor’s note: This piece has been updated since its initial publication.  

On the menu today: Certain elites have simply opted out of quarantine rules; wondering how much our news environment should be able to shift to non-virus news; the CDC says you’re less likely to catch the coronavirus from touching objects. One Pandemic and Quarantine for the Elites, Another for Everyone Else  Our fight against the coronavirus is slowly and steadily improving, but . . . we’re still a long ways away from out of the woods. From the numbers on Worldometers, 1,552 Americans succumbed to the disease Tuesday and another 1,403 Americans on Wednesday. We’re trending down significantly from the roughly 2,500 per day at the beginning of the month, but . . . that’s still about a half a 9/11 per day. We’re diagnosing about 20,000 to 30,000 new cases a day; we were above 30,000 new cases per day for most of April. The economic aftershocks have been calamitous. There’s never been a higher demand at food banks. Our kids are still out of school, and across the country, summer camps, programs, and other activities are being canceled. Schools aren’t sure if they will reopen in the fall, meaning that this just-barely-adequate-if-we’re-lucky “distance learning” may continue, in a situation that Michael Brendan Dougherty observes leaves parents with all of the costs of homeschooling but none of the benefits. Most kids haven’t seen a non-sibling peer in person in two-and-a-half months; the plan, I guess, is to continue this isolation through most of the rest of the year. In any other circumstance, we would consider that child abuse. In just about any other hardship that can befall a child, they still get to see their friends! We’ve still got giant problems to work out. It’s one thing to reopen society in a way that accounts for a contagious virus; it’s another thing to reopen society in a way that accounts for a contagious virus and lawyers that are eager to sue people. The CDC says swimming pools should be safe as long as people take the usual social-distancing precautions outside the water, but across the country, cities are deciding to keep their public pools closed. The restaurant and bar industry, the movie-theater industry, the hotel and tourism industry, theme parks, airlines — all of them are desperately trying to figure out how to stay afloat with a small fraction of their usual customer base. Removing the government restrictions is one step, but people still need to feel safe using those businesses before they’ll come back in significant numbers.  Everybody’s enduring hardship in one form or another. Well, almost everybody. From the beginning, we’ve seen evidence that the wealthy and well-connected could more or less buy their way out of the inconveniences and hardship of quarantines. This April story by Vicky Ward at CNN stuck with me: Last week, a Washington, DC-based media executive who is used to attending 200 cocktail parties a year decided that he could take talking to his microwave no more. In contravention of the city’s shelter-in-place executive order, he secretly attended two different dinner parties in Georgetown, an affluent DC-neighborhood. When he first told me this, I assumed I had either misheard or misunderstood. “Virtual dinners right?” I asked. “No” was the reply. These were the old-fashioned, in-person sort. Each time, he explained, the host’s instructions were the same. For both dinners, he entered through the back gate of the property, so disapproving neighbors would not see him. He was told in advance that neither he, nor any other guests, could take any photographs or talk about the party. The first dinner was hosted by a movie producer. A group of four listened to music and sat under heated lamps six feet apart in the garden where they were served dinner. According to the executive, none had been in contact with anyone who had suffered Covid-19 — as far as they knew. All had been isolating. At that dinner party, the food was prepared by a live-in chef, who was masked and gloved, and then served by the producer’s wife. At the second party, held over the weekend at the home of a Democrat political operative, one of the guests brought the food: “lamb to belatedly celebrate Easter.” In attendance were an ambassador, a city councilman and a well-known lobbyist. The night was balmy and they all sat outside for hours. “People did not want to leave,” the media executive told me, speaking on the condition of anonymity, to avoid being Covid-shamed — a new shorthand term for people behaving with apparent indifference to the safety of others. “But everyone had been cooped up for so long, there was much to discuss.” I’ll give you a moment to cope with the shock that a Washington-based media executive, a movie producer, a Democratic political operative, a Washington city councilman, and a well-known lobbyist and their spouses believed the rules didn’t apply to them. At least the ambassador could hide behind diplomatic immunity. (Where’s Roger Murtaugh when you need him?)   Apparently, quarantines are for the little people. If quarantines are optional for the wealthy and well-connected, we should not be surprised that they find them much more tolerable and worthy of extension than everyone else. Last week, the New York Times reviewed data and concludes, “roughly 5 percent of residents — or about 420,000 people — left the city between March 1 and May 1. In the city’s very wealthiest blocks, in neighborhoods like the Upper East Side, the West Village, SoHo and Brooklyn Heights, residential population decreased by 40 percent or more, while the rest of the city saw comparably modest changes.” If you are wealthy enough to own a second home, you have another place to go if you deem the risk of remaining at your current residence too high. Today in the New York Post, David Marcus unleashes a furious rant that his home city’s strict quarantine rules are choking the life out of the city: Beloved haunts, storied rooms, perfect-slice joints are shuttered, many for good. The sweat equity of countless small-business owners is evaporating. Instead of getting people back to work providing for their families, our mayor talks about a fantasyland New Deal for the post-coronavirus era. Open the city. All of it. Right now. Broadway shows, beaches, Yankees games, the schools, the top of the freakin’ Empire State building. Everything. New Yorkers have already learned to socially distance. Businesses can adjust. The elderly and infirm can continue to be isolated. One other indicator of the divide between those who are minimally impacted by the pandemic restrictions and the rest: Have you noticed how a portion of the news environment is moving on from the pandemic, even though our daily lives have not? Are News Institutions Getting Tired of Covering the Coronavirus?   I go back and forth on how much the focus of the news should shift away from the pandemic, and how quickly. In normal times, the Michael Flynn unmasking revelations and arguments would be front-page news, day after day. You can tell that much of the world is eager to argue about Matt Lauer trying to return to public life, or how mean Alison Roman was to those poor celebrities like Chrissy Tiegen and Marie Condo. Jonathan Safran Foer takes to the New York Times to instruct us, “If you care about the working poor, about racial justice, and about climate change, you have to stop eating animals.” You can see how many people are itching to return to the familiar culture-war fights — Kamala Harris introduced a resolution declaring use of the term “Wuhan virus” racist. The Atlantic unveiled a new special section on conspiracy theories, although I still haven’t found an article discussing the cover story in New York magazine asking whether Donald Trump has been an asset of Russian intelligence since 1987. The Washington Post warns that southern states are being reckless in how they’re reopening. (Connecticut has now reopened retail stores, offices with an encouragement to continue working from home, university research programs, and outdoor zoos. I await the Washington Post feature story on how new clusters of coronavirus spread could soon flare across parts of the Nutmeg State.)  I’m not saying that non-coronavirus news doesn’t matter at all. But you’ve probably noticed that this newsletter turned into nearly all-coronavirus, all-the-time in March and hasn’t looked back. Sometimes I miss the old familiar political news and discussion, too. But the pandemic and its aftershocks are the biggest story in the world right now, one that shoves all other news — even traditionally big stories such as a presidential election or North Korea — into the background. I wonder if coronavirus fatigue is driving increasing servings of silliness in our news diet. For the past two months, one of the most dangerous places in the world has been a nursing home in New York state. Chris Cuomo teased his brother, New York governor Andrew Cuomo, about the size of his nose with a giant nasal-swab prop. I remind you this is CNN in prime time, and not Saturday Night Live. The brothers’ bickering was cute at the beginning of this pandemic, but we’re now approaching the end of its tenth week. Don’t Touch That! . . . but It Probably Won’t Kill You  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention adjusted its coronavirus guidelines slightly Wednesday, emphasizing that the virus spreads easily from person to person but “does not spread easily” in other ways, such as touching objects. We would get through this ordeal easier if everyone in positions of authority could be a little more honest about what they know, what they think they know, and what they don’t know. I’ll be honest: I thought, based upon what we were seeing, that spread in places such as the New York City subways was driven in large part by people touching the same objects — poles, handrails, buttons, turnstiles, etc. Apparently, that was a smaller factor, and the primary factor was just people coming within six feet of each other. ADDENDUM: Advice from Nicholas Kristof that many are sure to ignore: “The odd thing about reporting on the coronavirus is that the nonexperts are supremely confident in their predictions, while epidemiologists keep telling me that they don’t really know much at all. Some of that epidemiological humility should seep into public discourse.”  

An additional 2.4 million Americans filed jobless claims during the past week, bringing the total number of unemployed Americans to 38.6 million, or about 23 percent of the workforce. “The hemorrhaging has continued,” Torsten Slok, chief economist for Deutsche Bank Securities, told the New York Times. Stanford University economist Nicholas Bloom has authored a study claiming that up to 42 percent of the layoffs that have occurred during the pandemic will become permanent  “I hate to say it, but this is going to take longer and look grimmer than we thought,” Bloom told the Times. Closures imposed to mitigate the spread of coronavirus have continued to take a toll on the American economy, even as U.S. states begin to move forward with plans to open businesses in regions less affected by the pandemic. On Tuesday, Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin warned lawmakers on the Senate Banking Committee that the economy risked “permanent damage” if shutdowns continue for too long.  “We’re conscious of the health issues and we want to [reopen] in a safe way,” Mnuchin said. However, the Treasury Secretary cautioned, “I think the jobs numbers will be worse before they get better.”    Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A group of GOP senators has begun to push for a coronavirus relief bill with a focus on infrastructure progress, even as others in Senate Republican leadership remain wary of an additional massive spending package. “I want to do infrastructure,” Senator Lindsey Graham (R., S.C.) told CNN on Wednesday. “I told Trump, this is the time. We got it teed up. This is the time to go big….It really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to give a facelift to the country.”  Senators Roy Blunt (R., Mo.) and Roger Wicker (R., Miss.) concur. “I think June doesn’t need to come and go without a phase four,” said Blunt, the chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee. Wicker told CNN that “optimistically, we might move before the Fourth of July….I do think we will move on phase four before the August break.” Congress has passed close to $3 trillion in economic relief legislation in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, the largest such aid packages in U.S. history. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) has attempted to slow down new efforts at relief spending.  “We need to assess what we’ve already done, take a look at what worked and what didn’t work, and we’ll discuss the way forward in the next couple of weeks,” McConnell told reporters on Tuesday. President Trump in late March voiced support for infrastructure legislation, however McConnell dismissed the idea at the time.  “McConnell was essentially saying that, while the president will be willing to spend any amount of money between now and November, it was going to be up to Senate Republicans to act like Republicans and resist crazy spending,” a source with knowledge of a Senate Republican joint call told Axios at the time.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Red- and blue-state America was already divided before the coronavirus epidemic hit. Globalization had enriched the East Coast and West Coast corridors but hollowed out much in between. The traditional values of small towns and rural counties were increasingly at odds with postmodern lifestyles in the cities. There were, of course, traditionalists in blue states. And lots of progressives live in red states. But people increasingly self-segregate to where they feel at home and where politics, jobs, and culture reflect their tastes.  The ensuing left/right, liberal/conservative, Democrat/Republican divide not only intensified in the 21st century, it also took on a dangerous geographical separatism. The coasts vs. the interior reflects two Americas — often in a manner similar to the old Mason–Dixon line that geographically split the U.S. for roughly a century.  Liberals scoff at the deplorables and irredeemables for embracing an ossified, unchanging 18th-century Constitution. The red-staters supposedly cling to their weird, dangerous habits such as owning guns and opposing abortion, while adhering to paleolithic ideas of small government, secure borders, and don’t-tread-on-me individualism. 
 Blue-staters are confident that progressive citizens of the world like themselves are where the global action, money, and future lie. And who could doubt the success of Silicon Valley’s wealthy tech companies, Wall Street’s investment giants, or internationally respected universities such as Harvard, MIT, Caltech, and Stanford? Progressives believe the story of America has most often been one of discrimination, original sin, and a need for constant repentance and reparations for a flawed past.  Conservatives feel just the opposite — that one does not have to perfect to be good, and that America is far better than anywhere else. Red-staters contend that many blue states are broke and need bailouts to ensure that their generous pensions and entitlements don’t wither away into insolvency. Cities are often seen by those in less densely populated areas as dirty, full of homeless people, dangerous, and ungovernable.  Red-staters also see failed statist ideas the world over. For them, China, the European Union, and much of Africa and Latin America are proof that democratic socialism is neither fair nor compassionate. Conservatives welcome in immigrants, but only if they come legally, assimilate to U.S. values, and arrive in manageable numbers to be integrated. When the virus hit, these divides intensified.  Blue-state governors wanted long lockdowns, red-state governors not so much. Elite professionals, state employees, and the wealthy residents of the coasts feel they can easily ride out a bad recession. They believe that even a miniscule chance of dying from the virus still makes it too risky to go out. Yet in red states, there are many self-employed people and small-business owners who are always at risk on the margins. They believe they have great odds to beat the virus but not to beat a more deadly depression. The 2020 election is the unspoken force multiplier of the divide. Blue-state politicians believe that if the lockdown continues, the country won’t recover before November. Donald Trump will then be blamed for the downturn. They hope for a replay of the 1932 election, with Trump as Depression-era Herbert Hoover vs. a progressive challenger with big promises of more programs and larger government. Progressives also want more connectivity with the world abroad to beat the virus. They rely on elite researchers, statisticians, and epidemiologists to chart and predict the course of the epidemic.  Conservatives are convinced that entrepreneurs and individuals will better save us. Most elites, they believe, were wrong in their modeling, their predictions, and their advice about the contagion. Many conservatives think that the best and brightest had little practical experience, less common sense, and did not live in the real world. Red-staters look at the lies of the Chinese, the enabling deceptions of the World Health Organization, and the initial failures of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. They conclude that transnational organizations are sometimes incompetent and corrupt, and that even our own bureaucracies are too unimaginative, sluggish, haughty, and territorial. Is there any agreement between red-state and blue-state America? Perhaps. Red-staters are not flocking to blue-state urban corridors, where the virus hit hardest. They are happy to live in less crowded places, rely on their own cars, have detached homes, and be free of government edicts that often make little sense other than to showcase the dictatorial powers of petty bureaucrats and local officials. Even blue-staters are beginning to see their mass transit, high-rise living, and clogged streets more as incubators of disease than as the circulatory system of an exciting, high-end life.  Perhaps in this time of plague, Americans can at least agree that the romance of Arcadia is suddenly preferable to the allure of big-city lights. © 2020 Tribune Content Agency, LLC 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he diplomatic fallout from the coronavirus has led observers to predict a new cold war between the U.S. and China. President Trump has repeatedly blamed the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) for the pandemic, calling it the “China Virus.” Meanwhile, Chinese propaganda outfits have spread conspiracy theories on social media, charging the U.S. Army with bringing the virus to Wuhan. Yet the diplomatic tussling only began to yield tangible policy changes last week, when the U.S. Commerce Department ratcheted up measures against Chinese telecommunications giant Huawei.  A new Commerce Department rule announced on Friday bars Huawei from purchasing any computer chips made or designed with U.S. equipment. It follows last year’s placement of Huawei on the DOC’s Entity List, which prevented U.S. suppliers from selling their products to the company. After a 120-day grace period, foreign companies that use U.S. chip designs will be required to suspend sales to Huawei. The new restrictions are the latest in a series of steps the federal government has taken against the company. In January of 2019, the U.S. Justice Department charged the company with stealing trade secrets and evading sanctions against Iran. Another round of indictments, which included a racketeering charge, was released in February of this year. Aside from criminal activity, U.S. policymakers have expressed concerns about Huawei’s transferring technology to the People’s Liberation Army. The CCP requires all Chinese firms to cooperate with the Chinese military as part of its policy of “civil-military fusion.” In order to combat that policy, last month the Commerce Department enacted export controls on technology that could have military applications. In a statement, Senator Ben Sasse said that “the United States needs to strangle Huawei. Modern wars are fought with semiconductors . . . companies that depend on American technology can’t jump into bed with the Chinese Communist Party.” Yet as eager as the administration has been to appear tough on Huawei, action against the company has until now been limited. The Commerce Department has continually granted extensions to its “temporary general license” (TGL) since placing it on the Entity List last year, allowing the company to do business with U.S. firms despite the restrictions.  The response from Huawei and industry researchers to last week’s announcement indicates that this time may be different. Huawei’s deputy chairman characterized the new rules as an existential threat to the company, saying, “We will now work hard to figure out how to survive.” In a note to clients, a Credit Suisse semiconductor analyst predicted that chipmakers would “halt their production of Huawei chips unless a resolution, settlement or loophole is found after a 120-day grace period.”  
 But the American Enterprise Institute’s Derek Scissors argues that the new rules are unlikely to be implemented any time soon. Even after three rounds of indictments, “We’ve never restricted Huawei under the entity list. We’ve given them five temporary general license (TGL) extensions. It’s a farce,” Scissors says in an interview. He predicts that the Commerce Department will extend Huawei’s TGL when it expires in August. (On the same day as it announced the new rules, the DOC, which declined a request for comment, granted Huawei an additional license extension. It said in a press release that it expected no further extensions to be granted.) Retired brigadier general Robert Spalding, now a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute, disagrees with Scissors’s assessment. “I think it will be enforced, definitely. Even if there’s a delay, the door is shutting for Huawei to U.S. technology,” Spalding says, adding that he believes the new rules will severely undermine Huawei’s ability to deploy 5G technology.  In addition to imposing export controls, the U.S. has pushed to keep allies from working with Huawei, with mixed results. In January, the U.K. announced that it would allow Huawei to build some of its 5G infrastructure. In the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, British officials have yet to reconsider that decision. The U.K. is the only country in the “Five Eyes” intelligence partnership that has allowed Huawei into its 5G network. Elsewhere, Bharti Artel, one of India’s largest telecoms, inked a 5G deal with Finnish company Nokia in April, defying expectations that it would partner with the Chinese firm instead. The new rules from Commerce could influence other companies in the same direction.  The White House and Congress are also exploring other tools to decouple the economy from China. Reuters has reported that lawmakers have suggested incentivizing companies to reshore manufacturing from China to the U.S. with tax breaks and direct subsidies. Meanwhile, amid the ratcheting up of tensions, the much-heralded U.S.–China “phase-one” trade deal appears to be unraveling. As part of the deal, Beijing to purchase $200 billion worth of U.S. goods. The Peterson Institute’s Chad Bowman estimates that China has as of now purchased less than half that amount, and the global slowdown in economic activity caused by the coronavirus is making it increasingly unlikely that it will make good on the rest.  For his part, President Trump has expressed a desire to take further action against China. “We could cut off the whole relationship,” he said in a recent Fox Business interview. But any further punitive measures would decrease U.S. exports to the country, undermining one of Trump’s central goals. The short-term economic and political pain from a decoupling may be too much for the president to stomach. 

1. Justice Department says California coronavirus plan should open churches sooner 2. Cuomo: Small religious gatherings allowed starting Thursday 3. About aging out of foster care — She Escaped Sex Work for College. Now the Virus Threatens Her New Life. 4. How a Queens Pastor Tends to His Flock From Six Feet Away   5. COVID-19 Has Arrived In Rohingya Refugee Camps And Aid Workers Fear The Worst 6. ‘You’re not alone, Louie.’ N.J. nurses wouldn’t let a coronavirus patient with no family die alone. 7. Churches challenging stay-at-home orders in court 8. Terry Teachout in the WSJ: Small arts organizations, suffering financially during the coronavirus turndown, are part of the social fabric of their communities. All the more reason to help them survive. 9. 5 Options for Family-Friendly Quarantine Viewing, From ‘The LEGO Movie 2’ to ‘Our Planet’ 10. Yankee Stadium Is Being Turned Into a Drive-in Concert and Movie Venue This Summer  

Senator Kamala Harris last week introduced a resolution condemning the use of the phrase “Wuhan virus” to refer to SARS-CoV-2, the deadly coronavirus that has spread from the Chinese city of Wuhan across the globe, as racist. Harris introduced the resolution on Thursday, joined by fellow Democratic senators Tammy Duckworth of Illinois and Mazie Hirono of Hawaii. It aims to “condemn and denounce anti-Asian sentiment, racism, discrimination, and religious intolerance” related to the coronavirus, and specifically cites phrases such as “Wuhan virus,” “Chinese virus,” and “Kung-flu.” It also calls on federal officials to “expeditiously investigate and document” credible reports of hate crimes or threats against the Asian-American and Pacific Islander communities and “investigate and prosecute perpetrators” if necessary.  President Trump briefly referred to the coronavirus as the “Chinese virus,” defending his use of the term by saying “it comes from China,” but later backed away from the phrase after reports of an uptick in violence against Asian Americans. “Look, everyone knows it came out of China, but I decided we shouldn’t make any more of a big deal out of it,” Trump said in early March. “Inflammatory and racist rhetoric from officials at the highest level of our government has contributed to a disturbing rise in hate crimes targeting Asian Americans,” Hirono said last month when announcing plans to introduce the resolution. The coronavirus first appeared in Wuhan late last year and is thought to have passed from bats to humans through the city’s “wet markets.” Since then, it has spread to at least 177 countries and infected more than 4.9 million people globally. As of Wednesday afternoon, at least 324,900 people have died after contracting it.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Charlie Camosy has been one of the most persistent and consistent voices calling attention to the dangers of rationing in these coronavirus times. This has happened even as the world has seemed to stop to protect vulnerable human lives — you’ve seen the decisions governors have made that have left men and women in nursing homes even more vulnerable than they started out. This is about more than bad governance, it’s about an ideology that infects so much of our culture and lives.  Even on a good day, he points to the dangers of our throwaway society, that casts asides human lives. Camosy, who is an associate professor of theological and social ethics at Fordham University, is author of Resisting Throwaway Culture: How a Consistent Life Ethic Can Unite a Fractured People and Beyond the Abortion Wars: A Way Forward for a New Generation. His is a good and helpful and brave voice. I hope you enjoy listening as much as I enjoyed talking with him. This is a time for taking this effort we’ve all made to protect some of the most vulnerable among us and making it the way we live our life as a culture. ﻿﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
  

Florida governor Ron DeSantis, a Republican, on Wednesday lambasted the mainstream press for confidently projecting a disastrous Covid outbreak in his state. “You’ve got a lot of people in your profession [journalists] who waxed poetically for weeks and weeks, about how Florida was going to be just like New York. ‘Wait two weeks, Florida’s going to be next;’ ‘Just like Italy, wait two weeks.’ Well hell, we’re eight weeks away from that, and it hasn’t happened,” DeSantis told reporters outside at an Orlando nursing home with Vice President Mike Pence.  The governor noted that Florida had a lower coronavirus death rate than various states on the Eastern Seaboard and the Midwest, with 2,096 confirmed deaths out of 47,000 cases as of Wednesday. Media outlets had predicted a looming disaster if Florida reopened its economy too soon, although the reopening has proceeded without a major rise in cases. DeSantis says any insinuation Florida doesn't have best data is typical partisan narrative. "You've got a lot of people in your profession who waxed poetically for weeks and weeks about how Florida was going to be just like NY."https://t.co/jTzJmKk8X0 pic.twitter.com/1sGw3Z1P3V — WFLA NEWS (@WFLA) May 20, 2020  “We’ve succeeded, and I think that people just don’t want to recognize it because it challenges their narrative,” DeSantis remarked. “It challenges their assumption, so they’ve got to try to find a bogeyman.” DeSantis explained to National Review that his state had implemented a policy of keeping coronavirus patients out of nursing homes for the duration of the infection to prevent spread of the disease, which is highly contagious in closed environments. That policy contrasts with New York governor Andrew Cuomo’s March 25 mandate that nursing homes must accept coronavirus patients discharged from the hospital. At least 665 nursing home residents in Florida have died from coronavirus, while 5,601 nursing home residents have succumbed to the disease.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In today’s Morning Jolt, while summarizing a list of bad news, I noted that “the Oxford vaccine effort is not as promising as initial reports indicated.” A reader points out that the results of the trials in monkeys could still yield a treatment that would mitigate the effects of the virus, if not cure it: “On autopsy, the researchers found the virus in the vaccinated monkeys’ lungs. On the upside, none of the vaccinated monkeys displayed pneumonia which suggests that, while not stopping the virus, it may be partially protective.” Pneumonia, or inflammation of the air sacs in the lungs in response to an infection, is one of the biggest ways the virus is killing people. Emergency room doctor Richard Levitan wrote in the New York Times last month: Pneumonia caused by the coronavirus has had a stunning impact on the city’s hospital system. . . . During my recent time at Bellevue, though, almost all the E.R. patients had Covid pneumonia. Pneumonia is an infection of the lungs in which the air sacs fill with fluid or pus. Normally, patients develop chest discomfort, pain with breathing and other breathing problems. But when Covid pneumonia first strikes, patients don’t feel short of breath, even as their oxygen levels fall. And by the time they do, they have alarmingly low oxygen levels and moderate-to-severe pneumonia (as seen on chest X-rays). Normal oxygen saturation for most persons at sea level is 94 to 100 percent; Covid pneumonia patients I saw had oxygen saturations as low as 50 percent. If Oxford researchers can develop a way to prevent a coronavirus infection from turning into pneumonia, their efforts will save a lot of lives — even if they don’t develop the vaccine they hoped and initially thought they might have.  

Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) has sent a letter to the Small Business Administration, asking its officials to explain how Planned Parenthood affiliates were able to receive $80 million in Paycheck Protection Program loans despite being ineligible and accusing the abortion business of committing fraud. The CARES Act, which created the PPP to administer forgivable loans to small businesses affected by the COVID-19 pandemic and related shutdowns, explicitly stated that nonprofits organized as affiliates — Planned Parenthood’s business model — did not qualify as small businesses for the purposes of the loans.  Even so, the SBA disbursed a total of $80 million in those loans to 37 Planned Parenthood affiliates across the country. “Section 1102 of [the CARES Act] says that nonprofits are eligible for the program only if they and their affiliate organizations have no more than 500 employees. As the White House correctly said last month, Planned Parenthood, at about 16,000 employees nationally, fails to meet this requirement,” Hawley wrote in his letter. “In the light of the clear text of the CARES Act and Planned Parenthood’s own admission that every one of its offices are affiliated with each other, it is hard to conclude anything other than that Planned Parenthood committed fraud,” the letter went on. “The SBA application form required each of the 37 Planned Parenthood affiliates to certify that Planned Parenthood, as a whole, employs no more than 500 employees. The application form further required Planned Parenthood to certify that it ‘underst[oo]d that knowingly making a false statement to obtain a guaranteed loan from SBA is punishable under the law.’”  It is worth noting, too, that Planned Parenthood itself has openly acknowledged that its affiliates were ineligible for the PPP loans, complaining about that fact on its website: “The bill gives the Small Business Administration broad discretion to exclude Planned Parenthood affiliates and other non-profits serving people with low incomes and deny them benefits under the new small business loan program.”  Among his many requests, Hawley asks the SBA to identify the Planned Parenthood affiliates that improperly applied for funds, provide copies of their applications, and identify those that receives loans, as well as the SBA officials responsible for disbursing them. He also asks that the SBA outline the steps it is taking to ensure that the Planned Parenthood affiliates in question return the funds they received, with interest.  

Yesterday, I pointed out the potential consequences of having an overwrought, childish, partisan debate over a lifesaving drug that’s used by millions of Americans. Today, I see, Joe Biden is comparing hydroxychloroquine to poison. “It’s like saying maybe if you inject Clorox into your blood it may cure you,” Biden said of Donald Trump’s admission that he takes the drug. “C’mon, man! What is he doing? What in God’s name is he doing?”  Now, I get that Biden thinks it’s cute to merge the myth that Trump wants Americans to inject themselves with bleach and the president’s unproven prophylactic use of hydroxychloroquine. It’s worth noting, however, that the presumptive Democratic Party nominee is also now telling Americans — including those who need this low-risk prescribed drug that has been approved for all public use for over 70 years — that taking hydroxychloroquine is tantamount to injecting yourself with bleach. Listen to this NPR interview with some doctors trying to conduct tests of hydroxychloroquine effectiveness. Dr. John Giles, a rheumatologist at Columbia University, who says that the partisan fight over hydroxychloroquine has made it virtually impossible for him to find people to test the effectiveness of the drug against coronavirus. Why would anyone want to swallow Clorox, right? “We are hearing now from some participants that the study and the drug feel too political and they just don’t want to participate at all,” says Dr. Christine Johnston at the University of Washington. Giles also points out that hydroxychloroquine is a “very, very safe drug,” and yet he can’t get people to participate in a study because “pretty much everyone” believes it’s “dangerous to your heart.”  You might remember the same media that is deeply offended by Trump’s championing of an “unproven” drug wrote story after story about a study, neither rigorous nor peer-reviewed, that claimed hydroxychloroquine regularly caused heart arrhythmias.  So Giles was unable to conduct any trials. Other doctors are struggling to find people as well. There is no other conceivable reason why this happens other than the politicization and fear-mongering of a drug.  Merely because Trump championed the drug, Dana Milbank feels free to compare it to “camel urine” and Representative Donna Shalala feels free to joke about how it might cause hair loss. (I wonder if the thousands of young people who need hydroxychloroquine think it’s as funny as she does.) These people don’t care one whit about science, they are consumed with hate for Trump. There are a number doctors with solid qualifications who see promise in hydroxychloroquine as a therapeutic answer to COVID-19. Whether they are right or wrong is yet to be seen. Or maybe not, since knee-jerk anti-Trumpism has created an environment where scientists can’t conduct a simple study.  

Pandemics call for a willingness to break medicine out of the usual red-tape mentality and accept some risks in combating a fast-moving, deadly virus. In that spirit, there was nothing wrong in theory with President Trump’s willingness to push the health-care system to consider hydroxychloroquine, although at his briefings he often sounded like a salesman desperate to make his quarterly quota.  Hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial drug, is a well-established medicine for other purposes, and its potential has been worth exploring. Some promising early results led Democratic governors such as Andrew Cuomo and Gretchen Whitmer to join the White House task force’s cautious optimism. Too many of the president’s critics instead dug themselves into actively rooting for the treatment to fail. The responsible thing to do with a clinically untested treatment is go where the evidence follows. The president, however, has responded to the barrage of criticism with his trademark relish for a fight. He now has publicly declared that he is taking hydroxychloroquine himself, as if his personal confidence in the drug is all that matters. This marks a new chapter in a stupid sideshow that no one needs. It will embroil the White House and the Republican Party in defending hydroxychloroquine for the same reason his critics loathe a drug they hadn’t heard of before a few months ago — simply because it is a thing Trump favors. The vice president has already felt it necessary to state that he is not taking it.  The president is also making a bet on a matter out of his control, and just as the evidence in support of his position is diminishing. While reports are conflicting and the jury is still out on formal trials and peer-reviewed research, the studies so far are trending against the recommendation of hydroxychloroquine. New York hospitals have abandoned it, and recent studies have found no benefit, including one conducted by the Department of Veterans Affairs. Trump dismissed the VA study, calling it “a ‘Trump enemy’ statement” and arguing that the patients given the drug “were very old, almost dead.” 
 Donald Trump wasn’t elected for his bedside manner, but this is unworthy of the seriousness of the moment and of his office. Beware the political side effects. 

This may be the most spectacularly under-discussed story of the pandemic: A dataset of coronavirus cases and deaths from the military’s National University of Defense Technology, leaked to 100Reporters, offers insight into how Beijing has gathered coronavirus data on its population. The source of the leak, who asked to remain anonymous because of the sensitivity of sharing Chinese military data, said that the data came from the university. . . . While not fully comprehensive, the data is incredibly rich: There are more than 640,000 updates of information, covering at least 230 cities—in other words, 640,000 rows purporting to show the number of cases in a specific location at the time the data was gathered. Each update includes the latitude, longitude, and “confirmed” number of cases at the location, for dates ranging from early February to late April. It is worth noting that each of the 640,000 updates counts a number of cases, and that number may be more than one: “The dataset reports one case of coronavirus in a KFC in the eastern city of Zhenjiang on March 14, for example, while a church in the northeastern provincial capital of Harbin saw two cases on March 17.” There are many reasons to doubt China’s official numbers. The official count of cases hit 84,000 at the beginning of March and has barely risen at all since then. Since March 1, the official data indicates the country — with almost 1.4 billion people — has had only one day with more than 300 new cases. China’s official figures show just two deaths since April 17. In mid-April, the city of Wuhan revised its number of coronavirus deaths from 2,579 to 3,869 — a statistically improbable increase of exactly 50 percent. If China’s numbers are accurate, then tiny Peru — a country with about 2 percent of China’s population — has more cases since the start of the pandemic.  The contention that a country with almost 1.4 billion people, with many living in close quarters in crowded cities with sanitary conditions that are less than ideal, simply brought its number of new cases and deaths down to nearly zero overnight is simply not plausible. What are China’s real numbers? If each of the updates is a report of one case, the country had 640,000 cases; if the average of each update is 2 cases, it’s about 1.28 million cases; if the average of each update is 3 cases, it’s 1.92 million cases. Keep in mind, this is in 230 cities — not the entire country, but a good chunk of it.   This dataset from 100Reporters suggests China had at least 640,000 to 2 million cases in 230 cities in a three-month period, a range which feels a lot more plausible than the official numbers, if not an absolutely complete count. A sum of 640,000 by itself would be the second-highest number of total cases in the world, behind the United States and nearly twice as many as Russia’s 308,000. (For what it’s worth, China’s official numbers indicated the country had 17,000 cases by early February.) China is the furthest along in this pandemic, and ideally, the rest of the world would be able to look at their experiences to know what to expect as the outbreak progresses. But the top priority of the Chinese government is to look masterly and in control at all times, leaving the rest of the world guessing at just how bad things are in that country.  

I have a piece up on the homepage today about Florida’s approach to the COVID-19 crisis. If you talk to Governor DeSantis and his team, it’s impossible to conclude anything other than that they have taken this seriously from the beginning, been immersed in the data and research, and crafted a well-considered response. Which makes it all the more astonishing and unfair that the media has been portraying DeSantis as a yokel who was going to get Floridians killed with his lax approach. In fact, on an absolutely central policy question — how to deal with the nursing homes — DeSantis and his team were much more stringent than other states. To simplify, in places in the Northeast like New York, the idea was to supposedly save the hospitals by getting COVID-positive patients out of hospitals and into nursing homes; in Florida, the idea was to save the nursing homes by keeping COVID patients in the hospitals or getting them into hospitals. Now, it’s obvious who was right, but Florida officials had to fight the hospitals on this. Here is a passage where Mary Mayhew, secretary of Florida’s Agency for Healthcare Administration, explains: Mary Mayhew had daily calls with the hospitals, with people involved in discharge planning on the line. “Every day on these calls,” she says, “I would hear the same comments and questions around, we need to get these individuals returned back to the nursing home. We drew a hard line early on. I said repeatedly to the hospital, to the CEOs, to the discharge planners, to the chief medical officers, ‘I understand that for 20 years it’s been ingrained, especially through Medicare reimbursement policy, to get individuals in and out. That is not our focus today. I’m not going to send anyone back to a nursing home who has the slightest risk of being positive.’” “What we said constantly is let’s not have two cases become 20 or five become 50,” she continues. “If you don’t manage this individual as you return them back, you will have far more being transferred back to the hospital.” Early on, when tests had a slow turnaround, there was a lot of pressure to give way, but Mayhew was unmovable on the question. At the other end of the equation at the nursing homes, the state made it clear, according to Mayhew, “if you are unable to adhere to these infection-control standards, if you are unable to safely isolate and dedicate staff to an isolation wing or unit, you need to transfer that individual to a hospital.” As the health officials put it, succinctly, “We wanted people out, not in.” I urge you to read the whole thing — the insights of DeSantis and his team are an important contribution to the debate over how to respond to COVID. 

I realize that balancing the risk of more infections against the need to reopen society for economic, health, and psychological reasons is a complicated one. I realize different leaders will look at these risks, benefits, and costs and come to different conclusions. I realize those responsible for reopening decisions take their responsibilities seriously, and the last thing they would ever want is making the wrong call and inadvertently allowing the virus to spread further.  But a lot of these decisions, when examined in aggregate, really don’t make much sense. Shopping malls can reopen, but not summer camps and other programs for kids? Many water parks and public swimming pools are remaining closed, even though the CDC guidance is “there is no evidence that the virus that causes COVID-19 can be spread to people through the water in pools, hot tubs, spas, or water play areas. Proper operation and maintenance (including disinfection with chlorine and bromine) of these facilities should inactivate the virus in the water.” Everyone is in chlorinated water designed to kill germs! College campuses can reopen with sufficient precautions at the end of summer, but elementary, middle, and high schools are still up in the air?   Bars and restaurants can reopen with limited capacity . . . but apparently sporting events, concerts, or other large venues with staggered seating will not be an option anytime soon? From the beginning of this pandemic, we’ve been told that simple steps can dramatically reduce the risk of catching the virus. Wash your hands frequently or use hand sanitizer. Try to remain six feet away from other people outside your household. Most health experts came around to a consensus on wearing masks. Try to avoid touching the same spots or objects as other people; if you must touch those spots, wear gloves. Stores and institutions that have people touching a spot — like a keypad for credit cards — should wipe them down frequently. Stay home if you’re sick or have any symptoms. All of this aligns with common sense. But apparently some of our leaders think the virus spreads in camps but not shopping malls, in water parks and at beaches but not nursing homes, and in schools but not college campuses. 

Today on The Editors, Rich, Charlie, and Michael discuss Trump’s statement that he’s taking hydroxychloroquine, and who is right when it comes to wearing a mask. Listen below, or subscribe to this podcast on iTunes, Google Podcasts, Stitcher, TuneIn, or Spotify. ﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
 

Yesterday, I wrote a piece for the homepage about how House Democrats are fighting to extend small-business loans to Planned Parenthood in the upcoming round of coronavirus-relief spending. It turns out they needn’t bother, because the abortion corporation has already availed itself of those resources, despite language barring them from applying for the funds.  In earlier iterations of the stimulus legislation, Republicans quashed Democratic efforts to extend funding to Planned Parenthood, inserting language into the bill that prohibits nonprofit groups organized as affiliates — a category that includes Planned Parenthood’s business model — from receiving forgivable small-business loans. But that didn’t stop Planned Parenthood from claiming those small-business loans anyway. According to new reporting, 37 Planned Parenthood affiliates applied for and received a total of $80 million in loans from the Paycheck Protection Program, which was established by the CARES Act to aid small businesses during the economic fallout related to the COVID-19 pandemic. “Planned Parenthood, the nation’s largest abortion business, tried to defraud taxpayers during the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression,” Senator Ben Sasse (R., Neb.) said in a statement after the news broke. “The Paycheck Protection Program is supposed to be a lifeline for small businesses, not a slush fund for Big Abortion. The administration needs to reclaim that money and fire the bureaucrats who signed off on this scam.” My piece yesterday explains a little more about why Planned Parenthood in no way qualifies as a small business: According to its most recent financial report, Planned Parenthood had total net assets close to $2 billion and total revenue of about $1.7 billion last fiscal year. More than one-third of that revenue came from government reimbursements and grants, well over half a billion dollars. Meanwhile, there is little evidence that the pandemic has created any financial problem for Planned Parenthood or prevented its affiliates from conducting their abortion business as usual. In several states, “reproductive health care” was explicitly classified as an essential service, and Planned Parenthood clinics were permitted to remain open and fully functional. In states that classified abortion as nonessential, Planned Parenthood joined other abortion-advocacy groups in swiftly suing to block those rules — and in most states, they won. Despite routinely classifying itself as a health-care provider, Planned Parenthood has failed to offer any actual health care during the pandemic and has in fact merely ramped up its provision of abortion. In Pennsylvania, for instance, the organization shuttered all its health centers but kept open all its clinics that perform abortions. The president of Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, the group’s Colorado affiliate, said that its abortion numbers “have been pretty extraordinary” during the pandemic and cited an increase in women traveling from out of state for an abortion. As stay-at-home orders went into effect across the country, the websites of local Planned Parenthood affiliates began to display messages emphasizing that they would not offer any kind of COVID-19 care, but patients could continue to show up for “essential services” such as abortion. The Small Business Administration, which administers the Paycheck Protection Program, is supposedly in the process of contacting each Planned Parenthood affiliate to inform them that the aid isn’t for them and trying to get it back. I wish them the best of luck.  

Last month, the Congressional Budget Office offered a mildly apocalyptic assessment of the economic crash, projecting that U.S. unemployment will top out at 16 percent in the third quarter, and still be at 10.1 percent in 2021. Are you ready for a little good news? I mean, a really little bit of good news? The CBO’s updated projection released yesterday puts the third quarter’s unemployment rate at “only” 15.8 percent, and all the way down to 9.3 percent in 2021.  The CBO’s projection of second quarter GDP has marginally improved from -11.8 percent to merely -11.2 percent. Yay?  

We didn’t want to adapt, but we adapted. All fifty states have now partially reopened. For those who argue it’s too early, note that the lockdowns started ten weeks ago. Sure, the medically or scientifically ideal policy might be to keep every American in their homes nonstop every day for three months, but that was never a realistic option. We flattened the curve, our hospitals were not overwhelmed, and now we face the equally difficult challenge of making life go on as the pandemic continues and, we hope, starts to wane. Today let’s look at what’s going right at this current moment, and what’s going wrong. What’s Going Right What’s Going Wrong Perhaps our greatest weakness in this crisis has been the inability to speak honestly about difficult truths — among political leaders, among the media, among ordinary citizens. Today, Kevin Williamson tears into a couple of prominent examples: Governor Andrew Cuomo of New York said the other day, “as I said from day one, I’m not going to choose between public health and economic activity.” Everybody knows it is a lie, beginning with Governor Cuomo. We are going to choose between public health and economic activity. We are going to try to strike some intelligent balance between competing concerns, and, even if we do our very best, innocent people are going to get hurt on both sides of that balance, and some of them will surely die — either from COVID-19 or from the economic consequences of the lockdown. We do not have very many adults in government, but if we did, those adults would understand — and make a point of dwelling on the fact — that every decision of any consequence in public policy involves tradeoffs. We are going to choose between liberty and security, between protecting the rights of the criminally accused and the interests of crime victims, between efficiency and stability, between our commitment to free speech and our desire to counteract disinformation, between the interests of today’s social-welfare beneficiaries and tomorrow’s taxpayers. Pretending that there is no choice and no tradeoffs does not liberate us from choosing. Mostly, it ensures that we choose poorly and that the choosing is left to ignorant and irresponsible demagogues. Perhaps Americans’ perpetual dissatisfaction with their leaders — manifested in that low approval rating for Congress, no matter which party is running which chamber — is an indication of how often our leaders fail to deliver on their promises of easy solutions with no trade-offs. But if we keep believing those same unrealistic promises and unworkable happy-talk . . . is the problem with those leaders . . . or with us for believing in them?  ADDENDUM: Yesterday, I had a chance to chat about the coronavirus and China with political commentator, military historian, retired U.S. Marine lieutenant colonel, and infamously controversial historical figure Oliver North on his program. It should appear here sometime soon.  

 A true Renaissance man, Matt Ridley is a British journalist, a member of the House of Lords, a businessman, and the author of many publications, including The Rational Optimist, his very influential book about the innate human tendency to trade goods and services, which he argues is the source of all human prosperity. Ridley’s new book, How Innovation Works, chronicles the history of innovation and argues that we need to change the way we think about innovation, to see it as an incremental, bottom-up, fortuitous process that happens to society as a direct result of the human habit of exchange, rather than as an orderly, top-down process developing according to a plan. Ridley also discusses the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the world’s economies, the real story of Thomas Edison and why he was one of the greatest innovators in human history, why China may not be the threat it appears to be (at least not technologically), and some predictions as to what the world may look like in 2050.  Recorded on May 6th, 2020  

More U.S. voters see China as an “enemy” than as a friend or ally amid the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new Politico/Morning Consult poll. The data shows that the percentage of U.S. voters who see China as hostile has risen 11 percentage points since January to 31 percent, while the number of respondents who view China as a friend or an ally has fallen by nine points in the same timeframe to a combined 23 percent. Those who view China as unfriendly but not an enemy remains at around 30 percent — a number that has stayed constant over the past five months.  Ahead of the November presidential election, the poll found that President Trump and former vice president Biden are essentially tied with voters on the China issue, with 40 percent trusting Biden more, 38 percent favoring Trump, and 21 percent undecided. While both candidates have fielded dueling ads over who has been tougher on the Chinese Communist Party, voters prefer working with China to solve the pandemic over holding China accountable at the expense of cooperation by a 28 point margin — 50 to 38 percent. While the majority of respondents view both Biden and Trump unfavorably, Trump is underwater by 14 points compared to Biden’s four points. Voters also trust Biden more than Trump in handling the pandemic, while the president is viewed more favorably in restarting the economy.  China hawkishness has been on the rise since the pandemic began, with Pew Research Center finding in a poll last month that Americans who view China unfavorably outnumber those who view China favorably by more than a 2-to-1 margin, 66 to 26 percent.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin on Tuesday warned that continued lockdowns meant to slow the spread of coronavirus could scar the U.S. economy. “There is the risk of permanent damage” if the economy stays shut, Mnuchin told lawmakers at a hearing of the Senate Banking Committee. “We’re conscious of the health issues and we want to do this in a safe way.”  Mnuchin was joined by Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell to answer lawmakers’ questions on the use of funds provided in economic relief legislation passed in March and April. Both officials have warned that the U.S. economy faces a challenging period ahead. “I think the jobs numbers will be worse before they get better,” Mnuchin said. Job losses already total upwards of 36 million, or about 20 percent of the workforce, with an unemployment rate of about 14 percent. “This is the biggest shock we’ve seen in living memory,” Powell told the senators. Powell suggested that the federal government may need to increase economic aid even further if local governments are unable to balance their budgets: “We have the evidence of the global financial crisis and the years afterward, where state and local government layoffs and lack of hiring did weigh on economic growth.”  Congress and President Trump have already signed off on economic relief packages approaching $3 trillion. Democrats and some Republicans, notably Missouri senator Josh Hawley, have pushed for additional federal aid to Americans laid off from work during the coronavirus pandemic.  However, Senate Republican leadership has cautioned against additional measures until more data can be gathered on the effectiveness of previous legislation. “We need to assess what we’ve already done, take a look at what worked and what didn’t work, and we’ll discuss the way forward in the next couple of weeks,” Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) told reporters on Tuesday.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Department of Justice warned California in a Tuesday letter that the state’s lockdown order “facially discriminates against religious exercise” and that Governor Gavin Newsom’s rulings “do not justify California’s actions” in banning in-person worship. Eric S. Dreiband, an assistant attorney general and the head of the Justice Department’s civil rights division, wrote in a three-page letter to Newsom that the state’s determination of “essential” businesses —including in the entertainment and ecommerce industries — showed an “unequal treatment of faith communities.”  “California has not shown why interactions in offices and studios of the entertainment industry, and in-person operations to facilitate nonessential ecommerce, are included on the list as being allowed with social distancing where telework is not practical, while gatherings with social distancing for purposes of religious worship are forbidden, regardless of whether remote worship is practical or not,” the letter reads. Newsom said he had “deep admiration to the faith community” on Monday, adding that he acknowledged “the need and desire to know when their congregants can once again start coming back to the pews, coming back together.” But the letter warns that “the Constitution calls for California to do more to accommodate religious worship, including in Stage 2 of the Reopening Plan.” Attorney General Bill Barr, who said last month that the Justice Department would “address” any state lockdown orders that “impinge on either civil rights or on the national commerce,” also told religious leaders that the DOJ would not allow the “singling out” of faith communities.  “Standing up for liberty is one of our highest priorities, my highest priorities,” Barr said, according to a transcript of his remarks provided to National Review.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Acting Department of Homeland Security secretary Chad Wolf announced Tuesday that the U.S. would be extending its border closures with Canada and Mexico by an additional 30 days. “The President has made it clear that we must continue to keep legitimate, commercial trade flowing while limiting those seeking to enter our country for non-essential purposes,” Wolf said in a statement. “Non-essential travel will not be permitted until this administration is convinced that doing so is safe and secure.”  With the move, which was first reported last week, the border will not reopen until June 22 at the earliest. It was first closed in March amid the growing coronavirus pandemic. The power to reopen the borders to tourist and other non-commercial travel rests with Centers for Disease Control and Prevention head Robert Redfield, according to a rule filed Tuesday. Wolf said that the U.S. had made the decision in coordination with its northern and southern neighbors. Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau agreed with the decision in a press conference on Tuesday, saying “It was the right thing to further extend by 30 days our closure.” U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement has scaled back its operations during the pandemic, with the agency saying in March that it would “focus enforcement on public safety risks and individuals subject to mandatory detention based on criminal grounds.” U.S. Customs and Border Patrol has also been immediately deporting any asylum seekers caught crossing the U.S.-Mexico border illegally.  Trump also issued a 60-day pause on some legal immigration in April, set to expire in June.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A  couple of months ago, the media, almost as one, decided that Governor Ron DeSantis was a public menace who was going to get Floridians killed with his lax response to the coronavirus crisis. In an interview with National Review, DeSantis says he was surprised at “how knee-jerk” the hostile coverage was, but he “also knew that none of these people knew anything about Florida at all, so I didn’t care what they were saying.”  The conventional wisdom has begun to change about Florida, as the disaster so widely predicted hasn’t materialized. It’s worth delving into the state’s response — as described by DeSantis and a couple of members of his team — because it is the opposite of the media narrative of a Trump-friendly governor disregarding the facts to pursue a reckless agenda. DeSantis and his team have followed the science closely from the beginning, which is why they forged a nuanced approach, but one that focused like a laser on the most vulnerable population, those in nursing homes. An irony of the national coverage of the coronavirus crisis is that at the same time DeSantis was being made into a villain, New York governor Andrew Cuomo was being elevated as a hero, even though the DeSantis approach to nursing homes was obviously superior to that of Cuomo. Florida went out of its way to get COVID-19-positive people out of nursing homes, while New York went out of its way to get them in, a policy now widely acknowledged to have been a debacle. The media didn’t exactly have their eyes on the ball. “The day that the media had their first big freakout about Florida was March 15th,” DeSantis recalls, “which was, there were people on Clearwater Beach, and it was this big deal. That same day is when we signed the executive order to, one, ban visitation in the nursing homes, and two, ban the reintroduction of a COVID-positive patient back into a nursing home.”   DeSantis is bemused by the obsession with Florida’s beaches. When they opened in Jacksonville, it was a big national story, usually relayed with a dire tone. “Jacksonville has almost no COVID activity outside of a nursing-home context,” he says. “Their hospitalizations are down, ICU down since the beaches opened a month ago. And yet, nobody talks about it. It’s just like, ‘Okay, we just move on to the next target.’” 
 Perhaps more understandably, The Villages, the iconic senior community, was a focus of media worries. According to DeSantis, as of last weekend there hadn’t been a single resident of The Villages in the hospital for COVID-19 for about a week. At one point, the infection rate in The Villages was so low that state officials were worried that they were missing something. “So I got the University of Florida to do a study,” he says. “They did 1,200 asymptomatic seniors at The Villages, and not one of them came back positive, which was really incredible.” So how did DeSantis go about responding to the epidemic? It began with the data, and trying to learn the lessons of other countries. At the outset, DeSantis looked at South Korea’s experience: “I just thought it was so dramatic, the extent to which this was concentrated in the older age groups. I think the first real fresh set of South Korea numbers I looked at, I think it had no fatalities under 30, and then 80 percent of them were 70 and above or something like that. It was really, really dramatic.”   Then there was Italy: “I think a lot of the policymakers in the U.S. acted like Italy would happen in the United States, but when you look under the hood of Italy, there were huge differences, and there were reasons why that part of Italy fared as poorly as it did. I think the median age of fatality was something like 82 in some of those areas in Northern Italy. So we looked at that, but that really helped inform the strategy to focus most of our efforts on the at-risk groups.” He was hesitant about sweeping lockdowns, given that there wasn’t much of a precedent for them. “One of the things that bothered me throughout this whole time was, I researched the 1918 pandemic, ’57, ’68, and there were some mitigation efforts done in May 1918, but never just a national-shutdown type deal,” he says. “There was really no observed experience about what the negative impacts would be on that.”  “So I was very concerned about things on that side as well,” he continues, “and I think that’s why I had a more nuanced and balanced approach than some of the other governors. Because you have some of these health officials saying, ‘You’ve got to do this. This is science,’ or whatever. But really, these were unchartered territories.”  The DeSantis team also didn’t put much stock in dire projections. “We kind of lost confidence very early on in models,” a Florida health official says. “We look at them closely, but how can you rely on something when it says you’re peaking in a week and then the next day you’ve already peaked?” Instead, “we started really focusing on just what we saw.” Florida was better able to do that than many states because of its routine experience dealing with natural disasters. “Many states simply did not have the data infrastructure that Florida has,” says Mary Mayhew, secretary of Florida’s Agency for Healthcare Administration. “We have an emergency status system that gets stood up, as I mentioned, in the case of a hurricane. Hospitals and nursing homes and other long-term-care providers are required to submit data on a daily basis, twice-daily basis, regarding their bed availability.”  The Florida Department of Health produces a report that DeSantis sees every morning: new cases, number of tests, positivity rates, etc. He also gets a rundown of the people who have gone into hospitals and of ICU usage. He can follow the key indicators down to the county level. This allows granular visibility into what’s happening. He cites the example of rural Hamilton County. It had 67 cases the other day. DeSantis was able to call the surgeon general of the state to find out what was going on, and learn it was an outbreak in a prison rather than a wider community spread. His focus has been on “clinically significant cases,” or serious cases that might require hospitalizations, and that pointed to the nursing homes. Here, Florida is indeed quite vulnerable. The state has roughly 350,000 residents and staff at more than 4,000 long-term-care facilities.  The state took precautions with its seniors generally. “We advised, before there was even mitigation,” DeSantis points out, “if you’re 65 and older, stay home as much as possible and avoid crowds. And that was just something that made sense.” The state talked to senior communities like The Villages about what they were doing to mitigate risk, and they took common-sense measures, such as stopping big indoor gatherings. But the nursing homes represented a different level of risk. “It was clear to me,” says Mary Mayhew, “that there were much higher standards related to infection control being outlined by the federal CDC that well exceeded what our nursing homes traditionally have been expected to adhere to. So we never had false expectations.” Inspectors and assessment teams visited nursing homes. The state homed in on facilities where, Mayhew says, “we had historically cited around infection control. We used that to prioritize our visits to those facilities, understanding that the guidance from CDC was changing frequently. So our initial focus was to be an effective resource education to provide guidance to these facilities to make sure they understood how to request personal protective equipment from the state.” Florida, DeSantis notes, “required all staff and any worker that entered to be screened for COVID illness, temperature checks. Anybody that’s symptomatic would just simply not be allowed to go in.” And it required staff to wear PPE. “We put our money where our mouth is,” he continues. “We recognized that a lot of these facilities were just not prepared to deal with something like this. So we ended up sending a total of 10 million masks just to our long-term-care facilities, a million gloves, half a million face shields.” Florida fortified the hospitals with PPE, too, but DeSantis realized that it wouldn’t do the hospitals any good if infection in the nursing homes ran out of control : “If I can send PPE to the nursing homes, and they can prevent an outbreak there, that’s going to do more to lower the burden on hospitals than me just sending them another 500,000 N95 masks.” It’s impossible to overstate the importance of this insight, and how much it drove Florida’s approach, counter to the policies of New York and other states. (“I don’t want to cast aspersions on others, but it is incredible to me, it’s shocking,” says the Florida health official, “that Governor Cuomo [and others] are able to kind of just avoid real questions about their policies early on to actually send individuals into the nursing home, which is completely counter to the real data.”)  Mary Mayhew had daily calls with the hospitals, with people involved in discharge planning on the line. “Every day on these calls,” she says, “I would hear the same comments and questions around, we need to get these individuals returned back to the nursing home. We drew a hard line early on. I said repeatedly to the hospital, to the CEOs, to the discharge planners, to the chief medical officers, ‘I understand that for 20 years it’s been ingrained, especially through Medicare reimbursement policy, to get individuals in and out. That is not our focus today. I’m not going to send anyone back to a nursing home who has the slightest risk of being positive.’” “What we said constantly is let’s not have two cases become 20 or five become 50,” she continues. “If you don’t manage this individual as you return them back, you will have far more being transferred back to the hospital.” Early on, when tests had a slow turnaround, there was a lot of pressure to give way, but Mayhew was unmovable on the question. At the other end of the equation at the nursing homes, the state made it clear, according to Mayhew, “if you are unable to adhere to these infection-control standards, if you are unable to safely isolate and dedicate staff to an isolation wing or unit, you need to transfer that individual to a hospital.” As the health officials put it, succinctly, “We wanted people out, not in.” When the state was seeing infections at nursing homes presumably caused by staff, DeSantis deployed what he calls “an expeditionary testing force,” 50 National Guard teams of four guardsmen together with Department of Health personnel that tested staff and residents. Most facilities haven’t had confirmed cases. “But the ones that have,” he says, “the majority of them have had between one and five infections. So the infections are identified, but then, you’re isolating either the individual or the small cluster before you have an outbreak.” The state has just deployed a mobile testing lab in an RV that has a rapid test with results in an hour or two. It goes to a community and the staff goes to different long-term-care facilities. “If you’re talking about an asymptomatic carrier, if you can identify that person instead of waiting 48 hours for lab results to come back, I mean, that could be the difference between saving a lot of infections,” according to DeSantis. The state has also started a sentinel surveillance program for long-term-care facilities, routinely taking representative samples to monitor for flare-ups. Finally, it has established several COVID-19-only nursing homes, with a couple more in the pipeline. The idea, again, is to get COVID-19-positive residents out of the regular nursing homes to the maximum extent possible. At the same time Florida was devoting enormous attention to nursing homes and establishing highly restrictive policies to protect them, it was giving its counties latitude in how they reacted to the crisis. “I said from the beginning,” DeSantis explains, “we’re a big, diverse state. The epidemic is not going to affect this state uniformly, and what’s appropriate in Miami and Broward may not be appropriate for Jacksonville or the Panhandle. And that’s pretty much the way we did it.” “We worked with the locals in Southeast Florida,” he continues. “They had more restrictive measures than the rest of the state.” And understandably so: “Even at this point, 60 percent of our cases have come from just those three counties. I mean, they represent 29 percent of the population, but 60 percent of the cases, and certainly a majority of the fatalities and hospitalizations.” DeSantis eventually did issue his own statewide order, but he argues that it was more flexible and less prescriptive than those of other states. “We had a broad essential-business definition,” he says. “So we basically had businesses operating. We had the daycares open, we had recreation open, and my order never actually closed any businesses. We allowed them to operate within the context of just limiting contact between people outside the household.” He was relaxed from the beginning about outdoor activities, even as critics sounded the alarm about the beaches: “I always believed that respiratory viruses were less likely to be transmitted in a hot outdoor environment, and then you started to see the studies come in, in March, saying that that’s what it was.”  He thinks that the relatively short, relatively capacious shutdown order has allowed Florida to be ahead of the curve of reopening of the more restrictive states. DeSantis maintains that “what we did in March and April is the equivalent of what New York will be or California, when they go to phase three.” Looking ahead, he says, “being measured and being thoughtful and just following data is important.” He’s not following the advice of some people to, as he puts it, “just rip off the Band-Aid and just go whole hog.” In looking at the cases every day, there are cases in prisons and nursing homes, but “outside of southeast Florida, we’re not seeing a huge amount of community transmission, which is a good sign.” Of course, testing will continue to be a priority, as it has been all along. “Our 13 drive-through sites in the state of Florida, we can do about 10,000 tests a day, just on those sites,” he says. “And we obviously have so much more testing going on in hospitals, doctor’s offices. But we can do 10,000 tests a day, and we average about 5,000 people that actually come to test. So we have a surplus of availability.” Perhaps things will still go wrong in Florida, perhaps its relative good fortune can be chalked up to weather, perhaps county-level lockdowns made a big difference, but no one can say that the state hasn’t taken a thoughtful approach to the crisis. Or, no one can reasonably say that — which, of course, hasn’t stopped many journalists. “I view it more as a badge of honor that I was doing a good job,” DeSantis says, “and that they viewed me as a target, because if I wasn’t, they probably would just ignore me.” 

1. Churches say they don’t want to be among the last to reopen 2. Hope, Fear and Grief: Wuhan After the Lockdown Ends 3.  Doctor who delayed retirement to fight pandemic at low-income hospital dies of COVID-19 4. Acts of bravery are the pandemic’s grace notes 5. Tom Hibbs: Isolated, angry and destructive — the America we can’t have when we emerge 6. America at Its Best from the George W. Bush Institute 7. On a ventilator while carrying twins 8. John Paul II’s mom chose life after her doctor advised an abortion 9. Centenary of John Paul II’s birth highlights continuity with Pope Francis 10. What is acedia, how do you pronounce it, and why does this priest tweet about it? 
  

The Trump administration on Tuesday finalized a rule that imposes indefinite restrictions on the land borders of the U.S. The rule gives Centers for Disease Control and Prevention head Robert Redfield the authority to reopen U.S. borders to tourist and other non-commercial travel. Redfield would need to confirm that the coronavirus does not present a threat to the U.S. in order to reopen the borders.  “This order has been one of the most critical tools the Department has used to prevent the further spread of the virus and to protect the American people, [Department of Homeland Security] frontline officers, and those in their care and custody from COVID-19,” Homeland Security secretary Chad Wolf said in a statement. The order states that “the danger” of coronavirus brought across U.S. borders is such “that a temporary suspension is necessary to protect the public health.” The order, which has been in force since March, has effectively halted the intake of asylum seekers into the U.S. Border patrol officers at the U.S.-Mexico border have been immediately returning asylum seekers to Mexico, with immigration officials fearing outbreaks of coronavirus in detention facilities. U.S. Immigration, Customs and Enforcement has released hundreds of illegal immigrants from detention facilities to mitigate potential outbreaks, and ICE has suspended operations to arrest illegal immigrants who seek medical care. Mexico has seen at least 51,000 coronavirus infections and 5,000 deaths as of Tuesday, although various reports claim the country’s death toll is being undercounted. The U.S. has reported 1,500,000 infections and almost 92,000 deaths.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In the New York Times on Sunday, Fordham theology professor Charles Camosy wrote that America’s long-standing disregard for the elderly and infirm “made the nursing-home crisis” touched off by COVID-19 “a tragic inevitability.” Camosy says that the elderly and disabled are “marginalized” in American life. Perhaps this is so. Most of us broadly affirm the inherent worth of those two populations, but it is difficult to dispute that our day-to-day decisions as individuals and as a nation do not always reflect our stated priorities vis-à-vis their well-being. It merits mention, though, that we effectively shut our economy down in hopes of preventing the spread of a virus that poses limited threat to the young for the sake of the aged and sick. Further, Camosy’s claim that the current nursing-home crisis was the inevitable result of our reliance on such facilities ignores the fact that Italy’s elderly, who by and large live with their families, were ravaged by COVID-19, too. Most pressing, it lets America’s state and local policymakers off the hook for their mishandling of the coronavirus pandemic, which has not impacted each state’s long-term-care facilities equally. Given that the virus is disproportionately lethal to those aged 80 and over, whether they live in a nursing home or elsewhere, some states have done a much better job limiting the damage it causes their long-term-care (LTC) facilities than others. Here are the population-adjusted data from the 34 states reporting COVID-19 mortality statistics for nursing homes and LTC facilities:  First, let’s consider New Jersey, whose LTC-mortality figure dwarfs the national average. More than half of the over 9,000 COVID-19 deaths in the state have been residents and staff from nursing homes and other LTC facilities. The state’s attorney general opened an investigation into those facilities, which have the nation’s highest per capita coronavirus-death rate and have long suffered from a lack of oversight. In a chilling display of the state’s troubles, police found 17 bodies in a shed outside an Andover nursing home in April after employees apparently absconded from the premises once the virus took hold. Other facilities were recently found severely understaffed and failing to adhere to basic care standards. Executive mismanagement exacerbated these preexisting deficiencies. Governor Phil Murphy recently told NJ.com’s Paul Mulshine that the state’s long-term-care facilities were required to screen patients and staff by May 26th — far too late a deadline, considering that we have known for months that this virus disproportionately preys on the elderly and infirm. In March, Murphy required all New Jersey nursing homes to accept patients who tested positive for the virus. The presumptive argument for instituting this policy — that it would allow the state to avoid overwhelming hospitals — was itself incoherent. As Dr. Michael Wasserman of the California Association of Long Term Care Medicine told NPR in April, “If you push folks out of the hospitals to make space and you push them into nursing homes, a couple weeks later, for every one of those you send to the nursing home, you may get 20 back in the hospital.”   In New York, a similar series of executive missteps led to a higher-than-average coronavirus-mortality rate in nursing homes and LTC facilities. Governor Andrew Cuomo told reporters that the virus spread like “fire through dry grass” in the state’s nursing homes, which is an apt analogy. Nevertheless, Cuomo instituted guidance on March 25 that stipulated “no resident shall be denied re-admission or admission to a nursing home solely based on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19.” Operating on the same premise as New Jersey, Cuomo ironically further imperiled his state’s hospital capacity by putting the “fire” of COVID-19 patients in the “dry grass” of nursing homes. While he changed the policy earlier this month, the damage was done: New York has the fourth-highest COVID-19 mortality rate per capita in LTC facilities as of May 13, and the staff and residents of veterans’ homes were similarly devastated by a lack of personal protective equipment.  Florida’s LTC facilities have had a different coronavirus experience. While the state’s response to the pandemic has been much maligned in the media — photos of “Florida Morons” flocking to beaches are the frequent object of contempt, and its reopening plan was subject to the standard canticle of “expert” denunciations — a concerted effort to allocate scarce resources to nursing homes and assisted-living facilities allowed it to avoid devastating those facilities.   While the AARP and other groups have criticized Florida governor Ron DeSantis for failing to implement a universal testing regime in nursing homes, he has persisted in administering random tests in the state’s 4,400 LTC facilities on a voluntary basis, deploying a group of National Guard personnel when a facility has a positive case. As of last Wednesday, National Guard medics had completed over 30,000 tests. DeSantis has also instituted a mobile testing lab that travels from facility to facility, capable of administering up to 3,500 tests a day. The state’s testing regime has not been perfect — it took the DeSantis administration, like other state governments, a few months to expand testing capacity — but the governor prevented disaster by prohibiting nursing homes from readmitting COVID-19 patients before they tested negative for the virus, and marshalling resources toward the creation of COVID-specific units for those unable to return to their original facilities. 
 Florida is certainly not exempt from future outbreaks — missteps by a government official or facility staff member could retard the state’s apparent progress, and it’s possible that, as testing continues to expand, the numbers will change and the mortality figures will reveal DeSantis’s approach to be suboptimal. But as of now, the data show that DeSantis has handled this pandemic better than governors in the northeast, and to say that the nursing-home crises those states face were an inevitability discounts the very real decisions that produced them. 

The New York Times has been busy over the last few months informing the general public of all that COVID-19 has done or stands to do in the deteriorating quality of life in our society, from air travel to dining to the overall well-being of the economy. Its writers have not hesitated to let readers know what, in their opinion, COVID represents, and, for that matter, its wider significance (or not).  The often sensationalist coverage may or may not have always been sincere, but it has been consistent. So it was not altogether surprising to read in a New York Times article by Sapna Maheshwari and Vanessa Friedman published last week that the pandemic alone was not to blame for the recent bankruptcy filings of iconic American retailers Neiman Marcus and J. Crew. No, COVID and the COVID-related lockdowns that took all customers out of their stores for two months (and counting) were not, in this case, the sole cause of their demise. Rather, the chains’ private-equity owners were accomplices. But this case is hard to sustain. Underlying the article’s thesis is an oft-repeated misunderstanding surrounding private equity — that the investors and sponsors have already made so much in fees and interest out of the deal that it really doesn’t matter too much to them if a highly leveraged investment ends in bankruptcy. The thesis has been repeated so often that it is frustrating to have to constantly refute it. But its repetition has helped embed it in American consciousness, and it is the duty of those who value truth and basic financial literacy to keep explaining why this analysis is faulty.  To start with the most basic of basic principles, equity investors lose money when a company goes bankrupt, and therefore they have every incentive to help it avoid that fate. That a significant amount of the capital that goes into a leveraged buyout — an acquisition where a high percentage of the cost is financed by debt — is borrowed money is by definition true. But buttressing every debt investment (which is, after all, an infusion of capital into companies that desperately need it for their growth, repair, and survival) is a layer of protective equity — the skin-in-the-game money that authors of articles such as this don’t seem to take into account. The argument that those who, as a result of owning the equity (or a large portion of the equity), have a significant stake in the profit if the company in which they have invested does well are prepared to risk that upside by structuring the company’s capital in a way that jeopardizes its prospects or even its continued existence seems counter-intuitive. Any commercial enterprise so careless with the future of the companies in which it invests will not stay in business long, will not draw investor interest for long, and would not even get meetings with companies it is pursuing for long. In short, it would not have much of a business. If my goal in life were the death of the private-equity industry, I would be rooting for it to structure more leveraged buyouts in which the investee company went bust. That would surely hasten the outcome for which I longed.   The cases of J. Crew and Neiman Marcus are nuanced, as is any private-equity investment. To understand why and how an investment was structured requires detailed examination of the investor, the investee company, and the deal’s terms and conditions. To say after the event that a “company died under the weight of its interest expense” is a tautology. All companies fail when their debts and ability to service them exceed their assets and ability to utilize them. I look forward to reading an article that says, “Company ABC dies after years of paying excessive taxes,” or, perhaps, that “after 20 years of 20 percent annual growth in health-care costs, company XYZ shuts its doors.” 
 I am not holding my breath. The vilification of private equity by politicians such as Elizabeth Warren and the likes of Occupy Wall Street has created the conditions in which this sort of analysis can prevail. In reality, Neiman Marcus and J. Crew were thrown a lifeline by their private-equity sponsors. In a free-enterprise system, decisions about what resources are needed to give investments the best chance to flourish are left with, you guessed it, those who made the investment. When reading of companies “burdened” with the debt put on them by private-equity owners, it’s wise to look a little deeper into what the purpose of the debt was, and what the alternatives to such debt may have been. Did the debt merely replace prior debt already on the balance sheet (usually; or at least a significant portion thereof)?  The writers of the New York Times article cited the oft-repeated nonsense that Toys “R” Us died because of $5 billion of debt put on it by KKR, Bain Capital, and Vornado Realty, but never mentioned that this $5 billion was a recapitalization of a mess of a balance sheet defined by leases that were beyond the ability of the company to pay. Before evaluating the debt put on by a private-equity investor, it is surely only fair to evaluate the debt such new debt was replacing, including the improved terms on which the new debt often comes.   But, for the sake of argument, imagine that the new debt was not an improvement in terms, that (say, and to oversimplify) it carried an interest rate of 7 percent, compared with the old debt’s 6 percent. Is that the end of the story? Not necessarily. What if the prior creditors had been about to seize that company, and the new recapitalization gave it the chance of a new life? It seems odd to throw mud at investors who gave a company the opportunity to survive, even if that rescue bid did not ultimately work out. The writers of the article take aim at private equity for not equipping Toys “R” Us to compete in a changing retail environment. “It did not have sufficient funds to invest in its stores and e-commerce business during a crucial period of growth for Amazon and Walmart,” they say.  The broader accusation is that private-equity companies are seduced by the big brand names of high-fashion retail and the cash flows these businesses are supposed to generate, while underestimating the costs of investing in their long-term development. Yet as noted in the article, it was private equity that believed in Neiman’s story in 2005, and then profitably sold it in 2013 to two new private-equity companies (and there was a little thing called “the great financial crisis” in between those two dates). Several private-equity sponsors put their money at risk in the company, managed its balance sheet and operations through a sustained economic recession, and sold it to new investors at a billion-dollar profit in less than a decade. Winners all around, not the least of whom were the employees and managers of Neiman Marcus. But yes, the private-equity sponsors who made the 2013 purchase now face the unfortunate reality of bankruptcy for their failed investment. Of course, before this happened, they attempted to bring the company public (in 2015, the heart of the economic recovery). Public markets were not biting. The risk was held by private-equity companies, and the creditors who had extended them debt (and by way of a basic reminder of how capital structure works, the creditors are paid first; the equity holders are paid last). The underlying inference in the New York Times article and others like it is that private-equity companies should be funding their investments with more equity and less debt. But in this case, the article itself highlights that the most liquid and sophisticated equity market on Planet Earth — the American public-equity market — had rejected the proposition. Nevertheless, private equity continued to support the business.  Michael Milken famously wrote that “capital risk should vary inversely with business risk”: The higher the risk, the more capital that will be required. Sophisticated investors understand this and, moreover, seek capital structures that work for their individual investments. If politicians, who are outside observers encouraged by journalists and academics (two more sets of outside observers), start to issue top-down rules determining the correct capital structure for companies in which other people are supposed to put their own money at risk, it will not only lead to grotesque misallocation of capital; it will eventually lead to no allocation of capital. Those leading and financing Neiman Marcus may very well have made all the right decisions over the years, and simply run into capitalism’s creative destruction, not to speak of the damage inflicted by COVID-19 and the efforts to combat it. Or they may have made mistakes, and the new capital injected and the new investments made may have been inadequate to compensate for those mistakes. Opinions will differ over what went wrong. But no one can be happy to see an iconic American brand succumb, not least of all the private-equity investors who had much to gain from its success, and much to lose from its failure. We do nothing to aid the cause of workers, managers, vendors, suppliers, and consumers by pretending against all logic and economic sense that these companies would be guaranteed success if only it weren’t for greedy investors and lenders — the greedy investors and lenders who believed in them and gave them a second chance. If you want a world of more iconic brand bankruptcies, root for the world the New York Times and their allies are pushing for – of pariah private-equity companies either being bullied into leaving their checkbooks in their desks or being denied the sort of opportunities that would induce them to take them out. But if you want to see free enterprise for all it is and all it will ever be — a combination of success stories and failures driven by the realities of the marketplace in the pursuit of productive growth — then rejecting the demonization of private equity is a good place to start. 

There’s a new document from Catholic doctors at some top-ranking institutions offering guidelines to Catholic bishops on how to get people to Mass. From a piece by Pablo Kay in Angelus magazine, which includes interviews with some of the doctors involved: A blue-ribbon panel of Catholic doctors from some of the nation’s top research hospitals and universities says churches should be able to reopen “as safely as other essential services,” after being shut down for more than two months due to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. In a document published on the Catholic Medical Association website and sent out to the nation’s bishops last week, the seven-member panel offered a “road map” for the nation’s churches, including guidance on how to hear confessions and resume public celebrations of the Eucharist. “I believe that churches can be just as safe, if not at times safer than so-called ‘essential businesses,’ provided they take the precautions that are recommended in this document,” said Dr. Anushree Shirali, a nephrologist at the Yale University School of Medicine who has been treating coronavirus dialysis patients since the pandemic broke out in March. … In interviews, the doctors emphasized that churches should be regarded as essential partners in rebuilding society in the wake of the pandemic, and said there are reasons to believe churches can do an even better job protecting people than other institutions in society. “If you should have best practices for a grocery store and for a Home Depot, why can’t you have best practices for church services?” said Dr. Andrew Wang, an immunobiologist who is helping to guide clinical research into the virus at Yale. “I just can’t see for any clear scientific reason why preparing food for a thousand people in a restaurant is any safer than people going to Mass,” he added. In their road map, the doctors recommend that Mass be celebrated using social distancing measures with congregants wearing masks and that parishes should be cleaned thoroughly between services. Singing should be avoided, they say, and Communion should be received in the hand, with younger priests or ministers preferred in distributing Communion. The sacrament of confession, the doctors recommended, “should follow safe social distancing practices and be carried out in a well-ventilated area, outdoors, or in the main church” with both priest and penitent wearing masks and with an “impermeable physical barrier” between them. … While the doctors who spoke to Angelus insisted that churches could be opened as safely as businesses and retail outfits and restaurants, they also argued that the Church’s sacraments and ministry are vitally important as American society seeks a return to some semblance of normalcy. Krogstad said the medical dangers of COVID-19 are real, but so are the psychological consequences of “stress and anxiety” caused by the shutdown of the economy and uncertainty about the future. Wang agreed: “Especially now as people are experiencing a lot of anxiety, and psychiatric issues arising from being isolated, it’s important that the community of the Church is there for them, that the fortification we get from participating in the sacraments is available, so that the Church can help in this global crisis as it has in all the other global crises before this one.” Shirali described the consensus among the doctors as: “Yes, we understand and we absolutely agree that the sacraments need to be open again, but it needs to be done in a matter that’s safest for everybody.” Read the whole piece here. And if you are a Catholic and sacraments haven’t resumed yet in your diocese, maybe send this along to your bishop with an assurance of your prayers for his prudence and courage. And may it be an encouragement to minister safely ecumenically. People need God.  

Representative Elise Stefanik called Tuesday for an investigation into Governor Andrew Cuomo’s decision to order nursing homes to admit residents who tested positive for coronavirus. “The governor took executive action forcing positive COVID cases back into nursing homes,” the New York Republican, who represents the state’s northernmost district, said during an appearance on Fox News Tuesday morning.  “There was zero transparency in terms of informing the seniors, the workers or the family members, whether there were positive cases,” Stefanik said. Cuomo has come under fire for his policies aimed at fighting the virus in nursing homes. Critics have noted the lack of personal protective equipment for caretakers working with the elderly and have also slammed Cuomo’s state regulation requiring nursing homes to take in recovering coronavirus patients. Earlier this month, New York announced 1,700 previously undisclosed suspected coronavirus deaths that occurred at nursing homes and adult care facilities, including people who passed away before a lab test could confirm they had contracted coronavirus. The updated total still did not include nursing home residents who were transferred to hospital before they died, obscuring the actual toll of the virus on nursing homes.  As of Tuesday, the tally stood at more than 5,760 of confirmed and presumed coronavirus deaths of residents at adult care facilities. Several nursing homes in New York City and Long Island were hit particularly hard, some reporting several dozen deaths.  “New York has mismanaged how we approached and how we protected seniors in our nursing homes. We knew going into this that our most vulnerable are our seniors,” Stefanik charged. The congresswoman added that the demand for an investigation is a bipartisan one, saying Democrats want to see Cuomo’s administration held accountable as well. However, any probe of the matter must be “independent,” she stressed, arguing that it should be conducted by the Department of Health and Human Services and not by New York Attorney General Letitia James.  “I think it needs to come from the federal government,” Stefanik said. State Assemblyman Richard Gottfried, a Democrat, echoed Stefanik’s concerns and said the New York attorney general should “appoint an outside counsel to run the review.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The short answer: Most of the studies done to this point are severely limited, and there are better ones still in progress. Ideally we’d all hope for good results but not turn this life-or-death question into a ridiculous political argument, but I suppose that opportunity has already passed. Both USA Today and the New York Times have decent summaries of the research. The NYT nicely explains why so many people have thought the drug showed promise and why some medical professionals are using it on patients: A promising laboratory study, with cultured cells, found that chloroquine could block the coronavirus from invading cells, which it must do to replicate and cause illness. . . . Reports from doctors in China and France have said that hydroxychloroquine, sometimes combined with the antibiotic azithromycin, seemed to help patients. But those studies were small and did not use proper control groups. . . . A study from China did include a control group and suggested that hydroxychloroquine might help patients with mild cases of Covid-19, the disease caused by the coronavirus. But that study had limitations: It was also small, with a total of 62 patients, and they were given various other drugs as well as hydroxychloroquine. The doctors evaluating the results knew which patients were being treated, and that information could have influenced their judgment. Even if the findings hold up, they will apply only to people who are mildly ill. But other studies are a lot less promising. From USA Today: A study posted on April 23 involving 368 patients with confirmed cases of COVID-19 treated at Veterans Health Administration medical centers found there were more deaths among those given hydroxychloroquine than those receiving standard care. In addition, the drug made no difference in the need for ventilators. Another study from earlier this month found “no significant association between hydroxychloroquine use and intubation or death,” though it also had very wide confidence intervals, meaning it didn’t rule out substantial effects in either direction. The bottom line is that we need large, randomized trials with proper control groups to know what difference this drug makes. Several such studies are in the works. I don’t envy doctors who have to decide right now whether to use this drug on the patients in front of them. But if you’re not a doctor, just wait for the answer!  

President Donald Trump claims that he’s taking hydroxychloroquine as a preventive measure against contracting coronavirus, and that he has taken zinc and antibiotic azithromycin as well. There’s no consensus that hydroxychloroquine is an effective therapeutic treatment for COVID-19 (early studies have yielded different results, and the NIH recently began a controlled clinical trial). Few people I’ve read argue that it’s a useful prophylactic. Nevertheless, the frenzied and childish reaction to Trump’s championing what amounts to a commonly used prescription drug is more destructive than his annoying habit of bringing it up.  A CNN columnist warns of “the danger in Trump’s decision to self-medicate.” If Trump is taking the drug, it’s been prescribed and presumably he’s being monitored, yet the CNN piece tries to create impression that the president is popping hydroxychloroquine tablets like mints to soothe his anxieties. Senate Democratic leader Chuck Schumer called Trump’s remarks about hydroxychloroquine “dangerous,” though for the general public, the drug itself is no more dangerous than a vast number of pharmaceuticals used every day by millions of Americans to help them live with less pain or to keep them alive. “Side effects of hydroxychloroquine include paranoia, hallucinations and psychosis,” notes the New York Times’ Michelle Goldberg, reading one of the many rare side effects of the drug. Wait until she reads the warning labels on the abortifacients that she wants the government to subsidize.  
 For that matter, we’re often lectured that killing an unborn baby is a decision made solely by a woman in conjunction with her doctor. Yet taking hydroxychloroquine is apparently a joint decision between a man, his doctor, every Democrat in congress, all the anchors on CNN, and an entire slate of New York Times op-ed columnists. The most reckless media personality on the issue has been Trump’s former bestie, Joe Scarborough, who repeatedly told his audience this morning that hydroxychloroquine will “kill you“: So he is not taking something that his own administration has said will kill you. That his own FDA said will kill you. That the [Department of Veterans Affairs] said will kill you. … That’s what doctors will say, too. The FDA said, take it if you’re in the hospital or take it if you’re in a closely watched clinical trial. But, don’t take it unless you’re under those two circumstances. So the president is not taking it, and yet, and yet, he’s telling Americans that they should take it. Not a single one of these agencies says hydroxychloroquine “will kill you.” That would be asinine. What the FDA recently noted is that there are elevated risks associated with COVID-19 patients taking the medication, which is entirely different. As far as I know, Trump has never explicitly instructed Americans to take it. What I do know is that hundreds of thousands of young people who use the drug, often to save their lives, are hearing media personalities and politicians liken it to cyanide. Hundreds of thousands of older men and women who take hydroxychloroquine for rheumatoid arthritis are hearing media personalities and politicians telling them their lives are danger. The conscientious way to cover Trump’s hydroxychloroquine usage would be to point out that there’s no proof that the drug will help treat the coronavirus, though tests are still ongoing. Instead, we are subjected to an overwrought lecture series of nasty, childish, partisan attacks and misleading stories about a couple ingesting fish-tank cleaner.  “I would rather he not be taking something that has not been approved by the scientists, especially in his age group, and in his, shall we say, weight group: ‘Morbidly obese,’ they say,” says House speaker Nancy Pelosi to Anderson Cooper.  Now, it should be noted that there are all kinds of side effects to commonly used drugs. Take, for instance, the anti-wrinkle drug Botox, which not only comes with a laundry list of warnings but has also been known to spark botulism symptoms that killed several Americans. Scientists have approved hydroxychloroquine for 70 years; every day doctors prescribe it on- and off-label.  If Trump and his doctor think it’s okay for him to take it, that’s his business. Whether hydroxychloroquine will be useful in this particular fight is yet to be determined. But COVID-19 aside, the drug doesn’t “kill people.” It saves people. The fearmongering isn’t helping anyone. 

 As the coronavirus pandemic drags on, the United States is slowly, steadily building something resembling a national testing regime — or at least 50 state testing regimes. For months, we’ve heard that “testing, testing, testing” is the key to reopening society and the economy. The clamor for widespread testing has obscured the fact that being informed about whether someone has the coronavirus is only part of controlling the spread; sound judgment in acting on that information is critical, too.  Start with the good news: The U.S. has a lot more tests to work with than it did a month ago, and the supply of tests is continuing to expand. The country is now conducting between 300,000 and 400,000 tests per day, and hit 411,235 tests Sunday. The Food and Drug Administration has given 76 companies and institutions “emergency use authorizations” to develop and manufacture tests for the coronavirus. This has generated an enormous demand for the materials and component parts of tests. The Bath Iron Works shipyard is manufacturing more specialized machines so that Puritan Medical Group can double its production of swabs from 20 million per month to 40 million per month. (Puritan is the only company in the U.S. that makes the kind of long, flexible swab that is ideal for coronavirus testing.) Thermo Fisher Scientific is making more than a million “viral transport media” tubes per week, and has plans to scale up production to 8 million per week. Roche is making 15 million tests per month and has already started shipping a new antibody test to leading laboratories, with plans to ramp up production of the latter dramatically. Abbott Laboratories is “currently manufacturing 50,000 tests per day, plan[s] to increase ID NOW manufacturing capacity to 2 million tests a month by June and [is] working to expand beyond that.” Quidel unveiled its own ten-minute test Monday, and has been making 150,000 per day. The supply of tests has grown to the point where places such as Virginia, South Carolina, and Colorado are offering free tests to just about anyone who wants one, although Colorado asks that only those showing symptoms get tested. In fact, we now have unused testing capacity in some places. New York governor Andrew Cuomo said Sunday that some testing sites with a capacity to conduct 15,000 tests per day are only testing 5,000 per day.   All of these numbers sound large, until one remembers that there are roughly 253 million American adults. Thankfully, we won’t need to get everyone tested all at once. Our priority will be sufficient regular testing for those at the highest risk of exposure: medical doctors and hospital staff, emergency medical technicians and ambulance crews, policemen, firemen, and just about anyone else whose job requires them to interact with the public a great deal. Considering the terrible toll of the virus on nursing and assisted-living homes, their residents and staff should also rank among the highest-priority groups. 
 Once the highest-priority personnel are covered, we will probably want to move on to all of the essential workers in supermarkets, pharmacies, agribusinesses, warehouses, and other companies operating through the pandemic. (Two easily overlooked categories: sanitation workers and those who work in wastewater or sewer systems. The virus has been found in untreated wastewater, though the CDC doesn’t know of anyone who has caught it that way.)  So far, so good: Our testing capacity continues to increase, and we have a general idea of who should be tested regularly once it’s feasible. But big questions still remain.  Abbott’s ID NOW COVID-19 test is designed to give results in five minutes. Quidel’s, as noted above, is meant to give results in ten. Some studies have argued that the error rate on the quick tests is higher. Abbott contends that those conducting the studies waited an hour or two between collecting each sample and testing it, and insists that when its quick tests are used properly and as directed, they have a consistently high rate of accuracy. If a person is tested using the slower methods, the sample has to be shipped to a lab and processed with reagents, which usually takes a few days but can take considerably longer if there’s a backlog. Right now in Los Angeles, the average turnaround time at county-operated testing sites is about three days. The Cleveland Clinic says it can get test results for those in hospitals within 24 hours, and for those using its drive-through facilities “within a few days.” What’s more, even assuming that the new, quicker tests are reasonably accurate and enough of them can be produced to go around, a test can only tell you whether or not someone had the virus at the time the sample was taken. If a test conducted on Monday comes back negative on Thursday, the patient could still have caught the virus on Tuesday or Wednesday. Ideally, we would be testing regularly or even frequently, but members of the public are likely to lose patience with the process of having a swab jabbed far up their noses on a regular basis. One of the concerns about the potential for self-administered coronavirus tests is that people won’t collect good samples, because they don’t like the discomfort of keeping a swab deep in their nasal cavity for several seconds.   Then there’s the question of how well people will self-quarantine after being informed of a positive test result. The good news is that most people mean well, don’t want to spread the disease, and will generally follow a doctor’s instructions. But even well-informed individuals can conclude that they know best and make reckless decisions. Back in 2014, NBC News’ chief medical correspondent, Nancy Snyderman, traveled to Liberia to cover the Ebola outbreak, and a photographer on her team caught Ebola. Snyderman was supposed to remain in her home for 21 days upon return. She left her house and went out for soup after about a week. Early on in the outbreak, a Missouri father took one of his daughters to a dance . . . and while there, he got confirmation that his other daughter, who had stayed home, was positive for the virus. A Kentucky woman who tested positive for the coronavirus was arrested after she violated an order to self-quarantine. In Hornell, N.Y., a person who tested positive broke mandatory quarantine to visit a pizzeria. This doesn’t mean that testing isn’t worthwhile, but it means we should recognize that good actions do not automatically follow from good information. We’re going to have some people who test positive and decide to go out anyway.  Picture an America where, by the end of summer, those in high-exposure jobs are being tested twice a week, and those less likely to be exposed are tested once every two weeks. The vast majority of those who test positive agree to self-quarantine for two weeks and then actually do it. The average number of people who catch the virus from each infected individual, already below one in almost every state and at or just above it in two, would drop even further. We would be still living with risk, even as we largely went “back to work.” This would be a significant improvement, but we wouldn’t be out of the woods! We’d still have to practice social distancing as needed, minimize our time spent in enclosed spaces with lots of strangers, probably wear masks, and remain concerned about the elderly and the immunocompromised. Sporting events, concerts, conferences, campaign rallies, and other events involving large crowds would still be discouraged. The harshest restrictions of the quarantine would be gone, but we wouldn’t be back to “normal,” if by “normal” one means “where we were before the virus hit our shores.”  None of this is meant to dash hopes or rain on optimists’ parade. We should be thankful to those who’ve spent the last few months hammering home the “testing, testing, testing” mantra, because their efforts have yielded real, positive results. But testing was always going to be only part of the puzzle. At the end of the day, it’s likely that there remains a long road ahead of us. 

CNBC has some details on a new study. Basically, researchers put infected and uninfected hamsters in nearby cages, and even added a fan to blow the virus from the sick rodents to the well ones. Unsurprisingly, in this control group, about two-thirds of the healthy hamsters got sick. When they put mask material over the healthy hamsters’ cages, the number fell by half. And a mask over the sick hamsters was even more effective, cutting transmission by three-quarters.  I’m not sure a hamster study is what we needed to convince the anti-mask crowd at this point, but it confirms what we know from plenty of other lab work. Masks keep viruses in, and to a lesser extent keep them out as well. Wear one if you go to an indoor public place or anywhere crowded. If you can’t get a surgical mask, go with a bandana or towel. It’s a cheap, easy way to make further lockdowns far less likely. 

In a piece today on the homepage, I detail the Democratic efforts to extend small-business loans to Planned Parenthood affiliates, and I argue that an easier way to solve the ongoing fight over abortion funding is simply to render all abortion providers ineligible for government funding. That is, perhaps, too tall of an order for this Congress. But Georgia senator Kelly Loeffler has a bill that would do something similar, at least in the context of coronavirus-relief funding. Her legislation — the ‘‘Limiting Infant Fatality and Empowering Nonprofit Organization Workforces,’’ or the LIFE NOW Act — would explicitly forbid any “entity, including an affiliate, subsidiary, successor, or clinic thereof, that provides abortions” from receiving the forgivable loans created to help mitigate the effects of the coronavirus recession.  The bill, cosponsored by Republican senators Kevin Cramer (N.D.), James Lankford (Okla.), and Mike Rounds (S.D.), also would expand the Paycheck Protection Program to allow larger nonprofits to receive forgivable small-business loans by eliminating the 500-employee cap for nonprofits. It also removes affiliation rules that prevented some faith-based organizations from claiming assistance under the program. In short, the legislation would allow more loan money to go to nonprofits that need it and allow none to go to groups that profit from abortion.  

Since yesterday’s column on how distance-learning arrangements at public schools are going to create strain in the medium term, a few people have pointed out that I was an early advocate for closing schools to stop the spread of coronavirus where there were outbreaks. Or that I once worried affluent parents were preventing the closure of schools because they require them as child-minders. Now I seem to be asking for a return to normalcy. Do I contradict myself?  I don’t think so. I simply think this period of abnormality has revealed how public schools thrive only when conditions are much more “normal” than what we are likely to see for many months. I thought closing schools where there were outbreaks was the right call in March and I still think it was the right call. The studies showing children are ineffective carriers of the disease give me some second thoughts (though most of those studies are from China), but I still think the dangers come from mixing members of different households in places with poor ventilation and not enough sunlight. But favoring the closure the schools for public health doesn’t oblige me or anyone else to find pleasant all the interim arrangements schools have made to get through this time, or to believe these improvisations are workable in the medium term.  A few others have asked what I propose to solve the problem. I don’t think it is solvable. If I had to guess, I think schools will try to carry on through erratic re-openings and distance-learning protocols, while the number of teachers and students who take exception to these arrangements expands. Some number of parents will withdraw their kids and homeschool formally, if only for a year or two. If schools open up, some teachers who have health concerns may try to retire early, or litigate for some other deal. 

Though Congress appears unprepared to pass a new phase of the coronavirus-relief legislation until at least next week, House Democrats are hard at work ensuring that it will allow abortion providers such as Planned Parenthood to receive federal assistance. In earlier phases of the relief bills, Republicans successfully blocked nonprofit organizations set up as affiliates — a category that ostensibly includes Planned Parenthood — from receiving forgivable small-business loans. The previous legislation also included Hyde Amendment language, barring federal funds from directly reimbursing providers for the cost of elective abortion procedures.  But Democrats are ready for another attempt, and the latest iteration of the new stimulus bill in the House includes no Hyde Amendment language. As it stands, the legislation would permit state and local governments to disburse their portion of stimulus funding to abortion providers, make Planned Parenthood eligible for small-business loans, and include elective abortion in subsidized health-care coverage for furloughed workers. The legislation likely wouldn’t pass the Senate as it is, and the White House has already signaled that President Trump would veto it, but Democrats are determined to force the issue. Aside from the obvious conscience violations involved in underwriting abortion providers and covering elective abortion, it should be fairly clear that Planned Parenthood is not in fact a small business and therefore should not qualify for small-business loans. According to its most recent financial report, Planned Parenthood had total net assets close to $2 billion and total revenue of about $1.7 billion last fiscal year. More than one-third of that revenue came from government reimbursements and grants, well over half a billion dollars.  
 Meanwhile, there is little evidence that the pandemic has created any financial problem for Planned Parenthood or prevented its affiliates from conducting their abortion business as usual. In several states, “reproductive health care” was explicitly classified as an essential service, and Planned Parenthood clinics were permitted to remain open and fully functional. In states that classified abortion as nonessential, Planned Parenthood joined other abortion-advocacy groups in swiftly suing to block those rules — and in most states, they won.  Despite routinely classifying itself as a health-care provider, Planned Parenthood has failed to offer any actual health care during the pandemic and has in fact merely ramped up its provision of abortion. In Pennsylvania, for instance, the organization shuttered all its health centers but kept open all its clinics that perform abortions. The president of Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, the group’s Colorado affiliate, said that its abortion numbers “have been pretty extraordinary” during the pandemic and cited an increase in women traveling from out of state for an abortion. As stay-at-home orders went into effect across the country, the websites of local Planned Parenthood affiliates began to display messages emphasizing that they would not offer any kind of COVID-19 care, but patients could continue to show up for “essential services” such as abortion.   There is no reason in the world why this organization should be eligible for coronavirus-relief funding, since it has demonstrated no particular difficulty in remaining open during the pandemic to continue profiting from abortion (and doing precious little else). But the showdown looming in Congress over whether Planned Parenthood should be eligible for stimulus money — or, more specifically, whether Congress should apply the Hyde Amendment to ensure that stimulus money does not directly reimburse the cost of abortion procedures — illustrates one of the fundamental problems with federal abortion policy. Legal abortion on demand is so enshrined in our policy landscape that the question of federally funding it is now a major sticking point any time Congress has to fund anything related to health care (and now, apparently, businesses). While these fights expose the Democratic Party’s unswerving dedication to taxpayer-funded elective abortion, the average observer likely has little idea that Democrats are willing to hold up a stimulus bill over abortion funding, because media outlets routinely cover these debates from the opposite angle — think, “Republicans obstruct stimulus bill to block funding for women’s health care.” The best solution to this consistent problem is the simplest one: Stop federally funding abortion altogether. The Hyde Amendment is a small win for pro-lifers, as far as it goes, and if it is our only option, it shouldn’t be abandoned. But it’s not our only option.  The battle Republicans continue to fight over Hyde is the wrong one. The alternatives on the table at the moment are either to directly reimburse abortion providers for the cost of performing abortions or not to do so. But there remains an undiscussed alternative: cease providing federal funds to any organization that performs abortions, whether in a relief bill or otherwise. Doing anything else is, practically speaking, the same as funding abortion. It is bad enough that we have a judicially manufactured and court-enforced regime of unlimited abortion, removing the abortion debate from the hands of the people and their legislators. It is another thing entirely to have a Congress that can’t even acknowledge the problem with forcing every American to underwrite it. 

This is encouraging: Encouraging News: Nationwide covid19 testing continues to expand and the positivity rate continues to fall. We need to focus on expanding the front end of testing, creating more community and employment based testing sites and capacities so we can broaden/increase screening. pic.twitter.com/SgJz7pzo3V — Scott Gottlieb, MD (@ScottGottliebMD) May 18, 2020    

New York City police shut down a Hasidic Jewish school in Brooklyn after neighbors called to report it was violating shutdown orders by conducting Yeshiva classes. Officers found about 60 schoolchildren in the building when they arrived, and the school administrators were not issued summons after they complied with requests to send the students home, per a police spokeswoman.  Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a Monday tweet that his office would issue a cease-and-desist order to the school for not complying with shutdown orders. “I can’t stress how dangerous this is for our young people,” the mayor said. “We’re issuing a Cease and Desist Order and will make sure we keep our communities and our kids safe.” In a later interview with NY1, de Blasio added that the police would closely moniter the school. “Where they happen, we’re going to stop them. If anyone tries to come back, they’re asking for a summons . . . it will be dealt with, there’s no question about that,” he stated. Senator Ted Cruz (R., Texas) responded to de Blasio by suggesting the Department of Justice should investigate situation for a violation of “constitutionally guaranteed religious liberties.”  The mayor has drawn criticism in the past for singling out Jewish communities for not complying with stay-at-home orders, and apologized for “tough love” after tweeting in April that “the time for warnings has passed,” following the gathering of several thousand Orthodox Jews on the streets of Brooklyn to mourn the death of a prominent rabbi. My message to the Jewish community, and all communities, is this simple: the time for warnings has passed. I have instructed the NYPD to proceed immediately to summons or even arrest those who gather in large groups. This is about stopping this disease and saving lives. Period. — Mayor Bill de Blasio (@NYCMayor) April 29, 2020     Following the tweet, Cruz urged the DOJ in a letter “to closely monitor New York City” for instances of “constitutional violations” related to religious discrimination against the local Jewish community.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				hree Republican senators raised an alarm in late March: Congress’s multi-trillion-dollar coronavirus bill would boost unemployment benefits by $600 a week — such a large amount that many people would make more if they were laid off than they would if they continued working. It turned out there was a stupid, embarrassing backstory behind this provision. States administer unemployment benefits using antiquated computer systems, and they couldn’t process a new benefit formula that was even mildly complicated. If lawmakers wanted to hike unemployment benefits during the worst part of the crisis — a time when government policy was deliberately idling much of the work force — they had to pick a flat amount to add to the existing benefits, and $600 was chosen because it would make the average unemployment benefit equal to the average wage.  Sometimes you have to make the best of a bad situation, and this was the solution that presented itself. But these benefits expire at the end of July, Congress has to decide what comes next, and the bill the Democratic House passed would extend these payments until next January. That is a terrible idea, and the Republican-led Senate needs to figure out something better. As a new paper from three economists at the University of Chicago demonstrates, the $600 boost fails to help workers in an equitable fashion and creates terrible incentives. It would be a poor fit for our coming circumstances, in which states are reopening and the economy should gradually improve. If, in this next phase, we want to keep the unemployment system a bit more generous than it usually is, we will have to either make the boost smaller or force states to implement a formula that actually makes sense.  The list of problems the paper uncovers is staggering. The $600 benefit makes unemployment insurance more remunerative than work for two-thirds of eligible workers. The median worker can get 134 percent of what he earned before. (If you’re wondering how this can happen when the average payout is set to equal the average wage, it boils down to the difference between a median and a mean; see the discussion on the report’s first page.)  
 People who get laid off usually get a raise, in other words, while those who keep working in essential jobs don’t. The sectors of the economy that are seeking workers, such as delivery services, have to compete with these lavish unemployment benefits. Those earning the lowest wages face the strongest disincentives to work, as the extra money can make unemployment pay nearly triple what they made before. Some industries are affected more than others, with food service, already hammered by the pandemic, faring especially poorly. And different states — with different occupational mixes and different costs of living, but the same $600 boost — fare quite differently, with the median New Mexico worker able to pull in 171 percent of what he made before while the median Maryland laborer gets “only” 129 percent.  It’s one thing to muddle through a few difficult months, in which we didn’t want people to work, with such a system. It’s quite another to live with it for most of a year. So if not $600, then what? One option would be to balance out this bad incentive by adding a good one. The House bill gives “hazard pay” to those in essential jobs, and a recent proposal from Mitt Romney would heavily subsidize bonuses to such workers. Another option would be to let the boost expire, sending a clear, unforgiving signal to the unemployed that they are expected to get back to work despite the ongoing health crisis and a still-struggling economy.   But there’s a middle ground too, as the University of Chicago paper makes clear: Find a different formula. The easiest one is a boost smaller than $600. But this is far from ideal. If you cut the payment to $300, for example, 42 percent of workers would still make more than they made before, while a quarter of workers would get less than 60 percent of what they made before. A bigger boost would worsen the former problem, a smaller boost the latter one. In other words, when your formula options are limited to the form “plus $X,” you can’t make unemployment benefits reliably approximate previous earnings. A better idea is to use a formula that directly takes into account workers’ previous wages. For example, if we added 45 percent of workers’ previous earnings to their unemployment benefits, three-quarters of workers would get at least 80 percent of their previous earnings, and only a few would get more than 100 percent. Or we could just set unemployment benefits to some fixed percentage of previous earnings and be done with it. But that just brings us back to the stupid backstory behind the $600 payment. Even with a little more lead time than they had during the previous round of COVID-19 relief, states might not be able to handle it. Here’s how a recent FiveThirtyEight piece describes the problem: That would require a more complex calculation by state unemployment insurance agencies — one they might be unwilling or unable to implement. “In a perfect world, I would prefer to give people a percentage of their income,” said Heidi Shierholz, a senior economist at the left-leaning Economic Policy Institute. “But we might not be set up to do it.” . . . And Daniel Zeitlin, the director of policy at Washington state’s unemployment office, said that while he didn’t think it was impossible, any change would be difficult for a system already under tremendous stress.  If I were in Congress, my own inclination would be to play hardball: Tell the states they can figure out how to get their computer systems to do math by the end of July, or they can lose the added benefits entirely. Maybe toss them some money to hire programmers. I hear Neil Ferguson is looking for a new gig and knows Fortran. But whatever we decide, we can’t keep paying people extra to stay home for the entire rest of the year. We’re reopening, like it or not, and we need a safety net appropriate to our new circumstances. 

Senator Ted Cruz called for the Justice Department to investigate New York City mayor Bill de Blasio’s decision to have the New York Police Department shut down an Orthodox Jewish school that opened in violation of the city’s social-distancing orders. The Texas Republican accused de Blasio of violating the right to freely exercise religion and called on the Justice Department to be prepared to step in on behalf of the Jewish community.  “The next time NYC’s mayor sends out a gleeful tweet about sending cops after Jews, the DOJ should investigate to make sure he’s not violating constitutionally guaranteed religious liberties,” Cruz wrote in a Tuesday morning tweet. “Actually, they should have done it after the last one,” he added. On Monday, the NYPD shut down a Hasidic Jewish school in Brooklyn that was holding classes, responding to reports from neighbors that more than 60 people were congregating in the building. No summonses were issued as school administrators complied immediately and sent the students home, the mayor said.  “Earlier today the NYPD shut down a Yeshiva conducting classes with as many as 70 children,” de Blasio announced in a tweet a day earlier. “I can’t stress how dangerous this is for our young people.” De Blasio added that the city is issuing a cease and desist order against the school to “make sure we keep our communities and our kids safe.”  This week is not the first time Cruz has called out de Blasio for his actions relating to the city’s Jewish community during the pandemic. Last month, Cruz urged the DOJ in a letter “to closely monitor New York City” for instances of “constitutional violations” related to religious discrimination against the local Jewish community. The senator’s exhortation came after de Blasio personally participated in dispersing a crowd of thousands who gathered for the funeral of a Hasidic Orthodox rabbi. “My message to the Jewish community, and all communities, is this simple: the time for warnings has passed,” the mayor said at the time, although he later apologized if his remarks had caused offense but said he had “no regrets” for criticizing the gathering.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

I had just finished reading Mario Loyola’s very sensible column on public versus private choices in dealing with the pandemic when I saw this story out of New York. New York took a body blow from COVID-19, and is still suffering losses, but the energy that has always characterized that great city is beginning to return, as New Yorkers make the private choices of which Loyola wrote.  It all reminded me of an axiom of pandemic response that, until the day before yesterday, public-health experts felt free to acknowledge without being considered heartless: that general quarantine or shutdown measures are at best a clumsy and inefficient tool with rapidly diminishing benefits and rapidly increasing costs. I’ve spent a considerable part of the last 12 years warning the government about the importance of preparing for a global pandemic. As part of that work, I’ve often discussed with public-health authorities the various steps they could take to control a pandemic once it broke out. They have never been enthusiastic about the idea of quarantining or confining the general population, as opposed to those who are actually sick. In fact, they typically dismissed such measures as counterproductive. There are a lot of reasons for that besides the economic deprivation that obviously accompanies any severe shock to the economy. For one thing, such measures disrupt the lives of the health-care workers on whom the system depends for medical management of the pandemic. For another, shutting down social interaction means shutting down large parts of the health-care system as well, and that means people can’t get the medical care necessary for their general health or to manage a chronic illness unrelated to the pandemic.  Another problem with extreme measures is that they divert the attention of authorities from focusing on the most urgent threats posed by the disease. Two months ago a pandemic expert — a longtime friend whom I respect greatly — told me that his biggest fear was that COVID-19 would get into nursing homes. That fear has been realized, in part because in many places inadequate steps were taken to protect that population. One of the reasons for that failure may have been that authorities were distracted by the difficulties of maintaining restrictions over the whole population.  It’s hard to focus on the really urgent aspects of pandemic response when, for example, government resources are being diverted to count the number of cars parked at a law office.  Finally, extreme social-distancing measures are very difficult to enforce even for a short time, and harder still to enforce after the visible need for them begins to disappear. Once the urgent necessity recedes, people start to circulate whether the government likes it or not, which then tends to create the worst of all worlds: The quarantine measures are not obeyed well enough to significantly reduce disease transmission, but their very presence continues to stifle the economy, cause social dysfunction, and reduce the credibility of the public authorities who try to enforce them. That’s starting to happen now, and it is increasing public discontent across the spectrum. The more risk-positive part of the population is angry that the extreme measures are still in place, and the more risk-averse people are angry that the measures aren’t being enforced. There is a real and growing possibility that continuing the de jure shutdown will end up alienating just about everybody.  I want to be very clear that I am not saying the extreme measures were unwise. I supported them when they were taken, and I believe they produced many benefits; and even if we eventually conclude they were not necessary, or not necessary to the extent they were imposed, the leaders who imposed them made the best decisions they could in the fog of uncertainty that pandemics always produce.  What I am saying is that those measures belonged to the initial phase of pandemic response, which is, basically, over. The balance of risk has changed substantially over the last two months. The government now knows, to the extent we know anything about COVID-19, that a large part of the population is at extremely low risk and that many people have already had and recovered from the disease and therefore have a large measure of immunity going forward. It also knows that the danger that hospitals will be overwhelmed by severe cases, while still present, is much less than was feared in March. The public knows all that too, and even in the hardest-hit places, is beginning to insist on returning to the normal pace of human activity. Trying to stop it would be like trying to stop a river from flowing. Going forward, the government should focus on empowering, informing, and encouraging the general public while assisting the high-risk demographics who remain isolated. That’s the best and most balanced strategy, and in reality the only viable strategy, for minimizing the total harm that the virus will cause over the life of the pandemic.  

President Trump has awarded a major contract to a Virginia company to manufacture Covid treatments in the U.S. The $354 million four-year contract was awarded to Virginia-based Phlow Corp. by Health and Human Services’ Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority to make pharmaceutical ingredients and medicines related to the coronavirus. The company says it is manufacturing ingredients and finished dosage forms for more than a dozen medicines to treat the virus, many of which are in short supply and were previously made in India and China and imported.  “This is an historic turning point in America’s efforts to onshore its pharmaceutical production and supply chains,” White House trade adviser Peter Navarro said, adding that the contract “will not only help bring our essential medicines home but actually do so in a way that is cost competitive with the sweatshops and pollution havens of the world.” The contract could potentially be extended to $812 million over 10 years. “The United States’ drug supply chain is broken, becoming dangerously dependent upon foreign suppliers for our most essential generic medicines,” Phlow’s website states, a sentiment echoed by Republican lawmakers who have urged the U.S. to limit its currently heavy dependence on foreign medical supply chains. The outsized role of China, where the coronavirus outbreak began, in supplying basic drugs like penicillin and ibuprofen has come under particular scrutiny.  The administration plans to release a statement on Tuesday announcing the contract in which HHS Secretary Alex Azar calls the contract “a significant step to rebuild our domestic ability to protect ourselves from health threats.”  Under the contract, Phlow will lead several other private sector companies including Civica Rx, Ampac Fine Chemicals and the Medicines for All Institute.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

On the menu today: the new multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children and questions about what China knew — and how much we should trust any medical data out of China; the World Health Organization accepts watered-down semi-accountability; the president tells the country he’s embracing better living through chemistry; and a new study pours a bit more cold water on the “wet market” theory of the virus’s emergence.  We Need More Information from China, and Quickly Late last week, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued a health alert about a “recently reported multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19).” The syndrome is described as “severe inflammatory responses with Kawasaki disease-like features” — a high fever that lasts, abdominal pain so serious some parents initially think it’s a burst appendix, and for many kids, diffuse rashes. The good news is that this inflammatory response is still pretty rare — a couple hundred cases in a country with about 50 million kids under age twelve — and fatal reactions are rare among those who catch this syndrome. Most of the kids seem to heal just fine. But one of the few silver linings of this virus in the early months of this pandemic had been the belief that children were not vulnerable to it. This inflammatory syndrome is the sort of factor that greatly complicates decisions about reopening schools in the fall and whether to go ahead with any summer programs. A couple of days ago, the Washington Post’s Josh Rogin offered one of the most disturbing and unnerving thoughts since the beginning of this crisis: “Either the Chinese government knew nothing about the delayed effects COVID19 has on children (which seems unlikely) or they knew about it but didn’t tell us. We must find out which of these is true.”   It is possible that all data about the coronavirus we get out of China will be suspect. There’s simply too much distrust, driven in large part by the fact that Wuhan authorities and Chinese government insisted the virus could not be spread from person to person until January 20, weeks after doctors on the ground knew it was contagious. But there are other odd incongruencies between the public conclusions of Chinese doctors and ones elsewhere. Back on April 23, Chinese doctors “inadvertently posted” a “draft manuscript” of a clinical study in that country declaring that the drug remdesivir was “not associated with a difference in time to clinical improvement” among coronavirus patients. But a week later, White House health advisor Dr. Anthony Fauci announced that data from trial testing of remdesivir showed “quite good news” and sets a new standard of care for COVID-19 patients. He said that while the mortality rate wasn’t dramatic — 8 percent for the group receiving remdesivir versus 11.6 percent for the placebo group — the study revealed a “clear-cut positive effect in diminishing time to recover.”  Did the Chinese study just have different results from the luck of the draw of the patients they studied? Or did some people in China want to downplay the effectiveness of a drug manufactured by Gilead in La Verne, Calif.?  This is a big question that will only get bigger in the months ahead. Doctors at the University of Beijing’s Advanced Innovation Center for Genomics think they have isolated, identified, and developed antibodies that will work as both a treatment and temporary vaccine. (Researchers at the American pharmaceutical company Sorrento Therapeutics think they’ve made a comparable breakthrough.) At some point soon, the Chinese government is going to declare that they have a vaccine. Does the world embrace it? Or do other countries regard a Chinese vaccine warily, wondering if it’s as unreliable as the 10 million defective tests, masks, and medical equipment that China shipped in the opening months of the pandemic? Then there’s this study of Wuhan residents, suggesting that achieving “herd immunity” would take a long, long time to complete: While strict lockdown measures in China’s outbreak epicentre Hubei province helped break the chain of local transmission, people in cities like Wuhan could be vulnerable to a second wave of infections because there is a low level of antibodies in the population. A study of 11,000 residents of Wuhan in April found that 5 to 6 per cent tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, Caixin reported last week. “Lots of people in China have no background immunity and would be at risk if there is a second wave,” Mr Hui said. Five months after the outbreak, the initial epicenter has just 5 or 6 percent exposure? If there’s any spot in the world you would think people would have high levels of antibodies, it would be a hospital in Wuhan, right? Apparently not: “Wuhan’s Zhongnan Hospital found that 2.4 percent of its employees and 2 percent to 3 percent of recent patients and other visitors, including people tested before returning to work, had developed antibodies, according to senior doctors there.”   Why do so many studies that come out of China make so little sense? We Know WHO Can’t Be Trusted Today at the World Health Assembly — the meeting of member nations of the World Health Organization — a majority of member states are expected pass a somewhat watered-down resolution introduced by Australia calling for an “impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation, including using existing mechanisms, as appropriate, to review experience gained and lessons learned from the WHO-coordinated international health response to Covid-19.” The resolution does not specifically mention China and should proceed “at the earliest appropriate moment.” Some corners of the Australian press are taking a victory lap: “While the wording of the draft resolution did not specifically refer to China or to Wuhan, it was broadly in line with what [Prime Minister] Scott Morrison and others have been advocating.”  It is difficult to get too excited. WHO’s director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, will still be the one ultimately responsible for overseeing the investigation that will review his own actions. If any of our progressive friends wonder why so many Americans have so little faith in international organizations, a World Health Organization that prioritizes keeping Beijing happy over, you know, world health is as powerful an example as you can find. All coalitions face internal conflicts and pressures; effective ones manage to remember and prioritize the original priority of the coalition in the face of internal disagreement. Ineffective coalitions let “maintaining the coalition” turn into the primary activity and priority of the coalition. The fact that there appears to be no serious talk of replacing Tedros is a clear sign that despite the weekend’s leaks of internal criticism, too many people within the World Health Organization see their institutional reputation as inseparable from Tedros’s reputation. If the director-general announced he intended to step down once the pandemic was under control, we could at least hope that the next director-general would have the right priorities and be willing to stand up to China when circumstances warrant.  The assembly kicked the can down the road on the question of whether to allow a delegation from Taiwan attend as an observer. You could make the argument that Taiwan has handled the pandemic better than anyone: “Despite its proximity to China, Taiwan has only reported 440 coronavirus cases and seven deaths so far even without a large-scale lockdown.” You may recall James Griffiths, a producer and commentator at CNN, writing at the end of April that China had handled the outbreak better than the United States, earning him plenty of criticism. Griffith’s latest on the WHO meeting at least acknowledges that “the pandemic has left China in one of its most vulnerable positions in terms of global influence, with criticism from multiple directions, not just traditional rivals like the US, but also countries with which Beijing has had strong ties in the past. One only need look at the never before seen levels of public support for Taiwan around the world to see how China’s clout is considerably weakened.” We Pay More Attention to What Trump Says Than to What Trump Does I guess we’re all arguing about hydroxychloroquine again, huh? Even though the letter from Sean Conley, physician to the president, only says “we concluded the potential benefit of the treatment outweighed the relative risks” and doesn’t actually say that Conley prescribed or that the president is taking it. Or when the president started taking the medication. I’ve read the medical journal articles; one of the central takeaways, which I relayed in an article earlier this month, is that chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine actually slow down parts of a patient’s immune system by making the cells not work as well together. This is actually desirable if the patient is in a “cytokine storm” — when the body’s immune system kicks into overdrive and starts attacking healthy cells in important organs. Yes, I’ve seen the arguments that hydroxychloroquine helps the body absorb zinc, resulting in a stronger immune system; you can read a not-yet-peer-reviewed paper here, about an ongoing clinical trial here, a new NIH clinical trial here, and an encouraging study from NYU here. All of these studies are on people who have already caught COVID-19, not as a preventative treatment. From a WebMD article last month: “My concern about the drug in the pre-infection state or the infected state is that they block the innate immune pathways that may allow the immune system to detect virus and to start a response against it,” says Art Krieg, who has spent decades studying this process. He sees both drugs as likely to be more useful to treat late stages of the disease, as has been done in China and elsewhere. Krieg, founder and chief scientific officer of Checkmate Pharmaceuticals, a Cambridge, MA-based startup developing immune treatments for cancer, says he’s particularly worried about health care workers and others who may try these drugs outside of clinical trial. Without a trial, he says, they won’t know if the drug is actually increasing their risk of severe infection. One of the extraordinarily frustrating aspects of this public argument is the number of people who insist chloroquine or hydroxychloroquine must be either a wonder drug or absolutely useless; a disturbing number of people cannot seem to grasp that a treatment could work for certain patients in certain circumstances and not others. I suspect my readership is far too smart to ever take an unacceptable risk, but just in case you know anyone who’s a quart low in the common-sense department, do not ingest prescription medication without consulting a doctor. Even if the President of the United States insists a drug is super-duper terrific and he’s taking it himself.  ADDENDUM: An intriguing new study, spotlighted by the Daily Mail: “Phylogenetic tracking suggests that SARS-CoV-2 had been imported into the market by humans.” The short version is that samples of the virus taken from the market in January 2020 look more like SARS at the latter stages of the 2003-2004 outbreak than the viruses at the beginning of the outbreak. In other words, the viruses at the market early on looked like they had already adapted to beat a human being’s immune system. This doesn’t completely eliminate the possibility of the virus emerging from the wet market . . . but it’s another piece of counter-evidence. This study points in the direction of a human being who had the virus coming to the market and spreading it, not some undercooked bat or pangolin.  

A new coronavirus study conducted in Korea suggests that those who test positive for coronavirus after recovering from the initial onset of the virus are no longer infectious. The study, released by the Korean CDC on Monday night, showed that 285 patients who still tested positive for the coronavirus despite apparently recovering were unable to spread any infection.  Additionally, virus samples taken from the group did not grow in culture, confirming the positive test was picking up non-infectious or dead virus particles. Last month, researchers found that polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests for Covid-19’s nucleic acid did not distinguish between dead and viable virus particles, suggesting that someone who tests positive post-recovery could be no longer infectious. In light of the new information, the Korean CDC is no longer requiring that individuals test negative before returning to work. “Under the new protocols, no additional tests are required for cases that have been discharged from isolation,” the Korean CDC announced after the findings, adding that it would now classify “re-positive” cases as “PCR re-detected after discharge from isolation.”  The findings also strengthen the case for antibody tests as an effective way to track herd immunity, with experts so far undecided on how to classify the test results, over fears that antibodies do not prove immunity. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the top U.S. infectious disease expert, said in April that he would be “willing to bet anything that people who recover are really protected against re-infection.”  “If this virus acts like every other virus that we know, once you get infected, get better, clear the virus, then you’ll have immunity that will protect you against re-infection,” Fauci stated.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

President Trump on Monday threatened to pull the U.S. out of the World Health Organization and end funding permanently if the group does not immediately address concerns about its deference to China. “It is clear the repeated missteps by you and your organization in responding to the pandemic have been extremely costly for the world,” the president wrote in a letter to WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus.  The WHO must “actually demonstrate independence from China” and “commit to major substantive improvements” over the next 30 days if the U.S. is to remain a member, the president said. The Trump administration suspended funding to the WHO last month until a review is conducted to assess the World Health Organization’s role in “severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus,” Trump said at the time. Trump has complained that the WHO is overly-deferential to China despite the U.S. providing substantially more funding to the organization. The U.S. provides about $400 million to the WHO annually, and is by far the largest contributor to the agency, covering 15 percent of its budget. By contrast, China annually contributes 0.2 percent of the budget. After the U.S. suspended funding, Beijing said it will provide an additional $30 million to the WHO this year to fill the gap left by Trump’s funding cut.  Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar criticized the organization’s handling of the pandemic on Monday in remarks to the to the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the WHO.  “We must be frank about one of the primary reasons that this outbreak spun out of control,” Azar said. “There was a failure by this organization to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.” In January, the WHO recommended that countries keep borders and trade open even as it dubbed the coronavirus outbreak a global emergency.  Several Republican senators have also eviscerated the WHO for its handling of the virus outbreak. Senator Martha McSally called on the director-general to step down and Senator Rick Scott called for a congressional investigation into the organization and accused it of “helping Communist China cover up” the seriousness of the virus. The president’s warning to the WHO came after the announcement that he is taking hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malaria drug, as a precaution against the coronavirus, despite concerns about the potentially serious side effects of the drug.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					J
				ustin Amash, having left the Republican Party and suspended his House reelection campaign in late April to run for president as a Libertarian, dropped out of the presidential race Saturday. Amash faced challenges in getting the Libertarian nomination; a May 4 online convention of Michigan Libertarians had him behind Jacob Hornberger, founder of the Future of Freedom Foundation. His withdrawal is also a comment on the nature of modern third-party campaigns. Amash’s statement on Twitter noted the particular partisan dynamics and pandemic realities of 2020: This environment presents extraordinary challenges. Polarization is near an all-time high. Electoral success requires an audience willing to consider alternatives, but both social media and traditional media are dominated by voices strongly averse to the political risks posed by a viable third candidate. The new reality of social distancing levels the playing field among the candidates in many respects, but it also means lesser known candidates are more dependent on adequate media opportunities to reach people. Today, most Americans are understandably more interested in what life will look like tomorrow than they are in broader policy debates, and news coverage has reflected those priorities. At the same time, fundraising challenges posed by an idled economy will hinder advertising. Amash received a lot of love from the most hard-core anti-Republican wing of “Never Trump” after voting to impeach Trump and leaving the party, but those same voices were caustically critical of his independent bid, and they cheered his withdrawal. Joe Walsh, for example, wrote in the Washington Post: The best and surest way to beat Trump is to have only one alternative to him. To give all the disaffected Republicans, conservatives and independents only one alternative to Trump. Giving them a conservative alternative might be ideologically satisfying, but it increases the likelihood that Trump can pull off another narrow win. This is actually more than a little questionable, as election analysis. Third-party presidential campaigns fall into one of three categories. At one end of the spectrum, you have charismatic, well-funded, well-publicized, or issue-driven third-party campaigns that actually win over voters who would otherwise have gone to the major-party nominees. The appearance of such candidates is a sign of a rupture within one of the two parties, or of a longstanding failure of both parties to address an issue or appeal to a constituency. H. Ross Perot was the last of these; other examples would be the regional Dixiecrat campaigns of George Wallace in 1968 and Strom Thurmond in 1948, the progressive and populist campaigns of Henry Wallace in 1948, Robert LaFollette in 1924, and James Weaver in 1892, and the campaigns of former presidents Teddy Roosevelt in 1912, Millard Fillmore in 1856, and Martin Van Buren in 1848. At the opposite end are the candidates who appeal mainly to true-believer third-party voters: longtime Libertarian Party or Socialist voters, for example. These candidacies may look as if they cost someone an election, but realistically, they are drawing voters who are never going to support the major-party nominees. In between are candidates who find themselves recipients of a protest vote. Amash was probably going to fall in this category and decided he did not want to spend a year pursuing those votes, because they were not going to be votes about him or his ideas anyway. But Walsh and others who were harshly critical of Amash are probably overrating the extent to which it really matters who the protest candidates are.  Consider the growth in the third-party vote between 2012 and 2016. Three third-party candidates got a significant share of the vote in 2016. Gary Johnson, running as a Libertarian, got more than 4.4 million votes, 3.27 percent of the national popular vote. Johnson cleared 5 percent of the vote in nine states, peaking at 9.34 percent in his home state of New Mexico. Jill Stein, running as the Green Party candidate, got over 1.4 million votes, 1.06 percent of the national popular vote, peaking at 3.2 percent in Vermont and otherwise topping 2 percent only in Hawaii and Oregon. Evan McMullin, running an independent campaign, got 0.53 percent of the national popular vote but drew 21.31 percent in Utah and 6.73 percent in Idaho, reflecting broad dissatisfaction among typically Republican Mormon voters with Donald Trump.  
 Johnson and Stein, however, both ran in 2012 and did far less well. Johnson got 1.2 million votes, 0.99 percent of the vote, and Stein got 0.36 percent. McMullin, for his part, was a complete unknown before 2016 and ran almost entirely on not being Trump. The reason they received so many more votes in 2016 was not because people were suddenly interested in their message, but because of the declining appeal of the major parties. Measured by share of the eligible voting population, Democrats declined from 29.9 percent of eligible voters for Barack Obama in 2012 to 28.4 percent for Hillary Clinton in 2016. Republicans declined by less, from 27.6 percent for Mitt Romney in 2012 to 27.2 percent for Trump in 2016. Disaffected voters who didn’t stay home just chose from the menu of third-party options. But outside of New Mexico and possibly Utah, who those options were did not really matter very much. It reflected the fact that both parties picked bad, historically disliked candidates. Consider Amash’s home state of Michigan, the most closely divided state in 2016. Look at the raw vote totals: 2012 D: Obama 2,564,569
2016 D: Clinton 2,268,839 2012 R: Romney 2,115,256
2016 R: Trump 2,279,543 2012 L: Johnson 7,797
2016 L: Johnson 172,136 2012 G: Stein 21,897
2016 G: Stein 51,463 2016 McMullin: 8,183 A hundred and sixty thousand people in Michigan didn’t suddenly get a lot more interested in Gary Johnson’s message; they wanted somewhere else to go. But with or without Amash, there will be a Libertarian Party candidate and a Green Party candidate. True, there would be some Michigan voters who are personally more familiar with Amash than another nominee, but for the most part, the dynamics of the campaign would be about Trump and Biden, not Amash.   As to Walsh’s argument, leaving aside the irony of the “binary choice” argument, how many potential Biden voters are pulling the lever for a small-government pro-lifer? Even on issues where Amash is outside of Republican orthodoxy, on foreign-policy and national-security issues, he’s far from Biden’s position. But that even assumes that people are paying attention to Amash’s actual message. Walsh seems to assume not, and Amash’s withdrawal is, even from reading his statement, a concession that his message would be buried, and the only thing people care about is “Justin Amash, he’s not Trump or Biden.” The last major vote-getter before Gary Johnson who ended up garnering a large-scale vote mainly as a protest was John Anderson, a disaffected liberal Republican who ran in 1980. Anderson’s support was probably disproportionately drawn from people who might have voted, not for his own party’s challenger (Ronald Reagan), but for the incumbent. Either way, though, Reagan beat Jimmy Carter because of how voters reacted to Reagan and Carter, not because Anderson gave a home to people who’d had enough of Carter but weren’t ready for Reagan. If anything, candidates of this nature have a larger impact downticket, by giving people an excuse to show up and vote even when they don’t like the people at the top of the two major tickets.  Amash is an interesting, sometimes infuriating, idiosyncratic politician. But he wasn’t willing to run just as a placeholder. There will be placeholders anyway, and they will not decide the election. 

Lyle Denniston, a legal journalist who began covering the Supreme Court in 1958 for the Wall Street Journal, is not happy about how the Supreme Court is conducting its business during quarantine, insisting that the current turn-taking arrangement “harms equal status of each justice, gives the [chief justice] arbitrary power, diminishes cross-bench exchanges, promotes wool-gathering by lawyers, prizes order over depth, lets technology triumph, [and] looks amateurish. If it is thought that this is the wave of the future, I’ll take decisions based solely on the briefs. To call this ‘argument’ is to impoverish the word.” Each item on that indictment is worth considering, but one is of particular interest: the charge that the procedures put in place to allow the justices to work remotely — the traditional open format has been supplanted by a system in which the justices ask their questions one at a time in order of seniority — “looks amateurish.” (It certainly is not a triumph of technology; technology here has won by default.) The inclusion of that purely aesthetic criterion among the substantive political and procedural complaints is not by any means trivializing. The appearance of amateurism may be the most consequential entry on Denniston’s list. Part of our political debate is over relatively straightforward things such as who gets taxed how much and what the money is used for. Some of our political discourse is simply the noise generated by the intellectual violence of complex issues being forcibly oversimplified. But much of our disagreement is about things we rarely speak to directly, including the cultural character of the state, what it looks like and feels like, how it sounds when it talks, what its manners are like. Among the many great fault lines in American life is the one that runs between small-r republicans such as myself who, for example, see the State of the Union address as a contemptible pseudo-monarchical spectacle unworthy of a free people, and those on the other side, including members of both parties, who desire majesty in government, who can’t imagine a free people managing their own affairs without a great deal of “oo ee oo aa aa, ting, tang, walla walla bing bang.” This is a debate as old as the United States: Poor John Adams was savagely ridiculed for his often-caricatured belief that the president of the United States should be addressed by some exalted title. Adams had entertained “His Highness, President of the United States and Protector of Their Liberties.” His preferences later escalated to “His Majesty.” (On this and much more, I recommend Richard Brookhiser’s great America’s First Dynasty: The Adamses, 1735–1918 and the very interesting The Problem of Democracy: The Presidents Adams Confront the Cult of Personality, by Nancy Isenberg and Andrew Burstein.) Adams’s worry seems quaint in retrospect: That the president would not be a sufficiently strong national figure, that he would get pushed around by the legislative branch, that his want of pomp and majesty would render him pitiable and impotent among the world’s princes. The modern American presidency is the love child of Caesar Augustus and P. T. Barnum, no longer an administrative post but a sacral kingship. That is why our fights over it are so bitter. It isn’t that we don’t care about internal bureaucratic debates over interpretation of Section 4(b)(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act or things of that nature, but it isn’t the question of due process under Title IX sexual-harassment procedures that causes some people to hate Betsy DeVos. They already hated her, they hated her from the moment they saw her, and 99 percent of the Left’s tantrum about the Department of Education under her leadership is simply backfilling in a rationale for that hatred. Democrats were wrong in their insistence that conservatives’ revulsion at Barack Obama was a matter of race, but they were correct that it was not primarily a matter of policy. Barack Obama, like Donald Trump after him, was a cultural totem and a signifier. If American democracy is Lord of the Flies as presented by C-SPAN, then the presidency is the conch — the power to dominate the conversation, the power to convene, a symbol of legitimacy. While one tribe glories in possession of that bauble, the other cannot bear being deprived of it. The need for majesty is obvious from the king’s point of view. A kingdom is what you get once organized crime becomes a monopoly and by dint of age attains a patina of respectability — Mancur Olson’s “stationary bandit.” Thomas Paine had nothing but contempt for the belief that kings should be treated with some kind of awe: This is supposing the present race of kings in the world to have had an honorable origin: whereas it is more than probable, that, could we take off the dark covering of antiquity and trace them to their first rise, we should find the first of them nothing better than the principal ruffian of some restless gang, whose savage manners of pre-eminence in subtilty obtained him the title of chief among plunderers; and who by increasing in power and extending his depredations, overawed the quiet and defenseless to purchase their safety by frequent contributions. That is the use of awe: ensuring compliance, obedience, and civil quietude. The Supreme Court’s appearance of amateurism diminishes its carefully cultivated sense of mystery — it functions as a Greco-Roman mystery cult, complete with ceremonial robes and occult knowledge available only to initiates — and that thins the awe it inspires in the American people. Without that awe, certain previously unthinkable thoughts become thinkable. The Supreme Court has handed down many illegitimate decisions over the years — Dred Scott, Roe v. Wade — that were illegitimate not because they produced horrifying outcomes (though many of them did) but because they were preposterous as legal arguments. But for the Left, the only time the Supreme Court’s legitimacy is in question is when the Left thinks it may not get its way. It has become an amusing media cliché, like “Republicans pounce!” It is never the Left’s policy agenda that is in peril, but only the Court’s legitimacy — or John Roberts’s reputation, as preference dictates. Justice Kagan has argued that the Court suffers from a “legitimacy deficit” and that the proper response is to frankly politicize the Court and move it in her direction, which she of course calls “the center.” (The center of what, exactly?) Roe is a textbook example of outcome-oriented jurisprudence, the Queen of Hearts model of legal reasoning. And yet we are expected to abide by it — and Supreme Court nominees are expected by Democrats to affirm the sanctity of it — even though it is, as every honest person knows, legally indefensible, a purely political decision. But purely political decisions are the order of the day, especially when it comes to the so-called liberals on the Supreme Court. John Roberts and Clarence Thomas may surprise you from time to time. The late Antonin Scalia often followed the law to places where his political preferences would have preferred not to wind up. But will Elena Kagan ever surprise you on anything of real consequence? Sonia Sotomayor? To ask the question is to answer it. They are party-line voters, and they might as well not even show up at the courthouse. Ruth Bader Ginsburg has in recent years abandoned any pretense of being anything other than a bare-knuckled political operative and a tribune who understands her role on the Supreme Court as making good on policy deliverables for the Left at every opportunity. So, the question is: How many illegitimate decisions can a court make before we question the court’s legitimacy? And that is where awe is really, really useful to people who would rather not talk too much about that sort of thing. Words about Words Some of my conservative friends have been mocking this passage from a Washington Post profile of Stacey Abrams, one of the women under consideration for the vice-presidential spot on Joe Biden’s ticket. Pandemonium ensues as she walks to the far left of the stage, like a runway supermodel, stops on a dime, poses, tilts her head slightly and smiles. Camera flashes explode. She next pivots and walks slowly to the center of the stage, freezes there and repeats the pose. Again, the flashes explode. Abrams is summoning her inner actress, and she is both enjoying the moment and getting through it to get to the conversation. Stephen Miller asks, rhetorically: “How is every journalist employed by the Washington Post not named Jennifer Rubin not completely embarrassed by this Stacey Abrams profile. [sic] How does something like this even make it past editors who care about their reputations?” Well. The profile, by Kevin Powell, is indeed friendly. But what, exactly, is wrong with the passage above? As an editor, I would have taken out “pandemonium ensues” and “on a dime,” but such clichés are not unusual for American print journalism. As for the rest of it — that’s what happened, no? I suppose Powell could have written, “Before being seated, Abrams stood on stage and briefly posed for photos.” But would that have been accurate? Public events have moods and emotional resonances of their own, and communicating those is part of good reporting. I’d have made some edits, but from what Powell wrote I can see in my mind’s eye exactly what happened. Powell’s livelier prose probably offers a better feel for what actually happened than a blander account would have. The Post and the Times generally prefer dry, dull prose in the mistaken belief that such boring writing denotes seriousness. But the people who come out to rallies and campaign events mostly are not bored — they are excited. The reporters may be bored, and the political professionals may be bored, but if the crowd was hopping and if Stacey Abrams was doing a supermodel impersonation on the stage, then that’s what actually happened. It is in fact very difficult to write an accurate and complete report of a campaign rally or similar event without including one or two things that make the star of the show look good — these events are designed to do just that. That is one reason many reporters do not spend very much time writing about such events. (I like to cover an event like that every now and then, because sometimes you actually see something worth writing about.) But if you are going to write about what happened, then you are going to write about what happened. If you are going to ask people questions, then you are going to report what they said. Most of the objections and criticism that one hears of these pieces amounts to, “But I hate that person! And they’d never be that nice to somebody from my party!” Alrighty. The Washington Post writes from a generally progressive (and much more specifically Democratic) point of view. It is going to have bias problems whether its writers are aggressively boring, as so many of them are, or interesting, or if they are just trying to be interesting, as in Powell’s case. One of the many downsides of the current situation in which American journalism has been almost completely colonized by opinion and commentary is that media partisans are obliged to adopt and defend ridiculous positions. Donald Trump Jr. can smear Joe Biden as a pedophile and it is all good fun, but a Washington Post writer doing a magazine profile tries to write what he saw at a public event, and we’re all supposed to be shocked and outraged by it. And so the moronization of our political discourse continues. Sometimes, young people ask me what they should do if they want to go into opinion journalism. I tell them to go cover the police beat in Philadelphia or the school board in Albuquerque for a couple of years, and hold off on the commentary writing until such a time as they know something about something. But much of our professional commentariat has skipped that step. Maybe get off the sidelines and off your asses and try doing some journalism. Rampant Prescriptivism Several correspondents ask for a vitriolic denunciation of “should of,” “would of,” and “could of.” Do not write these. The mistake is understandable: We like to use contractions, and, in spoken English, should’ve is indistinguishable from should of. If you cannot tell which of those a person is saying, then assume it is the right one. Speaking of spoken English, that’s oral English, not verbal English. Those words do not mean the same thing. Verbal applies to words in general, oral to words that are spoken. An unwritten contract is an oral contract; every contract is a verbal contract, i.e. a contract composed of words. Speaking of composed of — it’s never comprised of. The parts compose the whole, the whole comprises the parts, and comprise can generally be used interchangeably with include — and you’d never write “included of.” The musicians compose the orchestra; the orchestra is composed of musicians; the orchestra comprises many different kinds of instrumentalists. Send your language questions to TheTuesday@nationalreview.com. Home and Away The Obama administration’s abuse of counterintelligence powers in the service of parochial political interests follows a familiar pattern from his administration, e.g. the abuse of the IRS for similar ends. The curators of Barack Obama’s legacy insist that his administration was free of scandal — but what it was free of was accountability. More in the New York Post. You can buy my forthcoming book, Big White Ghetto: Dead Broke, Stone-Cold Stupid, and High on Rage in the Dank Woolly Wilds of the “Real America,” at Amazon and other retailers. My National Review archive can be found here. Listen to “Mad Dogs & Englishmen” here. My New York Post archive can be found here. My Amazon page is here. To subscribe to National Review, which you really should do, go here. To support National Review Institute, go here. In Closing  Sarah Vowell has written one of those “Woe is me, a Democrat in a red state!” columns in the New York Times. It is a pretty good exemplar of the genre. Vowell begins: “The only reason to be a Democrat running for statewide office in Montana is that, alas, you are one.” About that: The two highest statewide offices in Montana currently are held by Democrats, Governor Steve Bullock and Lieutenant Governor Mike Cooney. Presumably, reelection is a reason to run, too. The governor before Bullock was a Democrat. So were the two lieutenant governors before Cooney. Montana’s state house is Republican, but it’s a 58–42 split, not a Republican fief. Vowell is unwise to suggest that Democrats “assume that everyone you talk to is a Republican or an independent.” Democrats had a majority in the state senate as recently as 2009. John McCain beat Barack Obama by about 2 points in Montana in 2008; Hillary Clinton, on the other hand, barely managed to get a third of the vote there in 2016. Maybe Mrs. Clinton was the problem. That certainly was the view from much of the country. Ross Perot did pretty well in Montana in 1992 and 1996, getting 26 percent of the vote and 13 percent, respectively. Montana likes third-party candidates: Fighting Bob La Follette got a bigger share of the vote there running against Calvin Coolidge than Mrs. Clinton did running against Donald Trump. Maybe Montana isn’t that Republican. But that’s the power of the totemic presidency. Like Montana, Kentucky is a “red state” in the popular mind even though Democrats ran the state house from 1921 until 2017, even though it has a Democratic governor, even though it has a Democratic lieutenant governor, etc. All that matters is fealty to the Big Kahuna, His Excellency, President for Life, Field Marshal Snout, VC, DSO, MC, Lord of All the Beasts of the Earth and Fishes of the Seas, and Conqueror of the British Empire in Arkansas in General and Toad Suck in Particular.  


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					A
				s part of the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act, Congress allocated $30 billion to assist educational institutions in handling the economic fallout from COVID-19. About half of that funding was designated for higher education and $13.5 billion for K–12 schools, with the remainder left to state governments.  The bill gave the Department of Education discretion to craft guidelines for disbursing the money, and earlier this month, Secretary Betsy DeVos came under fire after she directed school districts to increase the amount of the money spent on students who attend private schools. Most of the funds will be allocated on the basis of need, with more going to areas that have higher numbers of low-income students. But the new guidance requires districts to allocate part of their shares to private-school students, on the basis of what percentage of all students in their jurisdictions attend private schools, rather than what percentage of low-income students do. Angering opponents of school choice, DeVos has also used about $180 million of the CARES Act funding to incentivize states to create microgrants, which would allow parents of grade-school or high-school children to pay for a variety of educational options, including private schools. DeVos’s critics, including several Democratic congressmen, argue that her guidance violates the intention of the law because it requires districts to use emergency funding, allocated based on poverty rates, to support all local students, including supposedly wealthy ones who attend private schools. According to Chalkbeat, public-school advocates say the guidance “will funnel precious resources to wealthy private schools while districts struggle to provide computers and free meals.”  Supporters of the department’s guidance, meanwhile, say it is consistent with the intention of the CARES Act, which aims to assist all schools and students in recovering from the economic crisis caused by the pandemic. It is worth noting that DeVos’s efforts to assist private-school children involve a tiny percentage of the overall CARES Act funding designated for schools. Moreover, there is no reason why governments should, for instance, privilege a local public school’s efforts to provide computers over assisting parents who want to keep their children in private schools. Arguments to the contrary are simply a retread of common anti-school-choice talking points, which insist that any government help for parents who opt out of public school — whether in the form of vouchers, education-savings accounts, or tax-credit-scholarship programs — disadvantages those who remain in the public-school system.  
 One might quibble with the specifics of how DeVos sought to include private schools and their students in the distribution of CARES Act funds, but her reasons for doing so are sensible. Though the stimulus bill dispensed funding to educational institutions, Congress failed to acknowledge that millions of Americans choose not to send their children to public schools and thus are receiving no assistance to continue making the best educational choices they can during this crisis.  Private schools typically receive far less direct financial assistance from the government than public schools. In the case of religious schools, such assistance has, in most cases, been deemed a violation of the First Amendment’s establishment clause. While public schools are the beneficiaries of a steady stream of funding from the local, state, and federal governments, underwritten by taxpayers, the majority of private schools rely almost entirely on tuition money and donations. Absent aid, these schools will be the first to close when families face coronavirus-related financial hardship, and our country will be worse off for it. To take just one example, close to 2 million American children attend Catholic schools in the U.S., and nearly 20 percent of those students are minorities. According to one study, a Hispanic or African-American student who attends Catholic school is 42 percent more likely to graduate from high school and 2.5 times more likely to graduate from college than one who doesn’t. Meanwhile, the National Catholic Educational Association estimates that Catholic schools save the U.S. about $24 billion each year. The mean cost per student at a Catholic school is $5,847, and $12,608 at a public school. Yet because of the pandemic, more than 600 Catholic schools in the U.S. are at risk of shutting down.   DeVos’s guidance is merely one small way of attempting to level the playing field in the absence of efforts to directly help private schools and the families they serve. It would be even better for Congress to offset tuition costs by earmarking funding in the next coronavirus-relief package for parents who send their children to non-public K–12 schools. A targeted voucher program, created specifically to respond to the economic devastation of the COVID-19 outbreak, would help parents to continue sending their children to the schools that are best for them. In the long term, though, the best solution of all would be for Congress to finally create a federal program providing vouchers, tax-credit scholarships, or education-savings accounts to families. The debate over government relief and DeVos’s guidance illustrates precisely what is broken about education funding in the U.S. There is no reason why a financial crisis should spur the federal government to pour billions of dollars into public schools while ignoring the millions of parents who believe a private education is best for their children. Yet that is what it has done, because that is what it is in the habit of doing during more “normal” times.  American families deserve better now, and they’ll deserve better going forward. Congress must act to give them as many options as possible. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he coronavirus pandemic has once more put the dark side of globalization in the spotlight. On both sides of the aisle, there is an increasing sense that, in its current form, globalization has resulted in an over-reliance on Chinese-made goods at the expense of domestic manufacturing capacity. Senator Marco Rubio recently cited the need for “a 21st-century, pro-American industrial policy,” warning that “the depletion of America’s manufacturing sector has left us with a huge national-security vulnerability.” Senator Elizabeth Warren likewise offered vocal support for legislation aimed at limiting the quantity of Chinese-made pharmaceuticals in the United States’ drug supply. As countries close borders, cancel flights, and hoard medical supplies in a bid to defeat COVID-19, such critics are increasingly calling into question the benefits gained from open borders, global supply chains, and interconnected trade.  While skepticism toward globalization was rising even before the global pandemic, it is now clearly in the United States’ national-security interest to repatriate some manufacturing activity. In order to protect Americans from the shortages and panic-buying that have plagued the U.S. in the past few months, Washington needs a strategy to prioritize the domestic production of goods that serve a vital national-security interest. Fortunately, the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States (CFIUS) provides a model of how this can be done. As an interagency committee chaired by the U.S. Department of the Treasury, CFIUS adjudicates in-bound investments from foreign purchasers on national-security grounds. It does this by reviewing proposed foreign acquisitions of American businesses involved in critical technologies, critical infrastructure, and personal data. The rationale behind this policy is simple: While the U.S. generally encourages the flow of goods, capital, and investment across borders, when there is a national-security interest at stake, CFIUS steps in to evaluate whether a transaction would serve it. In certain cases, it has proposed blocking such transactions altogether, as happened in 2017 when the Trump administration, upon its recommendation, stopped a Chinese-backed investment firm from acquiring a U.S.-based semiconductor company.  The weaknesses that COVID-19 has exposed in our medical-supply chains provide one powerful example of why Washington needs a CFIUS-like entity to oversee certain aspects of American manufacturing. To take one glaring example, after several countries found recent Chinese-made shipments of protective equipment, test kits, and masks to be faulty, Beijing issued new, stricter export rules in a bid to boost quality control. This in turn created a huge bottleneck of much-needed personal protective equipment — masks, surgical gowns, and ventilators — at the same time that front-line workers were struggling with a severe dearth of such equipment. A “CFIUS for all” entity would compile a list of items deemed to be in the national-security interests of the United States, by means of an interagency-review process. The entity could encourage companies to repatriate the domestic production of these items, using incentives such as subsidies or tax breaks. It could coordinate federal efforts to buy and stockpile goods that may be necessary in a crisis, make arrangements to ramp up production of such goods during an emergency, and, as a last resort, act under Congress’s commerce-clause authority to require that American companies repatriate production of them. The law creating the new entity could be strengthened further if it expanded the scope of CFIUS’s existing power to police foreign acquisitions of such companies. While commentators have speculated on the limits of Congress’s authority in this realm, the weight of current case law on that question makes it likely that a law along these lines, with a properly drafted connection to foreign commerce, would be upheld as constitutional.   Companies often move production offshore to minimize costs for consumers and increase profit. The pandemic has demonstrated how that instinct can backfire, rendering crucial global supply chains unreliable. To some extent, this realization may lead certain companies to unwind offshore production without a push from the federal government. But a CFIUS-like entity could step in when market forces were insufficient. The end result would be that our nation was protected the next time a pandemic, a nuclear incident, or another national emergency came around.  The COVID-19 pandemic can serve as an important turning point, helping governments and multinational corporations chart a new, and healthier, course forward that emphasizes national-security concerns and breaks our current addiction to increasing consumption at all costs. Creating a CFIUS-like entity to oversee the offshoring of certain products while also expanding CFIUS’s current review authority to include acquisitions of companies that produce such goods would go a long way toward reducing the vulnerabilities that the pandemic has exposed. Even after the present danger subsides, we won’t be out of the woods: We’ll need to prepare for the next national emergency, so we aren’t caught flat-footed again. Those preparations must begin now. 
 Varsha Koduvayur is a senior research analyst at the Foundation for Defense of Democracies, where she focuses on the Persian Gulf. Greg Everett is a writer and corporate lawyer based in Nashville, Tenn. 

1. Today would have been his 100th birthday: What Pope John Paul II can teach us about moving beyond fear 2. 12 of Pope John Paul II’s best quotes on love, marriage, and family 3. Charlie Camosy: What’s Behind the Nursing Home Horror 4. Essential workers who live at a center for homeless mothers and children in Maryland  5. Always read DJ Jaffe: A Pop-Psychology Pandemic 6. The morgue worker who buys a daffodil for each body bag  7. Dementia day care looks like 1950s to stimulate patients’ brains 8. Most Churches Are Taking the Coronavirus Seriously 9. About 20 minutes in, an inspiring, challenging wedding Mass homily from this weekend 10. Finally, Syriac Aramaic Maronite Church has returned to pray at their church in Kfar Baram in Galilee. After two months of quarantine, life is slowly going back to normal. We hope to host our friends again here soon.#Aramaic #Maronites #Christianity #Israel #Biram pic.twitter.com/FYb3R5xEWi — The Philos Project (@philosproject) May 18, 2020   

Bill de Blasio made terrible decisions as mayor of New York City. But as more reporting emerges about the catastrophic decisions made by New York’s governor, it’s possible Andrew Cuomo deserves even more blame than de Blasio for what the coronavirus has done to the tri-state area and consequently the nation.  New York and New Jersey combined have suffered more COVID-19 deaths than any other country being tracked by researchers who run the Johns Hopkins crisis dashboard. Cuomo made three breathtakingly bad moves in March that in retrospect amounted to catastrophe. First, Cuomo failed to call for, and even actively discouraged, informal social-distancing measures in early March. Next was the delay in mid-March in ordering formal closures when the virus started rampaging through his state. Third was his March 25 edict to long-term care facilities that they must accept infected patients, which caused a mass deadly outbreak among helpless, trapped, elderly New Yorkers. Only in the last few days have some corners of the media begun to call attention to just how badly Cuomo has failed us. Like de Blasio, who as late as March 10 was on MSNBC telling New Yorkers that most of us were at little to no risk and that the coronavirus was much like seasonal flu, Cuomo persisted with his don’t-scare-away-the-tourists happy talk well into March, the critical month. On March 1, the day New York State logged its first confirmed case of the coronavirus (a health-care worker who had just returned from Iran), Cuomo assured everyone that, although one of his own daughters had called him in a state of panic, there was no need to be afraid. “The facts defeat fear. Because the reality is reassuring. It is deep breath time. . . . This is not our first rodeo with this type of situation in New York,” Cuomo boasted, adding, “Excuse our arrogance as New Yorkers,” but the state was fully prepared. “We don’t even think it’s going to be as bad as it was in other countries,” he said. “We’re going to have a special effort for our nursing homes, et cetera, congregate facilities where senior citizens are being treated.” He further boasted that the state had broken free of federal restraints about testing: “Now we are actually in control of the systems ourselves. And as New Yorkers we like control.”  Summing up, Cuomo said, “Once you know the facts, once you know the reality, it is reassuring and we should relax because that’s what’s dictated by the reality of the situation.”  On March 6 Cuomo insisted, “The overall risk level of the novel coronavirus in New York remains low” and said, “We have more people in this country dying from the flu than we have dying from coronavirus.” As late as March 8, Cuomo, instead of advising people to stay away from the subway, advised New Yorkers to seek out less-crowded subway cars, the mass-transit equivalent of saying, “Let them eat cake.”  
 How were other states handling the outbreak? On March 1 on the other side of the country, officials were raising the alarm rather than telling people everything was fine. Launching the first phase of social distancing on March 1, in greater Seattle, King County officials held a conference call with 19 of the region’s large tech companies, including Microsoft and Amazon, and urged them to tell employees to stay home if they could. On March 4, Seattle officials said everyone over 60 should stay home and everyone else should work from home if they could. By March 5, photographs of highways typically clogged with rush-hour madness in Seattle showed sparse traffic instead. In San Francisco, in early March, Mayor London Breed was issuing a series of orders restricting large public gatherings. She ordered residents to shelter in place starting on March 16 and sent details of her shutdown order to de Blasio, thinking he might need to follow suit. Under orders from Governor Gavin Newsom, California shut down on March 19.  In New York, the public is today the victim of Cuomo’s longstanding, bizarre, petty, counterproductive hostility toward his fellow Democrat de Blasio. Though de Blasio publicly stated on March 17 that a shelter-in-place order might be necessary, and said so gingerly so as not to poke the bear, Cuomo fired back that it wasn’t necessary and that only he had the authority to give such an order. Privately he derided de Blasio as offering a scenario more befitting a nuclear apocalypse, according to ProPublica. Five days later, as the virus roared across the state, things had become so bad that Cuomo finally shut down the state, as usual without acknowledging that de Blasio had been correct.  The state and the city continued to work at cross purposes behind closed doors. “The state Health Department broke off routine sharing of information and strategy with its city counterpart in February,” ProPublica reported, citing both a city official and a city employee. “Radio silence,” said the city official. Even today, according to the city employee quoted by ProPublica, the city has difficulty getting basic data such as nursing-home staff counts from the state “It’s like they have been ordered not to talk to us,” the person said.   What may turn out to have been Cuomo’s worst unforced error was his March 25 order that nursing homes must accept patients who carried the coronavirus. This now looks like setting off a series of time bombs in New York State’s elder-care facilities, and Cuomo didn’t reverse this policy until May 11. The governor protested at that time that only 12 percent of New York State COVID deaths had occurred in nursing homes, but we are now learning that many people who died after falling ill in nursing homes have not been counted in the official stats. One such facility reported seven COVID deaths to the state, the New York Post reported, but the actual number of deaths there over a five-week period this spring was 76. New York is literally burying this problem: Many New Yorkers who died in nursing homes were never tested for the virus. Nursing-home staffers told the Post far more people are dying at long-term-care facilities than in a normal spring and that a coverup is underway. There is now a bipartisan group in Albany calling for an investigation, but Cuomo replied, “This is going to be a period where we don’t play gratuitous politics.” As New York State became the coronavirus capital of the Western world, with more deaths than any country except the U.K. and Italy, according to the Johns Hopkins COVID-19 dashboard, the media’s praise of Cuomo grew ever more lavish, and Cuomo’s approval ratings have (consequently) been sky-high. Today a reckoning is overdue for the disastrous results of Cuomo’s policies.  As of May 18, California has suffered eight COVID deaths per 100,000 population. Washington State, 14. In New York State, that figure is 140 according to the Washington Post tracking. Some 28,000 people are dead of COVID in the Empire State today. If New York had managed to combat the virus as successfully as Washington State did, it would have saved about 25,000 lives. But tell us again how delightful it is that Andrew Cuomo is “single and ready to mingle” or that it’s fun to watch him banter with his brother about their mom on television. 

I don’t think I can do this in the fall. What I mean by this is managing my kids’ new distance learning. Every time a day is finished I think, “How long can I do this?” Much has been said about how colleges will struggle and some will close as a result of COVID-19. America’s aging and declining in fertility. More schools chase after fewer students. The moment that schools try to charge for the premium college experience while delivering a CD-ROM-level education over the Internet, the weaker ones will fall apart.  But what about K–12 public schools? The social contract of a public school requires a certain kind of uniformity of expectations from teachers’ unions, students, and parents. But, under COVID-19, every term of that social contract seems up for grabs. Some parents want the teachers to conduct a class over teleconferencing software for four hours a day, to give them time to work. Other parents resent even as little as half an hour of online instruction when their own work-from-home and child-minding schedules are being improvised daily. NPR’s headline warned that “remote learning could go on for years.” That’s at once impossible to imagine as a social reality, and it makes perfect sense when you read the guidelines that the Centers for Disease Control developed for school reopening. A school following CDC-provided guidance could be in constant agitation. Each COVID-19 case in a school would result in dismissal for two to five days. That school would need to find the resources to engage in disinfecting itself semi-regularly. The school would need to develop procedures for checking signs and symptoms of COVID regularly. Does that mean temping every student and teacher as they enter the building? And if it doesn’t, will parents demand something like this? Will teachers’ unions? States and the federal government can create liability exclusions, but teachers’ unions can still sue the state over such things, and parents too.  
 The public-school social contract also may come under much pressure in the fall. NPR says that schools serve other functions than education, including “child care for millions of working parents.” But if the schools aren’t accountable for children for five to seven hours a day, then they may be subject to the same considerations that have college administrators trembling about their budgets. Right now, the dominant public mode among parents is one of support. In my own district, teachers recently enjoyed a supportive, socially distanced parade. Can that last?  Somehow distance learning makes it seem that parents are the employees of the teachers, who are deemed the true educators of children. The teachers and schools still have the power to declare students truant or to fail them for not keeping up. But those teachers and schools are incapable of providing anything like the same kind of service in exchange for that power. It doesn’t help the case for the teachers that the media have filled up with (probably bogus or overblown) studies showing that missed time or a change in routine will dramatically change the lives of children for the worse. In any case, parents have had to step into that breach themselves. And if I have to take the time to gather all the materials for every lesson and make sure all my children’s activity is logged, if I have to sit next to them while they do their school work to make sure they are connected and properly muted or unmuted, then I’m taking on almost all the personal costs of homeschooling while getting none of the benefits of it. Those benefits include determining the time and content of lessons, the books we use, the online tutors I hire, the friends that work with us, the pace that we go, and the days we are off.   It’s not just the schools either. Social services, early intervention, and any number of things done for the development of children have had to shift to simulations mediated by screens. In most cases, parents have adjusted to these substitutes begrudgingly as yet one more inconvenience of a temporary emergency. But patience is running out. The product of both parochial and public education, I’m neither a public-school hater nor a diehard supporter. And I expect the schools to survive long-term, given how much has been invested morally and financially into the system itself. But this medium term makes no sense.  We have to shift back to normality very soon, or prepare for a season of rancor and disruption as that social contract that applies to most of the children in this country gets stretched to a breaking point. 

A county judge on Monday ruled against restrictions put in place by Oregon governor Kate Brown to stem the spread of the coronavirus, declaring them “null and void” because her emergency order has expired. Baker County circuit judge Matthew Shirtcliff granted a preliminary injunction to ten churches who had sued the governor over the restrictions, which prevented them from gathering for religious services.  “This court understands that the current pandemic creates an unprecedented crisis in our state as well as this country,” Shirtcliff wrote in his ruling in Elkhorn Baptist Church vs. Katherine Brown. “The Governor has an enormous responsibility to protect the lives of the citizens of our state balanced against the citizens’ constitutional rights to freedom of religion which includes how he or she chooses to worship. The Governor’s orders are not required for public safety when Plaintiffs can continue to utilize social distancing and safety protocols at larger gatherings involving spiritual worship, just as grocery stores and businesses deemed essential by the Governor have been authorized to do.” Social-distancing directives implemented beyond Brown’s 28-day emergency order would require legislative approval, Shirtcliff ruled. He said the churches had shown they suffered “irreparable harm” from the restrictions. The governor plans to appeal to the state’s high court, according to Attorney General Ellen Rosenblum, who said in a statement that she believes Shirtcliff’s ruling is “legally incorrect” and that her office will ask for an immediate stay of his order.   “We will argue that the judge erred in his construction of the relevant statutes and that he abused his discretion in issuing the preliminary injunction,” Rosenblum said. Oregon has seen more than 3,600 cases of the coronavirus, and 137 people have died in the state after being infected.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

During his first tour in Iraq’s Al Anbar Province, Representative Mike Gallagher (R., Wis.) recalls, he was struck by the decision of a fellow Marine intelligence officer to study Chinese instead of Arabic. “I remember thinking at the time while we were jawing, ‘Why the heck would this guy have spent any time becoming a Mandarin linguist?’” Gallagher says.  More than a decade later, Gallagher credits that same officer — the current deputy national-security adviser, Matthew Pottinger — with helping shift his focus 3,000 miles further east. As Pottinger helps steer the White House through the coronavirus pandemic, Gallagher is one of 15 House Republicans joining the China Task Force, a group that aims to provide a comprehensive reassessment of America’s relationship with China. In justifying their desire to reorient American foreign policy toward containing the Chinese Communist Party, task-force members need only point to recent history, whether it be China’s hack of the Office of Personnel Management in 2015, its brutal treatment of Uighur Muslims, or its crackdown on pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong last fall. But for some, the issue runs deeper. “Growing up in western Pennsylvania, I have seen China’s transgressions firsthand, including their efforts to undercut U.S. steel manufacturers, export deadly opioids into our communities, and steal American’s intellectual property,” task-force member Guy Reschenthaler (R., Pa.) says in an email. As the country’s response to the coronavirus dominates the airwaves, the task force wants China’s malign intentions and growing capabilities to take center stage.  “We need to have a wakeup call about China’s influence into many aspects of American life, much of which Americans aren’t aware of,” Representative Michael Waltz (R., Fla.) says.  
 In interviews, task-force members presented a broad suite of potential legislative reforms, ranging from increased investment in space defense, to finding new international partners for rare-earth minerals, to exposing China’s theft of research from American universities. Sources with direct knowledge of the task force’s workings tell National Review that China’s record of human-rights abuses, its high levels of pollution, and its forays into artificial intelligence were also discussed on the group’s opening call. In its second call last Friday, members were assigned to work on specific issues, with the goal of producing a comprehensive report and legislative recommendations by October 1. While the China Task Force is focused on a number of different issues, it is united by a belief that Beijing poses a unique threat to U.S. interests — a challenge, its members say, that Washington has yet to seriously grapple with. “There was certainly a lot of hope, during the Clinton administration, during the Bush administration, during the Obama administration, that [China’s] behavior would change, but it clearly hasn’t,” task-force member Liz Cheney (R., Wyo.) says in a phone interview.  The rhetoric marks an implicit rejection of a longstanding bipartisan consensus: the notion that American free-market engagement would gradually liberate the Chinese people. Instead, Republicans argue that the opposite has happened: The CCP has chewed up and spit out foreign investment to serve its own interests.  “In working on many of the trade issues, you realize pretty quickly that all of the major issues are intertwined,” task-force member Anthony Gonzalez (R., Ohio) says by email. “Technology transfers, trade abuses, international institutional influence, and the like are all part of a broader strategy to displace the United States as the world leader and place Xi Jinping and the CCP at the top of the global pyramid.” “It never has been free trade, or free exchange, or free markets with China,” says Representative Andy Barr (R., Ky.), another task-force member. “Anyone who says that that’s the effort that has been tried over the last couple decades, they’re sorely mistaken. We have not had free trade with China. It’s been American companies, bullied by China, having their intellectual property seized and stolen by China, no fair competition, or free competition. It’s been American and Western businesses taken advantage of and pushed out of free competition by virtue of no labor regulations, cheap labor, and state subsidies of industry.”  While China’s handling of the pandemic makes the task force’s mission all the more urgent, the need to confront China was clear to many of its members long before the first COVID-19 case emerged. “My biggest professional challenge in the last 26 years of combined military and intelligence experience has been the information-sharing stovepipes, and the inability of people to look beyond their own mission set, and I think that’s something that we have to fix now,” Representative Denver Riggleman (R., Va.), a longtime NSA contractor and Air Force veteran, says.  The task force has been over a year in the making, but its formulation did not come without hiccups. In April 2019, as the Trump administration ramped up pressure to keep Chinese telecom giant Huawei from increasing its share of the global 5G market, House minority leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) reached out to majority leader Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) to see about creating a bipartisan commission on China.  House sources say that, following months of back-and-forth negotiations, an agreement was reached in February to launch “the China Policy Coordination Group,” consisting of four Democrats (Representatives Eliot Engel of New York, John Larson of Connecticut, Chrissy Houlahan of Pennsylvania, and David Trone of Maryland) and four Republicans (current task-force leader Michael McCaul of Texas, Reschenthaler, Darin LaHood of Illinois, and Elise Stefanik of New York). But a day before the scheduled launch on February 25, Republicans claim, Democrats pulled the plug. (Democrats did not return requests for comment on the task force or on their concerns over China’s growing influence.) Despite that apparent setback, Republicans say that they remain committed to ensuring that the task force has the broad support required to be a success.  “Look at the creative partnerships you’ve seen in Congress: You have card-carrying members of ‘the Squad’ like Ilhan Omar supporting legislation that’s very tough on the CCP for treating the Uighur Muslims in Xinjiang — and in doing so, echoing a lot of the rhetoric of Marco Rubio. So I think it creates a lot of strange bedfellows, and I think that’s positive,” Gallagher says. “We have an opportunity to really build a bipartisan consensus around how we compete successfully with the CCP without descending into McCarthyism.” There is reason to be hopeful that such a consensus can still be reached. McCarthy and McCaul still want input from across the aisle, and a House GOP source says that bipartisan “staff-level discussions” have been initiated with Democratic leadership, without elaborating further. Moreover, some task-force members believe there is appetite for strengthening the nation’s China policy across the aisle. “There’s a lot of Democrats who really do feel the same way that we do on these issues, and a real easy one is the pharmaceuticals,” task-force member Chris Stewart (R., Utah) argues. “Show me anyone in Congress who thinks it’s a good idea for us to get 97 percent of our generics [from China]. No one thinks that’s great. . . . Well, there’s a really easy bipartisan area, that’s significant, that we can work together on, but you got to come work with us on the task force.” “I think as you look at individual pieces of legislation, you’re likely to see bipartisan support for holding China accountable, things like requesting that Taiwan be able to be an observer at least at the WHO activities,” Cheney says. “I think you’ll see, on substance, many Democrats joining with Republicans to support holding China accountable.” “The first thing I did was warn everybody about making this a partisan issue,” says task-force member Adam Kinzinger (R., Ill.) of the group’s opening call. “Right now, it’s an 80 percent, probably 100 percent [bipartisan] issue — but we can make it 40 percent real quick and do nothing and look back in 20 years and be like, ‘Was it really worth it for an election?’” The coronavirus pandemic may have sped up the task force’s genesis, but for members, it is only the tip of the CCP iceberg. Of particularly pressing concern is the possibility that Beijing will use the pandemic’s aftermath to further its long-term global-infrastructure project, the Belt and Road Initiative, through which it has been known to leave developing countries in its debt, and thus under its influence. “When the dust settles from this, we know that China is going to walk into a bunch of countries with a bunch of cash and countries are going to have a decision to make: Do you take the immediate kind of heroin hit, the feel-good cash, and then find yourself addicted to China later?” Kinzinger asks. “The Belt and Road Initiative is part of a larger geopolitical strategy — it’s not just about building up their military, it’s not just about their cyberspace, hacking activities, or their ambitions in outer space — it is the fact that they have global ambitions,” Barr adds. “That is on full display, by exerting influence over these lesser-developed countries. Now in this task force, we need to seriously evaluate U.S. policies at these international financial institutions and how we use our influence in these international financial institutions to contain and counter Chinese ambitions.”  Still, the possibility exists that the pandemic will result in heightened levels of American isolationism, complicating efforts to more aggressively limit China’s global reach. Last month, President Trump halted funding for the World Health Organization, and congressional efforts to extract the U.S. from the World Trade Organization are already underway. In an interview published last Thursday, Trump signaled that he may be reevaluating his highly touted trade deal with China, saying, “We could cut off the whole relationship.” And in recent weeks, administration sources have said the White House is “turbocharging” the withdrawal of supply chains from China and hoping to shift them to a new trade network of Asian allies. “The way I’m starting to think about it, as a way to avoid descending into autarky, is: How do we harness this very healthy ‘Made in America, Decouple from China’ sentiment into closer and more creative partnerships with our allies?” Gallagher says. “That’s one area where I think the task force could do a lot of good, is identifying the areas where we really have an opportunity to work with our friends and partners on the world stage.” Gallagher is convinced of the need for allies in the fight against China because he’s convinced that Beijing represents an existential threat akin to the one once posed by the Soviet Union. “I think we are in a new Cold War,” he says. “I think we’re at a position similar to where we were in the late ’40s [and] early ’50s, and it’s going to require us to modernize a lot of our government structures and nongovernment structures in order to win this competition.” Of course, that doesn’t mean Republicans think an armed conflict is inevitable down the line — Stewart, for one, calls such a conflict “extremely unlikely.” But bilateral tensions with China don’t seem poised to ease any time soon, and task-force members are adamant about the need for strong military deterrents. “We need operational concepts like air, land battle — that were developed during the Cold War, with respect to the Soviets — given the very complex and complicated nature of the threat posed by the Chinese government,” Cheney says. “We need to have new concepts to think through: How do we deter China? How do we deter their aggression? How do we ensure that we have the capability to prevail, so we never have to use it?” 

There is a new cardinal rule in journalism — never write anything favorable about the Trump administration’s coronavirus response, even about its successes. It’s why the story of how the administration handled the potential ventilator crisis has gone almost entirely untold, and why its effort to secure supplies of personal protective equipment, or PPE, has been gotten largely skeptical or hostile coverage.  Any government response to a once-in-a-generation crisis is going to be subject to legitimate criticism, and there’s no question that almost every major government in the Western world, including ours, should have acted sooner. But to read the press, there is basically nothing good that the Trump administration has done over the last three months. This is manifestly false. In a briefing for reporters last week on FEMA’s work securing PPE, FEMA administrator Peter Gaynor laid out the raw numbers: FEMA, HHS, and the private sector have shipped or are currently shipping 92.7 million N95 respirators, 133 million surgical masks, 10.5 million face shields, 42.4 million surgical gowns, and 989 million gloves. According to Admiral John Polowczyk, head of the supply-chain task force at FEMA, we manufactured roughly 30 million N95 respirators domestically a month before the COVID-19 crisis. He says we are on a path now to ramp up to 180 million N95 respirators a month.   None of this happened by accident. At a time of unprecedented stress on the supply chain and a yawning gap between supply and demand in the market, it required considerable clever improvisation and determined hustle. This was not your average bureaucratic response. It was a partnership between the public and private sector to get supplies to the United States on an urgent basis and ship them to the places that needed them most, and then begin to ramp up manufacturing here at home. 
 A team around White House adviser Jared Kushner and the supply-chain task force under Admiral Polowczyk worked to fly supplies from overseas to the U.S. quickly, to vet leads for additional PPE (the work of volunteers from the business world mustered by Kushner’s team), and to build a cooperative relationship with 3M, the country’s most important manufacturer of N95 respirators. The story of what they’ve done is a key part of the administration’s response, even if it has been obscured by a press that has an allergy to anything that has worked.  Kitchen-Sink Attacks
The initiative to secure PPE has been the subject of constant criticism, whether it makes much sense or not.  Senator Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) has repeatedly said that the president needed a military leader to take charge of the supply chain — when Admiral Polowczyk, the vice director of logistics for the joint chiefs, was already in charge. The administration has been urged over and over again to invoke the Defense Production Act — when it has indeed used this act many times to prod and guide the supply chain, just not to take over industries wholesale. Stories in the press have tended to relay complaints that FEMA has “commandeered” supplies headed for states or other entities. According to FEMA, this is erroneous. After looking into supposed instances of commandeering, Gaynor says, FEMA believes that shady brokers have been using this line an excuse for their own failures. “FEMA has become a convenient scapegoat for malicious actors who are unable to deliver on the promises they had made or are engaging in illegal activity,” he says. They might make promise to various potential buyers and then pull the rug out from under them when they get a higher bid, explaining that the situation is out of their control because FEMA swooped in and took the material. Gaynor is emphatic that “FEMA does not have the authority to conduct seizures.”  A typical journalistic tack has been to find someone who had a frustrating experience with the administration and make him representative of the entire effort. A large, quintuple by-lined New York Times feature on Kushner’s volunteers was a particularly egregious example of the genre. It found a doctor named Jeffrey Hendricks who approached the federal government with information that he had “longtime manufacturing contacts in China and a line on millions of masks from established suppliers.” This wasn’t earth-shattering information, given that many tipsters said exactly the same thing. According to the Times, Hendricks was disappointed when it took weeks to act on his request before a site visit was finally set up to inspect the masks. After the story appeared, Hendricks said it “did not fully reflect my experience.”   The Times cited other examples of the effort supposedly gone awry. “At least one tip the volunteers forwarded turned into an expensive debacle,” the report said. The administration passed along procurement papers to senior officials in New York from “Yaron Oren-Pines, a Silicon Valley engineer who said he could provide more than 1,000 ventilators.” New York went ahead and awarded him a nearly $70 million contract and got exactly nothing for it. This is indeed a story of haste making waste — although one that implicates New York State, not the federal government. A senior administration official scoffs at how the Times blamed the Trump administration for New York’s screw-up. “I saw the email that was sent” to New York, he says, noting that it was from a federal-government employee, not a volunteer. The employee had just seen coverage of the governors of New York and New Jersey’s need for ventilators and simply forwarded it “because she wasn’t sourcing ventilators and wanted to help. ‘Hey, take a look.’ That was it.” Another passage in the Times piece related the story of “Dr. Albert Hazzouri, a Pennsylvania dentist and visitor of Mar-a-Lago.” According to the Times, he “repeatedly pressed FEMA officials to buy from his associates, after being referred by Rep. Brian Babin, a Texas Republican and fellow dentist.” It seemed that the story was leading up to a gross instance of cronyism, and then it ended with a whimper: “None of his tips resulted in FEMA supply deals.”  Oh. Don’t Nationalize Companies, Work with Them
A couple of insights guided the effort. Right from the beginning, everyone realized that the strategic stockpile alone couldn’t possibly cover what we needed in the crisis, and that the most sought-after supplies were overseas. “We had outsourced most of the medical supply chain to Asia,” as Polowczyk puts it. At the outset, HHS was the lead agency but, as a White House official notes, it is more of a policy than an implementing agency. The supply-chain effort would be moved to FEMA, which is routinely involved in execution. States are also used to dealing with it. It wasn’t considered feasible to nationalize the entire supply chain under the Defense Production Act. We’d “have to figure out where every single piece of equipment is going to go, and where every single thing is going to be distributed,” a HHS official explains. “So the amount of information that you would need and the amount of judgment you would have to be making about where things were needed was going to be exceptionally high.” Besides, the market players were hardly recalcitrant.  “Nobody needed coercion,” the White House official says. “Everyone was willing to step up and do what was right.” The Defense Production Act has still come into play; it’s been invoked 14 times, according to Gaynor, for PPE and other equipment. “Our goal,” he says, “has always been to supplement not to supplant America’s PPE supply chain.” This pointed to a cooperative arrangement with companies, using their existing operations, knowledge of the market, and real-time data, while at the same time redirecting supplies to hot spots — and doing it as quickly as possible. The PPE Airlift
Project Airbridge was one result. The impetus for the initiative was simple: Supplies we needed right away were in Asia, and it would take it them three weeks to get here via ship, the standard means of transport. A senior administration official recalls everyone thinking at the time, “We’ve got all these things that have been procured by distributors, but they’re going by boat, and we need them today.” The answer was flying them instead, cutting the transit time from more than 30 days to less than two. FEMA worked with the top six medical distributors — Cardinal Health, Owens & Minor, Henry Schein, McKesson, Medline, and Concordance — covering about 90 percent of facilities in the country. It contracted with FedEx and UPS for the flights. “We made FedEx and UPS our Air Force,” says the White House official. FEMA didn’t actually purchase the materials, but allocated 50 percent of it to the places that needed it most (the other 50 percent fed facilities elsewhere, which still needed the gear for more routine work and to prepare for COVID-19). The government-driven allocation was important. Distributors were feeling pressure to send stuff to their largest customers, which weren’t necessarily in the hardest-hit areas.  To get visibility into the supply chain, FEMA mustered the data of the companies. Polowczyk says FEMA fashioned “six disparate business systems into one visualization tool to make data-informed allocation decisions.” According to Polowczyk, FEMA can track material as it comes in from suppliers, what’s being held in inventory, and what’s being delivered, down to the county and the customer level. FEMA also has its own metrics, drawing on FEMA, HHS, and CDC data streams, for where the PPE is needed most. It has concentrated the allocation on roughly the 100 hardest-hit counties. Since March 29, there have been 139 Project Airbridge flights, bringing in a mountain of material. A number of criticisms are lodged at the project. One is that the federal government is subsidizing the distributors by paying their transit costs. But another way of looking at it is the government got an enormous amount of PPE where it wanted it to go, without actually buying it — just paying to fly it here. It’s also said that Project Airbridge should have used Department of Defense planes. “When you use a DOD plane, it’s super expensive and slow,” the senior administration official explains. “You generally don’t want to use military aircraft unless it’s absolutely necessary.” A Washington Post story somewhat bizarrely noted that many counties it contacted didn’t know whether they had received Project Airbridge supplies or not. But the material doesn’t come specially marked (this is a classic Catch-22 — if there were fanfare about Project Airbridge deliveries, the administration would surely be accused of politicizing the supply effort). A critical NBC News story highlighted the example of DuPont. It noted how DuPont gets Tyvek material sewn together into body suits in Vietnam and how it takes months to ship it back and forth. The federal government agreed to pay for chartered flights to reduce the total transit time to about a week and a half. “For some government officials familiar with the supply-chain end of the coronavirus fight,” according to the report, “it was yet another example of Trump’s task force serving industry.” But what was the alternative? To let desperately needed gowns take months to get here from Vietnam? To wait until DuPont relocated its entire supply chain in the United States, obviating any need to grapple with shipments to and from Asia? If the government wasn’t going to nationalize the supply-chain — for understandable reasons — it wasn’t an alternative to let companies operate under standard procedures either. The senior administration official considers the counterfactual of leaving the companies to fend for themselves. “What would have happened is you have these distributors that sourced all these supplies; they were theirs,” he says. “They all would’ve come over by boat, and it would have taken three weeks to get here, and then they would just be distributed to hospitals based on their customer relationships.” The administration settled on a path between full nationalization, with the potential disruption that would have brought, and business as usual. Separating the Wheat from the Chaff
Meanwhile, hundreds of leads were coming into the government for PPE. They came in from all over the world, with prices 14 to 15 times higher than usual, and from brokers new to the medical supplies. Kushner had a team of people drawn from business — the volunteers — comb through them. Sifting through the leads was a gargantuan task, given the sheer volume and how many were dubious. “There was a lot of messy stuff there — a lot,” says the senior administration official. One main line of attack against the volunteers is that they were inexperienced. Obviously, they weren’t experts in government procurement. But, largely drawn from the world of consulting and investing, they had done relevant work performing due diligence on businesses. The HHS officials says that it was “very similar to the work they were doing in the private sector,” comparable to kicking the tires on early-stage companies — “figuring which ones are legitimate, which ones have legitimate management teams, legitimate customers.” It wasn’t as though the volunteers examined and adjudicated every lead on their own, either. They’d do the initial vet — asking, for instance, if the broker knew what manufacturing facility the material was coming from. If the answer was “no,” it was a sign that the broker wasn’t what he seemed. If a lead passed muster, then it went through a series of hoops before anything happened.  Someone from the FDA would make sure that the product could be used in America. Someone from the State Department would check to see if it could be exported from the country that it was in. Then, using the existing network of distributors overseas, a site visit would take place to examine the materials and make sure they were as advertised. Only after those four steps would the information be packaged together and sent over to FEMA for the final procurement decision. “Without doing thorough vetting,” says the HHS official, “we would have ended up in a place that many other folks have ended up in, of purchasing low-quality goods, which I don’t think has really happened.” Stories in the press routinely allege political favoritism. If a lead came in from, say, a member of Congress, he or she would be apprised of where it stood (if this hadn’t happened, the critique would have been that the administration wasn’t communicating). If any lead was ultimately forwarded on to FEMA, the volunteers would check on where it stood. But officials involved in the effort insist that every lead went through the same funnel and was evaluated the same way. The New York Times says that Fox News personality Judge Jeanine Pirro made the case to get PPE for an unspecified hospital, and it indeed got supplies. If it was a New York City–area hospital, it’s hard to see how it wouldn’t be getting additional supplies regardless. What no one has pointed to is any case where the volunteers and FEMA gave a contract to someone not genuinely suited to deliver quality product. Indeed, one of the administration’s most significant actions has involved forging a close relationship with the very opposite of a fly-by-night operator, the multinational conglomerate 3M. From Shanghai to U.S. Hospitals
After a public spat with President Trump at the outset — culminating with the president invoking the Defense Production Act in early April to get 3M to make more respirators — 3M and the government have worked together to massively scale up the company’s production and import respirators here from overseas. 3M is the only significant domestic manufacturer of N95 respirators. It had relatively recent experience with what a pandemic does to a supply chain during the SARS outbreak in the early 2000s. The company had surge manufacturing capacity that it turned on as the coronavirus crisis developed, maxing out at about 100 million N95 respirators per month in mid-February, double its usual global output. Seeking to get more masks into the health sector, the company flipped its production entirely over to medical needs, whereas it usually produces for both medical and industrial users. Meanwhile, the FDA issued a so-called emergency use authorization to allow different types of respirators to be used in a hospital setting. From early on, 3M embedded a contact with FEMA to facilitate the relationship and provide expertise on the masks. Typically, 3M sells almost all its respirators produced in the U.S. to American distributors, and all of its respirators in China to Chinese distributors. The respirators in its Shanghai factory could have possibly become another source of supply to the U.S., but Beijing had been requisitioning all that production. 3M on its own got China to allow 10 million to be brought to the United States. That was just a start. More ambitiously, as the White House official explains, “we signed a contract with them for those [Shanghai] masks, and then we went to the Chinese government and said, ‘We have a contract with the company.’” This opened the spigots. The deal would secure 166.5 million respirators for the U.S. in the course of April, May, and June. “That’s more than anyone has sourced ever,” says the senior administration official. The procedure is that FEMA takes custody of the material in China and becomes the importer of record, flying it back to the United States. Initially, it took the company and FEMA three hours over the phone to work out the finer points of the logistics of these flights. Now, it has become so routine that coordinating each flight takes more like 10 minutes. According to FEMA administrator Gaynor, over last month 42 flights carrying nearly 44 million FEMA-procured masks and respirators from 3M have landed in the U.S.  Meanwhile, 3M has been ramping up domestic production even further, on the strength of orders from the federal government. 3M is slated to produce 50 million respirators in June, up from 22 million a month prior to the crisis. Then it will produce 74 million in July and 94 million a month by October 1. This is a signal contribution to what Admiral Polowczyk calls the “expansion” phase of the supply effort, enhancing the U.S. manufacturing capacity for the long haul. Credit Where It’s Due?
There’s no doubt that some hospitals, especially public hospitals, lacked the gear they needed at the outset of the crisis, and even those that didn’t have shortages felt as though they were living on the edge. Polowczyk says that he believes every place that needed PPE got it, although he had “the unenviable job of managing scarcity as we went through March into April and now May, where the volume of supplies has increased.” He explains that during the worst period, “people, hospitals, point-of-care, were getting supplies on the numbers-of-days amounts instead of, ‘Hey, I want like a month, two months.’”  He says he can understand how this just-in-time allocation method “would make you feel uncomfortable,” adding that as supplies were focused on hot spots, “other areas of the country that did not have such significant COVID outbreaks certainly got less of an allocation and were fed as needed.” How the administration worked through this and got to a better place would seem an interesting story, if the press weren’t too vehemently opposed to Trump to even consider occasionally giving some credit where it’s due. 

The World Health Organization on Monday acquiesced to pressure from its member nations to submit to an investigation into its response to the coronavirus pandemic. The WHO will launch an independent review of the organization’s response to the global health crisis “at the earliest appropriate moment,” WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly, which was held virtually this year due to fears about the spread of the virus.  Tedros defended the WHO’s response to the pandemic despite criticism that it was slow to act, insisting that, “WHO sounded the alarm early, and we sounded it often.” “Every country and every organization must examine its response and learn from its experience,” the WHO director added. A draft resolution calling for an independent investigation into the WHO’s coronavirus response is set for a vote on Tuesday. The proposal is led by the United Kingdom and Australia and is supported by at least 116 of the 194 WHO member states. A two-thirds majority is required for the resolution to pass.  An oversight report published Monday said the WHO “demonstrated leadership and made important progress in its COVID-19 response” but supported a review of the organization’s response to the outbreak. Health Secretary Alex Azar doubled down on the Trump administration’s criticism of the WHO in the wake of the pandemic, saying the organization is implicated in allowing the pathogen to spread but declining to mention China by name.  “We must be frank about one of the primary reasons this outbreak spun out of control,” Azar said. “There was a failure by this organization to obtain the information that the world needed, and that failure cost many lives.” President Trump has hammered the WHO over its early response to the pandemic, accusing it of being partial to China and endangering countries by recommending borders be kept open.  In January, the WHO recommended that countries keep borders and trade open even as it dubbed the coronavirus outbreak a global emergency. The Trump administration has rerouted funding away from the WHO, suspending payments until a review is conducted “to assess the World Health Organization’s role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus,” Trump said. As of Monday afternoon, more than 4.7 million people have contracted the coronavirus worldwide, and more than 315,000 people have died from the respiratory illness.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Bioethics and medical journals are growing increasingly ideological. When dealing with cultural, ethical, or political issues, they generally push progressive agendas; deploying health policies to effect radical social change, opposing medical-conscience rights, supporting health-care rationing schemes, disdaining the sanctity-of-life ethic in favor of a “quality of life” outlook, and promoting technocratic control by experts. The Lancet is one such publication. It comes out of the U.K. (since 1823) and touts itself as an international medical journal. And now — making many headlines — it has published an editorial essentially ordering Americans to kick Donald Trump out of office in the upcoming election because his administration has supposedly not managed the COVID-19 crisis well, is anti-CDC, and too partisan. From “Reviving the US CDC:” The COVID-19 pandemic continues to worsen in the USA with 1.3 million cases and an estimated death toll of 80 684 as of May 12. States that were initially the hardest hit, such as New York and New Jersey, have decelerated the rate of infections and deaths after the implementation of 2 months of lockdown. However, the emergence of new outbreaks in Minnesota, where the stay-at-home order is set to lift in mid-May, and Iowa, which did not enact any restrictions on movement or commerce, has prompted pointed new questions about the inconsistent and incoherent national response to the COVID-19 crisis. Deploying varying approaches in different parts of the country based on differing local circumstances is known in the U.S. as federalism, not that a U.K. medical publication — where centralized control of health-care is ironfisted — would begin to understand the concept. And note, the editorial somehow fails to mention that per capita, the U.S. has the third-lowest mortality rates of the 10 countries most affected from COVID, at 27.13 per 100,000 population. (Iran is best overall — which we can’t trust — and Germany is second at 9.57.) Meanwhile, The Lancet’s home country is the third worst at a whopping 51.96 per 100,000 — almost twice as bad as ours. Our case-fatality percentage is 6.0 percent. The U.K.’s is more than double, at 14.3 percent. (Johns Hopkins data as of May 16.) But rather than look at the U.K.’s failings, the editorialists attack Trump: The Administration is obsessed with magic bullets—vaccines, new medicines, or a hope that the virus will simply disappear. But only a steadfast reliance on basic public health principles, like test, trace, and isolate, will see the emergency brought to an end, and this requires an effective national public health agency. The CDC needs a director who can provide leadership without the threat of being silenced and who has the technical capacity to lead today’s complicated effort. The Trump administration’s further erosion of the CDC will harm global cooperation in science and public health, as it is trying to do by defunding WHO. A strong CDC is needed to respond to public health threats, both domestic and international, and to help prevent the next inevitable pandemic. Americans must put a president in the White House come January, 2021, who will understand that public health should not be guided by partisan politics. Oh, we “must,” must we? After being somewhat slow to comprehend the urgency of the emergency — wasn’t everyone? — Trump, I think, has generally done a good job managing the crisis, particularly in forging a robust public–private-sector partnership to produce bounties of ventilators, PPE, testing (after a sputtering CDC start), and his most recent announced effort to spur the development of treatments and vaccines at “warp speed.” His effort to keep the “cure” from becoming “worse than the disease” is also spot-on.  For some reason, The Lancet thinks that is bad. But then, its editorialists aren’t going to become suicidal because they have been financially wiped out.  Which brings up another important point: The editorial had kind words for New York and New Jersey because of the lockdown. Yet those were the very states that promulgated the worst public policies in this crisis by compelling nursing homes to accept COVID-infected patients, unleashing a catastrophic viral tsunami overwhelming long-term care facilities. It took many weeks and thousands of needless deaths for these scandalous orders to be revoked. Trump had nothing to do with that debacle. Reasonable people can have different opinions on the president’s performance in this crisis, and that will almost surely be the deciding factor in the upcoming election. But that is for us to decide, not the “experts” at The Lancet. Physician, heal thyself.  

China’s President Xi Jinping said Monday that China will contribute $2 billion in aid to combat the coronavirus in other countries as the world’s second largest economy works to repair its global image after the pandemic spread beyond its borders. The funds, which will be distributed over two years, are intended to “help with Covid-19 response, and with economic and social development in affected countries, especially developing countries,” Xi said at a convening of the World Health Assembly, the decision-making body of the World Health Organization.  Additionally, the Chinese president said a vaccine for the virus “will be made a global public good” when it becomes available and added that countries must “continue supporting global research by scientists on the source and transmission routes of the virus.” Xi also defended his country’s handling of the pandemic, which has been sharply criticized by U.S. officials and other countries, insisting that China has been prompt and transparent in sharing information about the virus with the WHO. “We have shared control and treatment experience with the world without reservation,” Xi said in his speech. “We have done everything in our power to support and assist countries in need.”  The U.S. intelligence community concluded in a classified report that China deliberately provided incomplete public numbers for coronavirus cases and deaths resulting from the infection.  Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said last month the U.S. “strongly believed” China flouted World Health Organization rules by neglecting to report on the outbreak in a “timely fashion,” and did not report on the community spread of the virus “for a month until it was in every province inside of China.” Xi added that China supports a full review of the global response to the coronavirus. “China supports the idea of a comprehensive review of the global response to Covid-19 after it is brought under control, to sum up our experience and address deficiencies,” Xi said. “This work should be led by science and professionalism, led by the WHO and conducted in an objective and impartial manner.” The Chinese president did not mention a specific proposal put forth by the European Union and Australia asking that an international investigation be launched into the origins of the coronavirus, which first broke out in the Chinese city of Wuhan. The inquiry, supported by the U.S., could send international inspectors to Wuhan. China has vehemently rejected the proposal, saying it is an attempt by the Trump administration to blame China for the pandemic and shift attention away from its own mistakes. As of Monday morning, the coronavirus has infected more than 4.7 million people worldwide, and more than 315,000 people have died after being infected.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The world may have a fifth piece of consequential good news, in addition to the four listed below. On Friday, the pharmaceutical company Sorrento Therapeutics issued a release announcing what would be a remarkable breakthrough against the coronavirus, an antibody that appeared to offer extraordinary protection from the virus: Among the antibodies showing neutralizing activity, one antibody stood out for its ability to completely block SARS-CoV-2 infection of healthy cells in the experiments. STI-1499 completely neutralized the virus infectivity at a very low antibody dose, making it a prime candidate for further testing and development. Initial biochemical and biophysical analyses also indicate STI-1499 is a potentially strong antibody drug candidate. Sorrento plans to request priority evaluation and accelerated review from regulators to determine the best pathway to make any potential treatment available as soon as possible. Sorrento’s existing state-of-the-art cGMP antibody manufacturing facility in San Diego is expected to be able to produce up to two hundred thousand doses per month and the Company intends to produce a million doses at risk while seeking FDA approval for any STI-1499 product candidate. The Company is seeking potential government support and pharmaceutical partners to further scale up STI-1499 manufacturing capacity with a goal of potentially providing tens of millions of doses in a short period of time to meet the vast projected demand. If this pans out, the antibody would work as both a treatment for those infected and provide protection for those at risk for exposure. The company believes that this and other antibody “cocktails” would prove effective, even as the coronavirus mutates and changes over time. You may not have heard of Sorrento, but they’re not a bunch of fly-by-night quacks. The San Diego company has been around since 2009 and their research is in partnership with the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai in New York City.  Over the past few months, you’ve probably run across gloomy statements like: “We’ve never released a coronavirus vaccine for humans before.” Notice the careful wording.  The good news is that medical researchers developed several potential vaccines against SARS after the outbreak in 2003-2004. The bad news is those vaccines carried significant side effects, such as liver damage or lung diseases. But it’s also worth keeping in mind that the scientific community more or less was forced to give up the search for a vaccine once the level of concern about SARS declined. Researchers describe their funding drying up; not many institutions or donors were interested in financing research into a disease that hadn’t killed anyone in a decade. Researchers also developed potential vaccines for another coronavirus MERS — Middle East Respiratory Syndrome — that worked in monkeys and is just getting to human trials this year. MERS is another viral outbreak that hit hard at first, and then cases became rarer and rarer, making the need for a vaccine less pressing.  Because most coronaviruses are not deadly and generate symptoms on par with the common cold, there’s been less incentive to put lots of research into developing vaccines for them. With this unfolding pandemic, medical researchers have enormous incentive and unprecedented resources to figure out how to stop SARS-CoV-2, and there are promising developments on a variety of fronts, researching potential treatments and vaccines. The “we’ve never released a vaccine to stop a coronavirus before” line can make it sound like coronaviruses are unstoppable microscopic Terminators, effortlessly cutting through the body’s defenses. But human bodies’ immune systems kill coronaviruses all the time. Our experience with the number of people who recover from SARS-CoV-2 with mild symptoms demonstrates that some human bodies’ immune systems can kill this coronavirus. We just have to figure out a way to make sure everybody’s immune system has the ability to make short work of these dastardly little invaders.  

New York mayor Bill de Blasio on Monday warned that swimmers at city beaches will be extricated from the ocean over the summer for violating coronavirus restrictions. “Anyone tries to get in the water, they’ll be taken right out of the water,” de Blasio told reporters at a press conference. On Sunday, the mayor said his administration would “not tolerate” gatherings of people that “put lives at risk.”  New York City’s beaches will remain closed to swimmers at least through Memorial Day weekend, the traditional season opening. City officials fear that crowding on beaches might contribute to a renewed outbreak of coronavirus, as well as crowding on public transportation used to arrive at the shoreline. “Imagine the scene on the train with people going out to the Rockaways, or any other train where people go to the beach, or the buses. We’re not going to allow that crowding to happen,” de Blasio said on Sunday. Beaches will likely remain open for nearby residents to stroll, as long as they socially distance from other people. De Blasio’s comments come after the mayor announced on Friday that the NYPD would relax enforcement of certain requirements including the wearing of face masks, but would continue to limit large gatherings of people.  “We’re going to focus on when it starts to be more than a handful of people, and we’re not going to be having the NYPD enforcing on face coverings,” de Blasio said. Over the weekend, police were stationed at several parks including Washington Square and parts of Central Park to limit overcrowding.  Earlier this month, Police Benevolent Association head Patrick Lynch warned that officers could not be expected to enforce social distancing measures for much longer. “The NYPD needs to get cops out of the social distancing enforcement business altogether,” Lynch said in a statement. “As the weather heats up & the pandemic continues to unravel our social fabric, police officers should be allowed to focus on our core public safety mission. If we don’t, the city will fall apart before our eyes.” The NYPD and city administration have faced criticism after several instances involving police and suspected violators of social-distancing restrictions. On May 7 it was revealed that 35 out of 40 people arrested for breaking social distancing were black, leading to accusations of racism. Police were also forced to break up an ultra-Orthodox Jewish funeral earlier this month after initially permitting it to go ahead, when unanticipated crowds of mourners showed up.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

How often does a Monday morning bring four big pieces of good news? One: “Moderna Inc. on Monday said human subjects in a Phase 1 trial of a candidate Covid-19 vaccine produced immune responses that were a positive sign of the vaccine’s potential to prevent infection with the new coronavirus. . . . Two weeks after receiving a second dose, people who received the smallest-tested dose of the vaccine created levels of binding antibodies equivalent to those seen in people who have recovered from Covid-19. And people who received a medium dose of the vaccine produced binding antibodies two weeks after a second dose that significantly exceeded the levels seen in recovered patients.”  Elsewhere in the Wall Street Journal, the chief science officer of Johnson and Johnson says his company expects to have sufficient doses “to vaccinate health care workers globally” in early 2021. Two: “Official data may not show much, if any recovery, in May from April, but a rise in June is quite plausible. If that growth is sustained, this economic contraction could go on record as the deepest since the 1930s, yet also the shortest, lasting as little as two or three months.” As painful as a deep and short recession would be, it beats a deep and long one. Three: On Rt.live, the latest data indicates that 48 of the 50 states have an Rt level below one, meaning that the average person who catches the coronavirus is spreading it to less than one other person. Minnesota is at exactly one, and Maine is at 1.01. Montana enjoys the lowest Rt figure in the country, at .52. These numbers could start creeping up again as the economy and society reopen, but the country has made enormous progress at slowing down the spread. Six weeks ago, 33 states were above the threshold of one, with Nebraska the highest at 1.2.  Four: “[Tropical storm Arthur] will make its closest approach to the Outer Banks during the day on Monday. By Tuesday, the National Hurricane Center forecasts Arthur to transition into a non-tropical low-pressure system as it moves away from the East Coast.” The last thing we needed was a bad hurricane hitting the coast while everyone is trying to stay six feet apart. 

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo singled out the World Health Organization (WHO) for being unable to halt the coronavirus global pandemic, saying “it had one job, to protect the world from a pandemic, and it didn’t get it done.” Pompeo, speaking to the Washington Examiner, called the WHO’s response an “abject failure” and said the virus “makes clear that international organizations aren’t necessarily good just because they’re a multilateral organization.” He pointed to how the Chinese Communist Party had coerced the WHO “to be quiet about the scope and nature of this pandemic.”  Earlier this month, Pompeo urged WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom to include Taiwan in this week’s World Health Assembly (WHA), but the WHO said it could not because of “divergent views,” after China said it “deplores and opposes” including Taipei in the gathering. Taiwan said in March that the WHO had ignored its December warnings that human-to-human transmission of coronavirus was possible. WHO officials, including Tedros, have previously praised China for its response to the virus. “China is doing the right things, and China is responding in a massive way,” Dr. Michael Ryan, executive director of the WHO Health Emergencies Program, said in late January. “We’ve seen no obvious lack of transparency.” But President Trump has slammed the WHO for being “very China centric,” and halted U.S. funding to the WHO last month. On Sunday, Axios reported that Trump intended to make the total funding cut permanent, after being on the verge of announcing that the U.S. would “agree to pay up to what China pays in assessed contributions” to the WHO. Fox News’s Tucker Carlson, who broke news Friday of the potential reinstatement, slammed the move.  Tedros said in April that “the world should have listened to the WHO” about coronavirus, adding that “we advised the whole world to implement a comprehensive public health approach — find, test, contact tracing and so on. The countries who followed that are in a better position than others.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Jon Wertheim’s recent 60 Minutes segment previewed the “radical transformation” that the coronavirus pandemic might inspire in the future. Between forest fires and a viral outbreak, Wertheim says that “Mother Earth” has “made herself heard.” He and his interviewees attempt to parse her laments. This line from Wertheim about possible responses to climate change stood out: The shutdown to industry has offered a glimpse into what collective response can look like. If our present “shutdown to industry” is a window into the sort of “collective response” that Jon Wertheim and his interviewees have in mind, I doubt they will win many converts to their cause. Not that I’m eager to give them PR advice.  

On the menu today: Many countries head into the World Health Assembly wanting the World Health Organization to investigate the origins of SARS-CoV-2; China makes a power grab in Hong Kong; a strange report about the World Military Games held in October of last year in Wuhan; and outbreaks in northern China that are inconvenient for Beijing’s preferred narrative.  If You’re Not Watching China Right Now, You Can’t Understand the World I suspect that this morning, many other news sources will helpfully inform you that the president of the United States said or tweeted something outrageously controversial, that some Americans in a red state are not following social-distancing recommendations, and that House Speaker Nancy Pelosi wants a “bipartisan” compromise after the House passed a $3 trillion wish-list stimulus bill on a near-party-line vote. Right now on MSNBC, the top story is that the State Department inspector general was investigating whether Secretary of State Mike Pompeo required a department employee to walk his dog. Congress is almost certain to investigate. Meanwhile, far from Washington, the coronavirus pandemic is driving big and consequential developments, particularly relating to China — but apparently that’s just not seen as interesting or newsworthy in U.S. newsrooms.  The World Health Organization is hosting its World Health Assembly today — everyone is meeting online for quarantine reasons — and one of the first speakers was Chinese leader Xi Jinping, who said his country would support “a comprehensive review of the global response to the Covid-19 pandemic led by WHO after the virus is brought under control.”  We can all see the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We’re living in it. What most of us want is a comprehensive review of where this virus came from and how it jumped into humans so we can reduce the likelihood this ever happens again. Heading into the assembly, sixty countries, including all members of the European Union, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, drew up a resolution demanding an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus. There is some indication that WHO management beyond director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus are starting to feel some pressure. Some of the staffers around Tedros appear to be offering their own defensive leaks to Reuters, contending that they didn’t think China was doing such a great job in the early days of the outbreak, and tried to warn Tedros, but he refused to listen: After meetings with President Xi Jinping and Chinese ministers, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus was impressed by their knowledge of the new flu-like virus and their efforts to contain the disease, which by then had killed scores in China and started to spread to other countries. The advisers encouraged Tedros to use less effusive language out of concern about how he would be perceived externally, the person familiar with the discussions said, but the director-general was adamant, in part because he wanted to ensure China’s cooperation in fighting the outbreak. “We knew how it was going to look, and he can sometimes be a bit naive about that,” the person said. “But he’s also stubborn.” Tedros knew there was a risk of upsetting China’s political rivals with his visit and his public show of support, according to the person familiar with the discussions — an account backed by a WHO official. But the agency chief saw a greater risk — in global health terms — of losing Beijing’s cooperation as the new coronavirus spread beyond its borders, the two sources said. “That’s the calculation you make,” said the person familiar with the discussions. For what it’s worth, the WHO denied the report in German media that Xi Jinping had called Tedros, asking him to delay releasing information about the virus: The UN agency said a German magazine’s report about a telephone conversation between WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus and Chinese President Xi Jinping on January 21 was “unfounded and untrue”. Der Spiegel reported that Mr Xi asked Dr Tedros during the call to hold back information about human-to-human transmission of the virus and delay declaring a pandemic. The magazine quoted Germany’s foreign intelligence agency, BND. Der Spiegel also claimed the BND concluded up to six weeks of time to fight the outbreak had been lost because of Chinese stalling. WHO said Dr Tedros and Mr Xi “have never spoken by phone” and added that “such inaccurate reports distract and detract from WHO’s and the world’s efforts to end the COVID-19 pandemic”. One flaw in the Der Spiegel account is that on January 21, Chinese officials admitted that the virus could be transferred from one human to another. But they also said, “there was no danger of a repeat of the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) epidemic that killed nearly 800 people globally during a 2002-2003 outbreak, which started in China, as long as precautions were taken.” The previous day, WHO stated some “limited human-to-human transmission” occurred between close contacts.  A Pandemic Is a Convenient Time for a Power Grab There is good reason to believe that the Chinese government sees the global pandemic as an opportunity. With almost every government of every country in the world attempting to get a handle on the outbreak, China is free to make moves that otherwise would bring international rebukes. In Hong Kong, pro-Chinese lawmakers are having their rivals dragged out of the chamber: . . . Another day of chaos inside the city’s House Committee, a body that helps scrutinize bills, with protesting pro-democracy lawmakers dragged from the chamber by security guards and scuffles between rival camps. It was the second time in two weeks that clashes have broken out as pro-democracy supporters try to kill a bill that would ban insulting China’s national anthem. The committee has been without a leader since October, meaning no bills have made it to the legislature for a vote, including the national anthem bill. Pro-democracy lawmakers have used filibustering to stop voting for a new chair. On Monday, the pro-Beijing camp installed its own committee chair, armed with an external legal opinion saying they had the power to end the deadlock. But the pro-democracy camp said the move was a coup, citing the legal opinion of the legislature’s own lawyers. In another demonstration of growing Chinese power in Hong Kong, “Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Sunday he believed China had threatened to interfere with the work of U.S. journalists in Hong Kong, and warned Beijing that any decision impinging on Hong Kong’s autonomy could affect the U.S. assessment of Hong Kong’s status.”   There is no word on who was walking Pompeo’s dog at the time. A Curious Report about October’s World Military Games in Wuhan Back on April 22, I wrote about the World Military Games, an Olympic-style competition, that was held in Wuhan and began October 18 and ended October 27. I concluded the piece, “as far as we know, no athletes who participated in the games in Wuhan have been diagnosed with coronavirus — and that’s not the sort of information that could be easily suppressed simultaneously by lots of militaries around the world.” For what it is worth . . . some German, French, and Italian athletes who competed at the games have told the U.K. newspaper the Daily Mail that they came home sick after the competition. This could be non-coronavirus illnesses, and memories influenced by the power of suggestion; it would probably be a good idea to see if these competitors have coronavirus antibodies in their systems. (Note that even if the antibody tests come back positive, it is possible that these competitors caught the virus sometime after they returned from Wuhan.)  But if a significant number of athletes who competed in Wuhan, and who have avoided contact with potential carriers since then, test positive for antibodies . . . that would strengthen the argument that the virus was floating around Wuhan much earlier than we currently believe. And that would be particularly intriguing in light of the report that there “was no cellphone activity in a high-security portion of the Wuhan Institute of Virology from Oct. 7 through Oct. 24.” Meanwhile, in Northern China . . . How is China’s fight against the virus going, as far as we can tell through state-controlled media? Nowhere near as bad as the initial outbreak in Wuhan, but not great: Jilin city, the second-largest city in Jilin province, saw bus and rail services halted and residential compounds closed off last week after the discovery of six new cases of infection. Recently reopened schools were closed again. These six people had contact with another cluster in the adjacent city of Shulan, which was earlier put under lockdown, suggesting that some amount of undetected spread has already taken place before. Overall, at least 22 infections spread across three cities in two provinces — Jilin city and Shulan in Jilin province, and Shenyang city in Liaoning province — have now been linked, making it one of China’s biggest clusters that has emerged in months. No doubt, leaders in Beijing would like the world to believe that their heavy-handed quarantine methods are the most effective. (They unleashed the problem upon the world, and they get to show the world the best solution.) Sure, China’s methods may look draconian . . . Residents of the province’s Jilin city must show certificates of health, including a recent negative nucleic acid test, if they wished to leave the city, state media reported. In Shulan county, which is under the city’s jurisdiction, train service has been halted until the end of the month. The industrial city of Shenyang in neighboring Liaoning province is requiring visitors from Shulan county to undergo a 21-day quarantine on arrival, according to state broadcaster CCTV. . . . but if draconian methods keep people alive, who’s to complain, right?  Of course, if those draconian methods don’t really stop the spread of the disease . . . then the Chinese government is giving its people the worst of both worlds. Orwellian surveillance, sweeping restrictions on daily life, welding apartment doors shut for those found to have had the virus . . . and they still are at risk of contacting the virus. ADDENDUM: Sometime when I wasn’t looking, my Twitter followers surpassed 100,000. (I suspect Twitter will purge another batch of bots soon and probably knock me below that threshold again.) If you’re one of them, thank you for following . . . except for the trolls. I can only imagine how frustrated the folks interested in politics are by my pop-culture thoughts, and how bewildered the people who want more information about the labs in Wuhan are when I react to news about the New York Jets.  

American biotech firm Moderna announced Monday that its phase-one human trial for a coronavirus vaccine produced COVID-19 antibodies in every one of its participants. Two vaccine doses of 25 micrograms showed that, by day 43 of the trial, humans developed antibody levels consistent with those who have recovered from coronavirus, the company said. Participants who received 100-microgram doses had antibodies that “significantly exceeded levels” found in recovered patients.  “These interim Phase 1 data, while early, demonstrate that vaccination with mRNA-1273 elicits an immune response of the magnitude caused by natural infection starting with a dose as low as 25 [micrograms],” Tal Zaks, the chief medical officer at Moderna, said in a statement. The trial also found that the vaccine produced neutralizing antibodies in at least eight participants — four of whom received a 25-microgram dose, while the other four received 100 mcg. When tested against a live virus, Moderna said the levels of neutralizing antibodies were at or above levels seen in blood samples. “When combined with the success in preventing viral replication in the lungs of a pre-clinical challenge model at a dose that elicited similar levels of neutralizing antibodies, these data substantiate our belief that mRNA-1273 has the potential to prevent COVID-19 disease and advance our ability to select a dose for pivotal trials,” Zaks added.  The news caused Moderna’s stock-price to surge ahead of Monday’s opening bell. Chief Executive Stephane Bancel told the Wall Street Journal that the company aimed to have a “pivotal” phase-three study in July. “We are investing to scale up manufacturing so we can maximize the number of doses we can produce to help protect as many people as we can from SARS-CoV-2,” she stated.  There are currently seven other coronavirus vaccines that have already started human trials, with the Trump administration continuing to orchestrate “Operation Warp Speed,” with the goal of making 300 million doses of a successful vaccine available to Americans by the start of 2021.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Eight prospective coronavirus vaccines have already started human trials, as the White House continues “Operation Warp Speed” with the goal of making 300 million vaccine doses available to Americans by the start of 2021. Researchers at Oxford University and drugmakers Pfizer and Moderna are among those already conducting human trials of potential vaccines, as part of an expedited timeline to deliver an emergency-use vaccine by the fall. Other pharmaceutical giants, including Johnson & Johnson, have begun building up vaccine production capacity to fast-track millions of doses to the public.  President Trump said earlier this month that he was “very confident” the U.S. will discover a coronavirus vaccine by the end of the year, with his administration combining public- and private-sector efforts to enhance research. “I think we’re going to have a vaccine much sooner rather than later,” the president said. “. . . This country needs a vaccine, and you’re going to have it by the end of the year.” Experts remain bearish on the prospects of making a successful vaccine available for public consumption by the end of the year, but have admitted the efforts are extraordinary.  “I’m not aware of any vaccine that’s been developed after only a year to a year-and-a-half after identifying a pathogen. It usually takes years,” Walter Orenstein, associate director of the Emory Vaccine Center in Atlanta, told the Wall Street Journal. “People are moving very, very quickly with this.”  Chinese and Iranian hackers have already attempted to slow vaccine development by targeting American health-care firms and universities. Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell admitted in an interview Sunday that the shuttered U.S. economy could require a vaccine to return to normalcy. “For the economy to fully recover, people will have to be fully confident, and that may have to await the arrival of a vaccine,” Powell said on 60 Minutes.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

President Trump on Sunday hit back at criticism from former president Barack Obama over the handling of the coronavirus pandemic. “Look, he was an incompetent president,” Trump said of Obama. “That’s all I can say. Grossly incompetent.” In a speech to graduates of historically black colleges on Saturday, Obama leveled thinly veiled criticism at his successor.  “This pandemic has fully, finally torn back the curtain on the idea that so many of the folks in charge know what they’re doing,” Obama said. The comments came after Obama termed the administration’s coronavirus response “an absolute chaotic disaster” in a call with former staffers. The tiff follows accusations by President Trump and allies that Obama attempted to hamstring the current administration by prosecuting incoming officials on suspicion of collusion with Russia. Earlier this month the Justice Department dropped its investigation into former national-security adviser Michael Flynn, who initially pleaded guilty to one count of lying to the FBI but later rescinded his plea.  Attorney General William Barr said he had concluded that the FBI laid a “perjury trap” for Flynn. However, Obama saw the decision as an affront to the “rule of law.” “The fact that there is no precedent that anybody can find for someone who has been charged with perjury just getting off scot-free,” Obama told formal officials in a private phone call. “That’s the kind of stuff where you begin to get worried that basic — not just institutional norms — but our basic understanding of rule of law is at risk.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell warned in an interview released on Sunday that a full economic rebound following the coronavirus pandemic may not occur until the end of 2021. Powell described the sudden slowdown as the “biggest shock that the economy’s had in living memory” during the interview on CBS’s 60 Minutes.  “This economy will recover; it may take a while,” Powell said. “It may take a period of time, it could stretch through the end of next year, we really don’t know.” Powell also said that a full economic recovery may depend on the availability of a coronavirus vaccine. “Assuming that there’s not a second wave of the coronavirus, I think you’ll see the economy recover steadily through the second half of this year,” he said. “For the economy to fully recover, people will have to be fully confident, and that may have to await the arrival of a vaccine.”  Due to mass business closures across much of the country, about 36 million workers have filed for unemployment since the start of the pandemic, or about 20 percent of the workforce. The unemployment rate stands at 14.7 percent as of April, but Powell warned it could rise to 20 or even 25 percent, and predicted “a couple more months” of job losses. Powell said policymakers and lawmakers should attempt to prevent a situation in which Americans begin losing their homes. “It may well be that the Fed has to do more,” Powell said. “It may be that Congress has to do more. And the reason we’ve got to do more is to avoid longer-run damage to the economy.”  The coronavirus has infected almost 1,500,000 and killed almost 90,000 in the U.S. as of Monday. Daily rates of new cases have been steadily declining in areas that already saw a wave of infections, most notably the New York City metropolitan area. States including Georgia and Florida have been reopening businesses with limitations on the number of customers allowed in a given space, while some regions of New York State are moving toward reopening.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					U
				niversity of California, Berkeley urban-policy professor Carol Galante, writing in the New York Times last week, argued that “now is the time” for cities “to embrace density.” She worried that NIMBY types might be emboldened by a coronavirus that preys on the closely congregated, and insisted that society has “an obligation to ignore the short-term reactionary impulse to blame density for the spread of the coronavirus and instead use this opportunity to rethink the policies that impede the construction of new housing, at more price levels, in the places where housing is most needed.”  Galante’s opponents — you will not be surprised to learn — have long “cloaked” their opposition to further development with feigned outrage over things like “neighborhood character and traffic impacts,” meant to conceal their ostensibly unsavory motives. COVID-19, she worries, will provide them with another “rallying cry to maintain [their] sprawling fortress neighborhoods designed to foster exclusion.” While Galante’s piece reads like a flailing attempt to salvage her imperiled commitment to “density,” she is right that the coronavirus pandemic will eventually pass, and that our debates over things such as urban policy will retain much of their pre-pandemic character when it does. Population density won’t disappear any time soon, and much less of our urban policy and related debates will change than those now wishfully touting a “new normal” would have us believe.  One source of population density has, understandably, received a lot of coverage of late: nursing homes. The buzzword that has defined the American long-term care debate for the past 40 years is the word “community” — read through any policy brief on “long-term supports and services” (LTSS) and you’ll find it saturated with euphemisms like “community-based care.” The underlying ideological assumption is that it is almost always better for someone who needs long-term care to be serviced “in their community” — with an at-home attendant, in a small group-home setting, or in an outpatient arrangement — than in a congregated setting like a nursing home. To be sure, most people would agree that it is preferable for an elderly person to be cared for by their family, whenever possible, and that “putting grandma away” is not a preferable alternative to caring for her at home. But there are nevertheless many forms of “long-term care,” many different types of “long-term-care facilities,” and still more reasons why a person might require LTSS in the first place.   Just as population density has proven to be a handicap in fighting the coronavirus in cities and other urban centers, long-term-care facilities for the elderly and infirm have been especially vulnerable to the spread of the virus. The Washington Post reports that more than one-third of national COVID-19 deaths have occurred in “nursing homes and other long-term care facilities.” 
 It is worth noting that the phrase “long-term-care facility” is often used as a synecdoche for “nursing home,” which itself covers everything from skilled nursing facilities (SNFs) to assisted-living facilities to memory-care homes. In more normal times, each type of facility has a unique role in the provision of long-term care. But in the fight against COVID-19, they all face similar challenges, because they house elderly people — an already vulnerable population made more vulnerable by the virus — in relatively close proximity to one another, making viral outbreaks within their walls more likely. Other forms of long-term care present different challenges. Many group homes for persons with intellectual or developmental disabilities have struggled to contain COVID-19 outbreaks: Some in the IDD population struggle to understand and thus adhere to social-distancing guidelines, or have underlying health comorbidities that make them especially vulnerable to the virus. Psychiatric hospitals and intermediate-care facilities for the developmentally disabled have struggled in different, but still profound, ways.   All of which raises the question: What should change in congregate-care settings when the pandemic ends? There will certainly be calls to abolish them outright in favor of a universal, “community-for-all” regime, but — to borrow from Galante — we should avoid that “reactionary impulse.” It is not always possible to offer effective “community-based” long-term care to the many different populations that need it; severely demented adults, for instance, are often a danger to themselves or others, and require the more structured environment of a state hospital or memory-care facility. One plausible long-term change might be prompted by current CDC coronavirus guidelines. The CDC is telling nursing homes to use internal “COVID-19 care units” for affected patients, isolating them from other residents. This, if taken to its logical conclusion, might inspire a return to the spacious facilities pioneered by the more rural “cottage-plan” model of congregate care that flourished in the early 20th century. The cottage plan is a campus-style arrangement in which residents reside in separate buildings on a large plot of land, rather than being consolidated into a drab and clinical central facility. A return to something like it would ward off future outbreaks by making it easier to isolate affected residents, while also helping to make long-term institutional care more humane and home-like for those who require it.   Crucially, the fact that COVID-19 is spreading more aggressively in poorly ventilated buildings might inspire a renewed focus on architecture, reviving a more beautiful and intentional approach to facility design. The beauty of the spaces we inhabit matters, and it matters all the more to people in long-term care who spend a great deal of time indoors, on facility grounds. Congregate care will remain with us when the coronavirus pandemic ends. We ought to learn what lessons we can from our present crisis to better structure and administer such care in the future. 

Editor’s Note: This is an expanded version of a piece we have published in the current issue of National Review. 
					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				n the middle of the 20th century, there was an expression: “He had a good war.” It was unseemly, maybe, but everyone knew what the expression meant: The person in question had come out of World War II in good shape — even advantaged. In the same way, we might say that Taiwan is having a good pandemic.  Those words are terrible to type, but readers may indulge them. Taiwan is enjoying good press all over the world, for its handling of the crisis. One headline reads, “Taiwan’s Coronavirus Moment.” Lots of headlines speak of “lessons” to be learned from Taiwan. The phrase “Taiwan model” is in the air. It is used by the U.S. State Department, for example. So, Taiwan has been handed an excellent opportunity: an opportunity to earn recognition, good will, and sympathy. But there is a danger, and that danger is, as always, the Chinese government. This government claims Taiwan as a mere province of China. Taiwan has shown up the People’s Republic in the pandemic — which makes the men in Beijing angry.  
 The headline I quoted above, I quoted incompletely. In full, it reads, “Taiwan’s Coronavirus Moment — and Delicate Balancing Act.” Taiwan must find a way to strut its stuff, or seek its due, without provoking Beijing into greater fury.  “Taiwan has been isolated from the international community for many years,” says Mab Huang, an eminent scholar in Taiwan. He is Liberal Arts Chair Professor at Soochow University. Taiwan’s isolation has been “a fairly painful experience” for the island’s citizens, as he says. Indulge me in a little etymology. “Isolate” comes from “island,” in Latin. Taiwan has often given me occasion to reflect on that fact. “Our government and civil society — NGOs — have been working very hard to gain access to the international community,” Professor Huang continues. (“NGOs” are non-governmental organizations, as you know.) Moreover, government and civil society have been working to “gain dignity” within the international community, says Professor Huang.  Ah, yes. Taiwan has suffered many indignities over the last 50 years. It was replaced by the PRC at the United Nations in 1971. Eight years later, the United States abrogated formal relations with Taiwan, in favor of the PRC. And yet, the U.S. maintains a strong informal alliance, and the American Institute in Taiwan functions as an embassy.  Taiwan may compete in the Olympic Games — but under the name “Chinese Taipei.” “This is so we don’t get it confused with the Swedish Taipei,” quips Jacques deLisle, an expert on China and Taiwan at the University of Pennsylvania Law School. From 2009 to 2016, Taiwan was allowed to participate as an observer at the World Health Assembly (the decision-making body of the World Health Organization, which is an agency of the U.N.) — but, as at the Olympics, under the name “Chinese Taipei.” What happened after 2016? I will get to that in due course. Johns Hopkins University, the renowned institution in Baltimore, keeps an interactive map, charting the coronavirus. At first, they listed Taiwan as “Taiwan.” Then they changed the designation to “Taipei and environs.” This is how the WHO currently refers to Taiwan. After criticism, Johns Hopkins switched back to “Taiwan.”  Taiwan is down to 15 allies, which is to say, 15 states that recognize Taiwan. No offense to these states, but they are tiny and insignificant — from Eswatini to Tuvalu. It is hard to think of a state less deserving of pariah status than Taiwan: a country that evolved from dictatorship to become a splendid example of liberal democracy in a region sorely in need of such an example. The coronavirus started in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province, China, sometime in December 2019. This made Taiwan a “frontline state,” as Jacques deLisle says. Taiwan had a number of things going against it, as a frontline state. Taiwan is only 81 miles from the mainland. People travel between the mainland and the island all the time. In 2019, there were almost 3 million visitors from China to Taiwan. Also, Taiwan is densely populated — not a natural place for “social distancing.”  As soon as there was a hint of a virus from China, Taiwan swung into action. Why? How to explain the alacrity? First, “Taiwan does not trust China,” as Jianli Yang says, bluntly. He is a Chinese democracy activist who heads Initiatives for China in Washington, D.C. “Probably Taiwan knows better than any other country the nature of the Chinese Communist regime. Taiwan knows that you cannot rely on accurate information from China. So, from Day One, Taiwan acted to protect itself.”  Second, Taiwan had been hit by SARS — which also originated in China — in 2003. This epidemic was devastating for the country, as Taiwanese tell it. There were 346 cases of the illness and 73 deaths (in a country of 22.5 million). Is that a lot? It must depend on what one’s standards are.  “We could not get any information from the World Health Organization because we were excluded from it,” a Taiwanese official tells me, looking back on 2003. “They refused to engage with us, because they were so afraid of China. So, we could not handle SARS well. But this time, when the coronavirus came, we were ready.” In the years after SARS, the world in general understood that the PRC had behaved badly. The world also understood that Taiwan should have a part, somehow, in the WHO and not be blindsided. In 2009, the PRC relented. This relenting followed the election of Ma Ying-jeou as president of Taiwan. Ma is part of the Blue coalition in Taiwan, which favors relatively close ties with the PRC. Him, Beijing could tolerate. Ma served two terms, ending in 2016. In that year, Tsai Ing-wen was elected president. She is part of the Green coalition, which is independence-minded. Her, Beijing could not tolerate. So Taiwan was booted from the health organization, even as an observer. Near the beginning of the pandemic — on January 11 — Tsai was reelected in a landslide. This “really angered and humiliated Beijing,” as Jianli Yang says. Jumping on the pandemic, Taiwan implemented 124 measures — an almost famous 124, at this point. They deserve an article unto themselves, for they are interesting in multiple ways: technical, economic, political, social, psychological. Taiwan is a society with a high degree of mutual trust, or social solidarity, if you like, and the Taiwanese can embrace policies that other societies would balk at. But this is another article, and here I would like simply to mention masks. At first, Taiwan banned the export of masks, to ensure an adequate supply for the citizenry. The country manufactured masks at a furious pace, with the military enlisted in the effort. Masks were rationed, so that no one had too many or too few. Some could buy masks on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday; others on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. There was a clear, detailed system. There was also a slogan, typical of the society: “I’m okay, you take the mask first.” By April 1, Taiwan was ready to donate masks abroad. Taiwan donated 10 million masks, marked, significantly, “Made in Taiwan.” This was at a time when the PRC was selling such equipment, and often faulty equipment at that. Taiwan sent 7 million masks to Europe, 2 million to the United States, and the remaining million to its 15 allies. There was a slogan to go with all this: “Taiwan can help.” As Professor deLisle points out, Taiwan has long looked for opportunities to assist on the international stage. They want to show themselves a team player, globally. So they are quick to supply aid after earthquakes, in times of flooding, and so on. Taiwan’s vice president, Chen Chien-jen, made a statement that confirms this point precisely. In mid-April, he said, “We can see that this is a good opportunity for us to let people know that Taiwan is a good global citizen.” Chen, by the way, is an epidemiologist, who earned his doctorate at Johns Hopkins. He did not run with President Tsai in this recent election. The new vice president, to be sworn in with Tsai on May 20, is Lai Ching-te. He earned a master’s in public health at Harvard. Back to masks for a moment: By early August, Taiwan plans to be exporting mask-making machines. So far, there have been 438 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Taiwan, and six deaths. When there is a stretch of days with no new cases, some buildings in Taipei light up with the word “Zero.” Winter break for schoolkids was supposed to last from January 21 to February 10. Officials added two weeks to this break, owing to the pandemic. Taiwan’s schools have been open since February 25 — although with strict precautions (involving temperature checks and the like). Professional sports are being played, without spectators. A baseball announcer said, “Welcome to the one and only live sports game on the surface of the planet!”  Anyone can understand the pride that Taiwanese take in such matters. Taiwan very much wants to get back to the World Health Organization, in some fashion. But why? With the country serving as a model of a coronavirus-fighter, why does it need the WHO? According to Taiwanese officials, the country can use all the information it can get. Every scrap helps. COVID-19 is a pandemic, sparing no country, and the world is interconnected, and the very word “world” is in the WHO’s name, and no country should be excluded. But there’s the rub: Is Taiwan a country? According to the PRC and its enablers, no. Taiwanese officials make another point: Taiwan has information, and experience, to share with others. So its inclusion in the WHO would be of benefit to all concerned. Friends of Taiwan, led by the United States, are pushing for its inclusion, just as they did after the SARS epidemic. It’s “back to the future,” as Jacque deLisle says. As always, the PRC is pushing back, strong-arming anyone it can. China’s hold over people and institutions is a phenomenon of our time. Beijing is a master instiller of fear. On March 27, Yvonne Tong interviewed Bruce Aylward, by video hookup. She works for a Hong Kong news program called “The Pulse”; he is a Canadian official of the WHO. A stranger interview you never saw. Ms. Tong said, “Will the WHO consider Taiwan’s membership?” Dr. Aylward did not answer. He looked into the camera, for a long period. Finally, Ms. Tong said, “Hello?” He said, “That’s okay, I couldn’t hear your question.” Ms. Tong said, “Okay, let me repeat the question.” Dr. Aylward said, “No, that’s okay, let’s move to another one then.” But the interviewer persisted (politely). Then Dr. Aylward appeared to sever his connection. Persisting, the show got a hold of him again. Ms. Tong said, “I just want to see if you can comment a bit on how Taiwan has done so far in terms of containing the virus.” Dr. Aylward replied, “Well, we’ve already talked about China, and, you know, when you look across all the different areas of China, they’ve actually all done quite a good job.” With that, he bade farewell. Even race has made its way into this drama. The director-general of the WHO is an Ethiopian scientist, Tedros Adhanom. He is a legend in his country, for building up public-health services. Mr. Tedros said that he had been the target of racist attacks from Taiwanese on social media. He said that Taiwan’s government had declined to disassociate itself from these attacks. President Tsai took offense at a broad charge of racism against Taiwan, saying, “For years, we have been excluded from international organizations, and we know better than anyone else what it feels like to be discriminated against and isolated. If Director-General Tedros could withstand pressure from China and come to Taiwan to see Taiwan’s efforts to fight COVID-19 for himself, he would be able to see that the Taiwanese people are the true victims of unfair treatment.” Like the U.S. government, the Australian government is supporting Taiwan’s return to the WHO. An Aussie spokesman put it delicately: “The challenge of COVID-19 demands a determined, global response. The WHO must therefore maintain a close working relationship with all health authorities. We support Taiwan’s participation as an observer or guest, consistent with our one-China policy.” Australia and China have close business ties, and any slight to China makes Aussie businessmen very nervous. Anyone can understand this. A major Aussie businessman, Kerry Stokes, said, “If we’re going to go into the biggest debt we’ve had in our life and then simultaneously poke our biggest provider of income in the eye, it’s not necessarily the smartest thing you can do.” In Washington, Congress passed the TAIPEI Act, and the president signed it. “TAIPEI” is one of those strained-for acronyms, standing for “Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative.” The bill passed both the House and the Senate unanimously. In brief, it requires that the U.S. government support Taiwan in its effort to integrate itself into the world. A co-author of the bill, Senator Chris Coons (D., Del.), said, “The TAIPEI Act sends a clear message that the United States stands with Taiwan’s free-market democracy.”  Beijing, evidently, got the message. A foreign-ministry spokesman said, “We urge the United States to correct its mistakes, not implement the law,” etc. Otherwise, the U.S. “will inevitably encounter a resolute strike back by China.” The U.S. mission to the U.N. signaled its support of Taiwan in a tweet. The Chinese mission did not care for the tweet, saying, “It gravely interferes with China’s internal affairs and deeply hurts the feelings of the 1.4 billion Chinese people.” The mission further declared that “Taiwan is an inalienable part of China.” China appears rattled and ticked, battling a public-relations problem in the world, as well as a virus. They look like a bully — bullying Taiwan, bullying international bodies — because they are. They are playing petty political games in the middle of a pandemic, as Jacques deLisle points out: a situation that is literally one of life and death. They are also playing war games, increasing their drills in the vicinity of Taiwan, just to intimidate. The pandemic, says Jianli Yang, has laid bare the contrast between authoritarian China and liberal-democratic Taiwan. Beijing will suffer from the contrast. The PRC has been deceptive, nasty, and manipulative; Taiwan has been transparent, forthright, open. Beijing, wanting to suppress the truth as much as possible, evicted reporters for the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the Wall Street Journal. Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, lost no time in inviting the reporters to come work from Taiwan — “a beacon of freedom and democracy.” So, Taiwan is up and Beijing is down, to the extent that Taiwan can be truly up against this Goliath. Mab Huang, of Soochow University, points out that Taiwan need not pick quarrels with China right now. Events can take their course. I think of an adage sometimes attributed to Napoleon: “Never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake.” Earlier, I spoke of “having a good war.” If Taiwan emerges from this “war,” this pandemic, more appreciated by the world — and if the Chinese government emerges more appreciated for its villainy — then this will be an outcome to hail, even if so much else is dark. 

Deborah Birx, the physician advising the White House’s coronavirus task force, gave voice to a real concern earlier this month. She told officials from the Centers for Disease Control that some of its numbers on mortality and case count could be inflated by up to 25 percent. “There is nothing from the CDC that I can trust,” the Washington Post reported Birx saying.  We now know more about what she was talking about, since Colorado has become the first state to publish two different numbers. One number is derived using a definition mandated by the CDC, which issued guidelines on March 24 specifying that “COVID-19 should be reported on the death certificate for all decedents where the disease caused or is assumed to have caused or contributed to death.” (Emphasis in original.) The second is a narrower category called “deaths due to COVID-19,” which is limited to people who actually died of the disease. Counting in this way results in a decline of 23 percent in reported COVID-19 deaths. What’s going on here? There have been many outlandish examples of people dying of things bearing not the slightest connection to COVID-19, but, having tested positive for the coronavirus, they were added to the official COVID-19 death tally anyway.  There was the Lehigh Valley, Penn., man who slipped and fell at home. The coroner said, according to LehighValleyLive.com: “The primary cause of the man’s death was a head injury from a fall at home, but . . . the virus was listed as a contributing factor to his death.”  
 In April a 37-year-old California man “died as a result of a drug overdose while infected with COVID-19, a significant contributing condition, according to county spokeswoman Ashley Bautista, per the Ventura County Star. Last week, there was the entry in the Cook County, Ill., medical-examiner ledger: “Complications of opiate (probably heroin) toxicity. Novel corona (COVID-19) virus, end stage renal disease, hypertension, ACCIDENT.” Oddities, all, we were told. “Aberrations.” Insignificant to the overall count. Except we know they were not.  Republican state representative Mark Baisley accused the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) of fraudulently altering death certificates in cases in which coronavirus-positive individuals died but the medical examiner did not list COVID-19 on the death certificate. Baisley, in his request for an investigation, cited a letter from the Someren Glen nursing home to staff, residents, and their families saying that CDPHE had overruled physicians and added COVID-19 to seven death certificates. CDPHE came under more fire when they added the death of a 35-year-old man who died of alcohol poisoning, who happened to be coronavirus-positive, to their official tally. Their defense was simple: They said they were just following the CDC definition. “We classify a death as confirmed when there was a case who had a positive SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) laboratory test and then died,” CDPHE said in statement.  Democratic governor Jared Polis could have circled the wagons. But to his enormous credit, he ordered the state to publish the two different numbers. He told Fox News Sunday that the new approach is “a better way to inspire confidence” in the data on the total number of virus victims. The numbers differ considerably. At the time of Colorado’s announcement on Friday, the CDC-definition tally, used in CNN’s “dashboard” and all the other media reports, stood at 1,150 statewide. But only 878 of those, more than 23 percent less, are identified as deaths due to COVID-19. This language appeared Friday on the state’s website, along with the new numbers: Beginning May 15, the department began reporting the number of deaths in two ways: The number of deaths among people with COVID-19. This represents the total number of deaths reported among people who have COVID-19, but COVID-19 may not have been the cause of death listed on the death certificate. This information is required by the CDC and is crucial for public health surveillance, as it provides more information about disease transmission and can help identify risk factors among all deaths across populations. The number of deaths among people who died from COVID-19: This represents the total number of people whose death was attributed to COVID-19 as indicated on a death certificate. This number is determined by the CDC and is updated daily for dates through the previous Saturday. There is no doubt this virus flashed through nursing homes with devastating effect. We have cataloged the death toll in these spreadsheets.  But if we don’t fix the definition, residents of nursing homes (which are now being tested wholesale for coronavirus) who have mild or asymptomatic infections will show up in the COVID-19 death count when they die from any of the maladies from which people die. The median nursing-home stay before death is just five months. If this definitional problem isn’t fixed, the tallies will lose all contact with reality, with attendant public panic and additional economic hardship.  Colorado has taken the lead. Baisley lit the fire, and Polis stepped up to exercise genuine leadership. All governors, Republican and Democratic, should follow his lead and report both sets of numbers. And the CDC should fix its nonsensical definition — which didn’t even exist until March 24 of this year. John Fund is National Review’s national-affairs reporter. Phil Kerpen is the president of the Committee to Unleash Prosperity and the co-editor of its Hotline.  


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				ith the debate over additional epidemic aid to the states simmering, Florida senator Rick Scott and New York governor Andrew Cuomo are taking a special interest in one another. Senator Scott used to be Governor Scott. He took office in Florida in 2011, three days after Cuomo did in New York. The two states had a lot in common at the time: Both had been hammered by the financial crisis, both had lost a lot of jobs during that crisis, and—this part is sometimes forgotten—both had seen significant numbers of residents moving elsewhere.  After having led the country in net domestic migration (meaning people moving from one part of the United States to another) for years, Florida had slipped behind Texas in 2006—and by 2008, it was losing population to other states. Both New York and Florida began to make modest population recoveries in 2010, but New York’s petered out. Between 2010 and 2019, its net domestic migration decline was almost 1.4 million people. Florida has kept growing. It surpassed New York as the third-most-populous state in 2014. New York is probably going to lose a House seat after the next census; it already is losing part of its tax base to Florida, as even Governor Cuomo has been forced to admit. How bad is it? New York officials currently are scrutinizing dentists’ records and veterinarians’ bills to make sure that former New Yorkers who have relocated to Florida aren’t exceeding their quota of New York days. “If you’re a high earner in New York and you move to Florida, your chances of a residency audit are 100 percent,” Barry Horowitz of WithumSmith+Brown, an accounting firm, told CNBC.  Who wouldn’t want to sign up for that?  
 New York has a very lopsided tax system, with 1 percent of taxpayers coughing up almost half of the state’s income-tax revenue. Every time New York loses a Carl Icahn to Florida, the state treasury feels the pinch. Florida is happy to have New York’s former taxpayers. And New York’s former taxpayers have reason to be happy in Florida. “Look at Cuomo and me,” says Senator Scott. “We were elected at the same time. I went about trying to recruit companies and people to move to Florida. We had lost 832,000 jobs in four years. I went to New York to recruit companies, and Cuomo was livid. At first, the reaction was, ‘Nobody’s moving.’ By the time I left, people were moving in in droves. Why? New York’s budget is almost double Florida’s, but it has 2 million less people.” (If you want a flash fact-check: New York State’s budget in 2019 was $176 billion for 19.5 million people; Florida’s was $91 billion for 21.5 million people.) “People move out of New York because they’re sick and tired of the taxes, and now, instead of trying to control his budget, Cuomo wants Florida to pay extra.” It wasn’t just New York. As governor, Scott says he was tempted to put up billboards taunting California’s governor at the time, Jerry Brown: “Same haircut. Lower taxes. Move to Florida.”   Florida Republicans believe, with good reason, that they have done a pretty good job of things and made a lot of those “hard choices” that Rick Scott talks about. Theirs has not been a perfect record, by any means. But compared to what’s been going on in Albany or Trenton, the ladies and gentlemen down in Tallahassee have done pretty good work. They are subtropical ants to Aesop’s grasshoppers up in New York and New Jersey. Following up on the first pandemic aid package for the states, Nancy Pelosi now wants to push through another multi-trillion-dollar aid package, one that would include almost $1 trillion in unrestricted cash. Governor Cuomo would very much like to see that happen. Senator Scott is stepping on it. The latest House bill has been described as DOA by Senate Republicans, but Senator Scott also is blocking a vote on a bill from fellow Republican John Kennedy of Louisiana that would lift restrictions on money already appropriated for state aid, allowing the states to use that money for general operating expenses. That is of great interest to leaders in certain mostly Democratic-run states such as California, New York, and Illinois (and Kentucky), which have hundreds of billions of dollars in unfunded liabilities for government workers’ pension plans. The total unfunded pension liability for the states is estimated at $1.5 trillion. “Pensions are driving a lot of this,” Senator Scott says. “[States] don’t want to raise taxes. They don’t want to make tough choices. Businesses have to do it. You have to. Families have to watch their budgets — but not the states.”   Governor Cuomo, for his part, has attempted to resurrect the old canard about the so-called blue states subsidizing the red ones, as measured by tax receipts vs. federal expenditures. “They’re not bailing us out,” Cuomo said of Florida and Rick Scott. “We bail them out every year.” This is a cherished Democratic talking point, but it is not quite true. The largest per-capita net-recipient states at the moment are Democratic states: Virginia, Kentucky, and New Mexico. The biggest “donor” states are Democratic, too: Connecticut, New Jersey, and Massachusetts. (NB: Estimates vary some from source to source, but New York is reliably pretty high on the purported net-payers’ list.) Some of those numbers are driven by entitlements and by the fact that the U.S. tax code is steeply progressive, i.e. by Democratic policies. And some of those numbers are driven by the fact that federal purchases, federal contracts, federal employees (hello, Virginia!), and federal lands are not evenly distributed throughout the country, which means that federal outlays do not land equally on every square inch of American territory — the federal government owns 85 percent of the land in Nevada but less than 1 percent of the land in New York State. There are a lot of financial firms in New York City and not very many Air Force bases, which affects the notional balance of payments. The same dynamic is a big part of why Democratic states such as Maryland and Hawaii are on the net-takers’ list while Republican states such as North Dakota are net payers. California, once a donor state, is at the moment a modest recipient state, to the tune of about $12 a year per capita.  Again, it’s a dumb talking point, but this is Andrew Cuomo we’re dealing with. And if New York keeps sending the Carl Icahns of the world to Florida, it’ll end up being a net-recipient state, too, much to the delight of Florida. Governor Cuomo had better be careful what he wishes for. (Another fun way of looking at this is that, because of our very progressive tax code, so-called donor states tend to have very high levels of the “income inequality” that keeps progressives up at night. In fact, California, Connecticut, Louisiana, New York, and the District of Columbia contribute disproportionately to that inequality—every other state has a Gini coefficient lower than the national average. The most egalitarian state in the country? Utah. But Utah is way down at No. 42 in per-capita income . . . and in the top tier, at No. 13, in household income. It’s complicated. Utah’s median family income is about the same as California’s, those being $65,997 and $67,739, respectively. California has a median per-capita income lower than that of North Dakota, Minnesota, Colorado, or Delaware, but those Silicon Valley guys pay a lot in taxes.) Governor Cuomo’s administration is not spending its money bailing out Florida. It’s spending it on government unions and welfare, and on an increasingly dysfunctional New York City transit system for which a new mile of track or a new station costs five times (or more) as much as the same work does in London, Paris, or Madrid.  As Chris Edwards at Cato points out, New York and Florida have about the same number of kids in school, but New York spends far more on its highly unionized public-school workforce, shelling out $69 billion in 2017 to Florida’s 28 billion. U.S. News and World Report ranks New York and Florida about the same when it comes to preK-12 education, right in the middle of the pack at 25 and 27, respectively. (It ranks Florida No. 1 in higher education and New York No. 15.) Edwards finds that New York spends two and a half times what Florida spends on welfare, even though the Empire State has a higher median household income. New York’s government workforce is much larger than Florida’s (1,196,632 vs. 889,950), and as Edwards notes, “New York spends vastly more on employee retirement than Florida.” Rick Scott likes to boast that Florida’s government debt was reduced by $10 billion on his watch and that Moody’s upped its credit rating to AAA. Less debt and better credit mean less money spent on interest payments. New York carries more debt than Florida does, and does not share that AAA rating. That takes an additional $10 billion a year out of New Yorkers’ pockets compared to Floridians’ interest-payment burden.  Senator Scott doesn’t want to see federal bailout money going to state governments, he says, because of the “complete disregard for the people who pay the taxes.” Beyond the pension shenanigans, just writing a blank check to state governments allows Democrats in effect to shift state liabilities onto the federal government and pursue their own parochial short-term political interests. “If we do the bailouts, we’re funding the pension plans,” Senator Scott says. “If we do the bailouts, we’re funding Planned Parenthood.” He’d rather see money go to unemployment benefits and to more focused counter-epidemic programs, especially testing. “The right thing to do is to solve the problems. Do the testing. If people have lost their jobs, help the unemployed. Help the small businesses that have been hit.” He says the Paycheck Protection Program needs to be “cleaned up” — he wants businesses to prove they’ve suffered substantial revenue losses before Washington starts picking up their expenses — and says he is worried about the rate at which the federal government is accumulating debt and the interest-rate risk that brings. “We haven’t fixed any of the programs,” he says. “Medicaid, Medicare, Obamacare, Social Security — none of them is fully funded.” Instead, he says, we have leaned on deficit financing. And that means, at some point, a day of reckoning. “Somebody, eventually, has to write the check.” 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				f you find yourself at home all day with young children during the pandemic, you’re probably spending more time than usual reading to them. And you might have found that a substantial portion of their library bores you. If you’ve ever sneakily skipped a couple of mind-numbing pages of a children’s book, hoping that little junior won’t mind missing the tantalizing fact that a dog has (no kidding!) brown spots, then you know how to mitigate suffering. But why suffer unnecessarily? Reading to your child may be a duty, but it can quickly turn into a delight if you select books that you also enjoy.  Too many “children’s books” are written to include concepts that a four-year-old can perfectly grasp, instead of stretching their imagination and broadening their language. A good children’s book allows you to enjoy the story’s subtleties, jokes, and good English—while your young progeny learns that language has rhythm, that unknown words make sense with context, and that stringing together certain words can conjure up vivid images and feelings. Here’s a short list of time-tested books that never get old. The Tale of Squirrel Nutkin
While Beatrix Potter is best remembered for the adventurous and disobedient Peter Rabbit, who lost “a blue jacket with brass buttons, quite new,” don’t overlook her many other smart and funny tales. Nutkin’s story crackles with wit while creating a poetic and imaginative world that any child can delight in.  
 Riddles (and their answers) are woven into the fabric of the story, and even though a younger child may not understand the full concepts as an adult will, they can still enjoy the sing-songiness of it all—and learn that language can sparkle and sizzle and taste as delicious as the squirrels’ “present of wild honey” that is “so sweet and sticky that they licked their fingers as they put it down upon the stone.”  Ox-Cart Man
The pioneer family created by former U.S. poet laureate Donald Hall may help social-distancing families feel a little more normal—and they may find a spark of creativity from reading this classic American story of a family making wares to be sold at market. This family of craftsmen (and craftswomen) make birch brooms “carved with a borrowed kitchen knife” and “blankets from sheep sheared in April,” before finally enjoying one after-dinner mint each from the family’s stash of “two pounds of wintergreen peppermint candies.”  The poetic language is simple and charming, and the story’s hardworking cow, who gets a parting kiss on the nose from the farmer, would get my vote for president.  Where the Wild Things Are
Maurice Sendak’s well-known classic is about a wild young boy, Max, who gets sent to his room, but his adventures continue in his imagination — where he tames all the wild creatures he meets on his travels, making him king of all the wild things. But even kings need their mothers, and the smell of supper recalls Max back to the place where “someone loved him best of all.” Ultimately, the story shows that taming the beast within doesn’t make you weak; it makes you a king in your cozy home. Corduroy
Don Freeman writes a heart-warming story about an imperfect teddy bear named Corduroy that goes unnoticed in a cold department store until a little girl walks in and realizes his worth. Despite her mother’s objection to the missing button on his overalls, the little girl, Lisa, is determined. She empties her piggy bank and comes back for him the next day. The message is simple: You don’t need to be perfect to be loved — but love perfects you. Safe in his new home, Corduroy has his missing button sewn back on by Lisa, who says that she likes him just the way he is, but she wants him to be comfortable. A classic tale of friendship and belonging, Corduroy still fascinates almost 60 years after publication.  Guess How Much I Love You
Children have a lot of deep questions when it’s time for bed, and this story takes time to answer the deepest one: How much do you love me? The answer through analogy builds from the easy to grasp (the distance from your fingers to your toes) to the mind-blowing (the distance to the moon — and back!), proving the point that a parent’s love is so great, it’s impossible to imagine. Despite the hectic routine of living 24 hours a day with your quarantine buddies who you just happen to be related to, it’s magical to snuggle at the end of a long day and marvel at the unfathomable love of parents for their child. Tikki Tikki Tembo
Arlene Mosel’s story sold more than a million copies thanks to the mouthful of her title character’s name: Tikki tikki tembo-no sa rembo-chari bari ruchi-pip peri pembo! (A great long name reserved for a family’s first and honored son.)  The book charms its way through an exploration of family dynamics in which parental favoritism exists, sons fall down wells because they didn’t listen to their mothers, and younger brothers come to the rescue of pretentious older brothers. The message? Pretentious people are funny — and will probably need saving one day.
Children love hearing stories again and again — and these stories are so packed with meaning and so layered with fun-to-say words and phrases that you’ll enjoy revisiting them, endlessly. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					D
				anae was the mother of the Greek hero, Perseus, courtesy of Zeus. Her father was the king of Argos. The oracle at Delphi told the king that his daughter’s son would murder him, and given that oracles in those days had good track records, the king promptly put Danae in permanent lockdown in a tall bronze tower with a tiny opening for air and light.  Orazio Gentileschi (1563–1639) was smitten with Danae’s story since it involved sex — always a crowd pleaser — and gold, attractive in 1623, when Gentileschi painted Danae and the Shower of Gold but coveted anywhere, anytime, especially today given the government’s convincing attempt to murder the economy and impoverish us all. Titian and Rembrandt depicted Danae, too. I picked Gentileschi’s because the Getty purchased his version for $35 million just last year, when museums had money, before the government threw, coincidentally, 35 million people out of work in a few weeks. And Zeus thought he made the fastest moves.  Danae happened to be Zeus’s flavor of the month, and Zeus, like the Chinese coronavirus, goes wherever he wants. Zeus visited her as a cloud of gold, sometimes coins, sometimes raindrops, depending on the storyteller. He then reengineered himself into flesh and blood, enjoyed a sizzling matinee in the tall bronze tower, and thence sprung Perseus, who later chopped Medusa’s head off, married Andromeda, and became king of Mycenae. And he killed Danae’s father, his grandfather, along the way, as the oracle had predicted. You see, lockdowns don’t always work. Those old Delphi oracles, they knew their fortune-telling, too. We need to get some working for us, travel ban or no travel ban. Among the Chinese coronavirus’s wreckage are heaps of failed computer models whipped up by experts and public-health bureaucrats who might have done better had they gone to Delphi. Our modern oracles from the science establishment are about as reliable as weathermen and economists.  
 The new climate has exposed a “desperate times mean desperate measures” crowd among the Association of Art Museum Directors (AAMD), the high-end museum world’s professional organization. Museums are taking a terrible revenue hit. No gold coins fallin’ from the sky anywhere near them. The only golden showers in the news today are in Christopher Steele’s pee-pee dossier — you know, the one the FBI used to try to overthrow Trump.  As I noted a few days ago, AAMD’s board passed two resolutions last month amending its ethical standards. First, it won’t punish museums that tap restricted endowment funds to pay for operating expenses. Second, it won’t punish museums that sell art and use the money to pay for collection-care expenses. I wrote about the first issue on Wednesday. Now, I’ll write about the sale of art. It isn’t illegal to sell a museum’s art to raise money unless the art was a gift with a “do not sell” condition. AAMD deems it unethical, as do most museums’ individual codes of ethics, if the money is used for any purpose other than buying more art. Most museums have active programs to sell art they no longer want, raising money to buy art they do.  AAMD has now decreed that it will not punish museums that sell art to raise money to balance their budgets. This is a bad idea. We can make it simple: “A museum can sell art in its collection only to buy art.” We can consider this a sin, period, warranting the wrath of Zeus, Isis, Inti, Nana Buluku, not to mention God. It’s not that easy, though. Selling Art to Raise Cash Isn’t New Raiding the vault to procure cash isn’t new, and it’s not always wrong. I wouldn’t have lost sleep had the Barnes Collection sold a few of its hideous late Renoir nudes to stabilize its finances. The Barnes was not a museum. It was a school, and Dr. Barnes was clear that his collection was a teaching tool. The Berkshire Museum in Pittsfield, Mass., sold millions in art to finance its transition to a museum devoted to science and children. That’s fine. It changed its mission. That’s the trustees’ prerogative. I fought it — it’s not far from my home — because I thought that particular change was a flaky idea promulgated by flaky people.  The National Academy of Design was scorned and bullied beyond decency by AAMD because it sold three Hudson River paintings in 2008 to keep it going. The NAD, at the time, considered itself a museum, but it really wasn’t, and it certainly isn’t today. It’s a service organization for the best American artists and an academy, membership in which is a prestigious prize.  Historically black colleges started selling art about 20 years ago to fix longstanding, structural financial problems. They had “museums,” but they were podunk places. I can’t say I cared much. AAMD hammered them because these sales were camel noses under the tent. In any event, when Fisk University tried to sell a Georgia O’Keeffe painting for desperation cash, the Crystal Bridges Museum saved the day. It bought a half-interest in the picture, giving the school millions.  Brandeis University tried to close its Rose Art Museum in 2009 to fix the university’s money problems caused by the financial crisis. The trustees wanted to sell the art. This reaped a whirlwind of angry protest. The art’s donors were still alive and sensate enough to be furious. The Rose was a real place, too. It had a long, serious scholarly mission. Unlike the Barnes, the Fisk, and the National Academy of Design, it collects and cares for art and interprets it, both for the benefit of the public. It’s an authentic museum. Many, not all, alumni were embarrassed by the bad publicity. The plan collapsed, and the president was canned. Chalk one up to the good guys. It was a terrible idea and an assault on culture. In 2013, Randolph-Macon College, after years of trying, raised $25 million for budget relief by selling its museum’s great George Bellows painting to the National Gallery in London. Sending the picture to another museum excised the painful pricker. The college museum wasn’t an AAMD member anyway. The grasping president of La Salle University and its trustees gutted its museum, purportedly to pay for its new strategic plan, but it also had a big deficit. Who knows where the money went. I was happy to see that most of the art failed to sell at the Christie’s auction. Cases of art selling to balance budgets have occurred with greater frequency, starting with the financial crisis, first in outlier places such as the Fisk and the Barnes, then in places like the Rose that are actually real museums. Now, AAMD has decided to approve the practice, though for a limited time. Problems with Selling Art There are many problems with selling art for operating expenses. First, AAMD has now approved sales of art only for expenses related to “collection care,” but this is disingenuous. It’s fake cover, because “collection care” is almost anything. It’s prorating the electric bill based on the percentage of museum square footage that art storage takes. Curator and registrar salaries, guards, and insurance are all collection-care expenses. So, AAMD is trying to make its new rule look targeted — “it’s still all about the collection” — when it’s really all about money, and the guardrails are low.  The second problem is the art itself. Even in a decent small place, the vast majority of art isn’t worth much. Sending the art that’s never displayed to Christie’s or Sotheby’s probably won’t pay the bills. Art is almost never an appreciating investment. It’s a consumable. Only the best blue-chip art makes serious money, but that’s the art that museum visitors want to see. In the case of big museums with hundreds of thousands of objects, though, storage vaults are filled with paintings that would get $100,000 or $250,000 or $1 million. Will they sell art to close very high deficits? I wonder if they have the nerve. And once the art’s sold, it’s gone for good. The museum world is filled with cases of out-of-fashion art sold by well-meaning people that evolves over time into coveted art. Tastes change. Another problem is donor relations, and I’m not talking about living donors whose art goes out the door. That’s a distinct political and diplomatic problem. Even if the donors are dead, it’s good form to alert the family, but not for permission since, barring a “do not deaccession” condition, it is the museum’s to sell. Once an institution’s donor community learns it’s selling art to balance its budget, it will vote with its feet and take future art-giving elsewhere. Why shouldn’t it?  The biggest problem in selling art for budget relief doesn’t pertain to the museums with scrupulous trustees, which is most museums. These places respect their museum’s role as custodian of the past. They have the commitment needed to open their own checkbooks and to work with directors to make budget cuts to protect the museum’s long-term integrity and stability. Usually, but these are trying times. But the museums with sharks and charlatans as trustees, or the ones with know-nothing bozos — these are the museums whose art is most threatened. Rather than pull out their own checkbooks, these trustees might very well look to the art to do the heavy lifting. These are mostly museums in places without a long philanthropic tradition or a thriving arts tradition. Their directors will come under pressure. Also vulnerable are college and university art museums. They’re part of parent institutions. Often, college and university presidents and trustees, like Brandeis’s or La Salle’s, don’t know much about art. Directors at these places are often midlevel in the academic pecking order. They don’t have access to trustees to plead a case that selling art for cash is bad. When trustees raided the Rose and La Salle’s museum, their directors and volunteers were clueless until it was a fait accompli. Most threatened are museums that belong to the government. The federal government can print money, but Los Angeles County, San Francisco, Virginia, and North Carolina can’t. Their governments own prestigious museums packed with high-value art, and crashing their economies Pol Pot style has emptied their coffers. AAMD has virtually invited them to raid their museum walls. Under far better circumstances, it took all the connivance known to the Greek gods to keep Detroit’s masters from the city museum’s vaults when Detroit went bust. Once word gets out that a museum is raising operating money by selling art, giving is bound to take a hit. Why should I give money to a museum that has art it’s willing to liquidate? It shows bad judgment. My church or animal shelter or high school doesn’t have assets to liquidate. Why not steer my money there? Who Else Benefits? The munchkins said, “Follow the yellow brick road.” The odious Mark Felt, Watergate’s Deep Throat, is supposed to have said, “Follow the money,” though it might have been Al Capone. Still, good thing to keep in mind. Two museum-director friends told me this week, “Oh, no one will ever use it,” about the new power to sell art to pay the bills, guilt-free and without reprisal. AAMD wouldn’t have done a volte-face of this magnitude unless someone was going to benefit from it. Somebody had to push it. Earlier this week, I wrote about the power structure at AAMD. Though the head of its trustees now is the director of the Saint Louis Museum of Art, the movers and shakers are really the big museums such as the Met. At least when I was an AAMD member, nothing substantial happened unless the Met, the National Gallery, the Art Institute of Chicago, and the big museums in Philadelphia and Boston supported it. These big museums are the ones that currently have active, organized deaccession practices, selling things they no longer want and using the money to buy art they do, often contemporary art. Selling accessioned art isn’t simply a case of walking through the vault and pointing at paintings on the rack while intoning, “This can go, that can go.” There’s a vetting process. Is it ever displayed? Do we have things like it that are better? How did we get it? If it was a gift, is the donor alive? Will a sale piss him off? How much can we get? The big museums and many medium-size museums have this kind of process in place. Each curatorial department has a list of things that can go out the door to Christie’s or Sotheby’s, and if they don’t, both auction houses will enthusiastically suggest some candidates. “Follow the money.” It doesn’t take Agatha Christie, much less a Greek chorus, to see which museums have the motive, means, and opportunity. I suspect that these museums propelled AAMD’s change of course. It’s likely that the museums with established deaccession programs will keep deaccessioning, diverting some of the money to “collection care” rather than buying art. Will we ever know? Museums selling art for cash are required by AAMD to disclose it in their annual reports and website. Is there such a thing as 1/100th-point type?  There’s another alternative, and that’s spending control. Glenn Lowry, the longtime director of New York’s Museum of Modern Art, followed the money. He’s taking a budget axe and giving its spending the Medusa treatment, and chop, chop. Before museums liquidate art to raise cash or tap acquisitions funds to fill budget holes, they should look to my new hero. Lowry and his trustees are cutting MoMA’s Fiscal Year ’21 budget from $180 million to $135 million. The museum’s exhibition and publication budgets are sliced roughly in half. All 60 open positions were eliminated. There’s a new early-retirement program. And he’s tackling MoMA’s crunch in the context of a big addition that’s just opened, with lots of new expenses. He’s realistic, and courageous. MoMA, like most New York museums, counts on paid tourist admissions. The tourist economy in New York, alas, is in a coma. Lowry lives in the real world of dollars, cents, paychecks, and electric bills. The public-health establishment, let’s remember, is mostly government employees. Academics, the ones with all the failed models, have tenure. Their paychecks are fat and safe, and almost none practice medicine. Rather, they pronounce from Mount Olympus. AAMD and the American Alliance of Museums are the two core museum-lobbying groups. AAM’s membership includes not only art museums but science and children’s museums, gardens, house museums, and historical societies. These two groups need to sharpen their elbows K Street–style and demand data, not airy-fairy models or readings from Madam Arcati’s crystal ball or even whispers in the ear from the oracle of Delphi. They need to demand data justifying everything government will demand from them on the road to reopening. 

House Democrats passed a $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill on Friday despite trepidation from some moderate and progressive Democratic lawmakers about the effectiveness of the package. The massive relief package, dubbed the HEROES Act, passed the lower chamber in a 208 to 199 vote Friday evening. Fourteen Democrats bucked party leadership to vote against the bill, and only one Republican voted yes.  Many members were allowed to vote remotely due to safety concerns about the spread of the virus. The House approved remote voting in a temporary change to House rules that Republicans opposed as detrimental to the transparency of the voting process. The relief bill, which follows four other coronavirus packages passed by Congress, includes $1 trillion for state and local governments to blunt the devastating economic effects of the pandemic, a second round of direct payments of $1,200 each for Americans, $75 billion for coronavirus testing and contact tracing, $200 billion in hazard pay for essential workers, and funding to extend the federal government’s expanded unemployment benefits until January. The bill also provides more food assistance funding, $175 billion in rent and mortgage relief as well as support for election safety, Obamacare, the U.S. Postal Service, and more relief for small businesses. “Not acting is the most expensive course” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said earlier this week.   “If you vote against this and all this funding for your state, then you have to go home and defend it. And if you can defend that no vote, then you’re a better politician than me,” Pelosi warned members of her party Thursday evening about opposing the more than 1,800-page bill. Republicans swiftly condemned the bill when it was introduced, arguing that it includes a Democratic wish list unrelated to the legitimate measures aimed at combating the coronavirus. GOP Representative Steve Scalise and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy both slammed the package as rife with “liberal wish list” items. Meanwhile, several House Democrats also expressed discomfort that the bill includes provisions that appear unrelated to the coronavirus, such as a requirement that federal banking regulators deliver regular reports on “the availability of access to financial services for minority-owned and women-owned cannabis-related legitimate businesses.” Representative Joe Cunningham, a South Carolina Democrat, said he would not vote for the bill, calling it “Washington politics at its worst.” Representative Abigail Spanberger, a Virginia Democrat, similarly said she opposes the bill and accused her party of using the package to make political statements.  “What I wanted to see in this package is sticking to the very specific emergency need that the country has,” said Representative Elissa Slotkin, a Democrat from Michigan, adding that she was not sure yet whether the positives outweigh the negatives in the bill. All three Democratic critics represent typically Republican districts.  “There are some things that I don’t feel like had to be in the bill,” Slotkin said. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said this week that he would negotiate with Democrats if Republicans come to an agreement with the Trump administration on pursuing a next phase of relief. “What you’ve seen in the House is not something designed to deal with reality, but designed to deal with aspirations,” McConnell said of the House bill, which the Senate GOP has indicated is dead on arrival in the Senate. As of Friday afternoon, the U.S. has seen more than 1.4 million cases of the coronavirus, and more than 86,000 people have died after being infected. More than 36 million people across the country have filed for unemployment benefits over the last few weeks as businesses have been forced to shutter and lay off workers while states remain under stay at home orders.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Although most of the euro zone’s attention in the last week has been fixed on the clash between the German constitutional court (the BVG) on one side and the European Central Bank (ECB) and European Court on the other (a conflict I wrote about here and here), that is a clash that — if the parties put their minds to it (and they may not) — can be resolved by agreeing not to talk about the underlying dispute and opting for a messy quick fix instead.  But the storm that is gathering over Italy — a storm that was somewhere in the mind of the BVG — cannot be so quickly wished away. Writing two days ago for Bloomberg, Alessandra Migliaccio, Luca Casiraghi, and Viktoria Dendrinou provide a useful summary of some of the issues that are coming to a head, even if they do not address the underlying causes of Italy’s woes: It cheated its way into a currency union for which it was clearly always unsuited, and was always going to be unsuited. The result has been to place its economy into a straitjacket from which it has been unable to escape. Italy has been in and out of recession since 2000 and now its weakened, heavily indebted economy has to deal with the consequences of COVID-19 and the economic destruction caused by the effort to contain it. Bloomberg: The European Commission sees gross domestic product shrinking 9.5% this year, after a 4.7% decline in the first quarter, the worst drop since the series started in 1995. That could swell its already massive debt to well over 150% of GDP. And those are not the most pessimistic numbers out there. Meanwhile, for now, Italy can afford its debt load. Bloomberg: The ECB has enabled Italy to keep servicing its giant 2.4 trillion-euro ($2.6 trillion) debt load affordably. While the cost of insuring against default rose in March to its highest since 2013, 10-year bonds still yield less than 2%. In 2011, they topped 7%. The government tapped the market again Wednesday, selling 9 billion euros in bonds. Another difference from 2011 is that the politics are much more complicated. Unlike Greece, Italy has meaningful leverage: foreign investors hold more than 700 billion euros of its bonds, a third of the total, according to Bank of Italy data. Any problem there would be enough to send shock waves through global financial markets and Europe’s weakened banking system. To that should be added the mayhem to the internal-financing arrangements of the Eurosystem, particularly Target-2, its payment mechanism, where Italy’s negative balance is currently a little under €500 billion. While there are those that dismiss Target-2 as an irrelevance, a book-entry that means nothing, if Italy has to leave the euro, that money is gone: There is no chance that Italy could repay it, particularly in a ‘new lira’ that would crash against the single currency.  And the chaos across the euro zone caused by an Italian exit would not stop there. The threat that Italy might quit the currency union remains one of its biggest weapons: It is too big to sail. And so, Bloomberg: No one in Rome needed to hear the warning last week from the European Commission that the virus-spawned recession will be severe enough to put euro unity at risk. Like his forebears in 1992, Italian Prime Minister Giuseppe Conte felt abandoned by his allies early on in the pandemic when France and Germany ignored Italy’s cries for help. Italian opposition leader Matteo Salvini expresses sympathy for fans of a referendum on exiting that would tap into rising Italian frustration with the euro. The wrangling was on display last week when euro-area finance chiefs approved a deal to provide ultra-cheap loans via its rescue fund, but without any onerous conditions. Yet the insistence by Italy’s populist opposition that such loans would undercut the country’s sovereignty has rendered them politically toxic — even if they would lead to greater savings. Along with France and Spain, Italy has been pushing the bloc for joint borrowing against opposition from the likes of Germany, the Netherlands and Austria. This remains unacceptable to the ‘northern’ bloc (Finland should be added to its ranks), to whom such bond issuance is unacceptable in its own right and as a step along the road to a fiscal union that the ‘frugal four’ fear (quite rightly) would be a transfer union, draining their taxpayers in perpetuity, another fear at least partly reflected in the BVG’s judgment. Intriguingly, the Bloomberg report also contains this: Even without the German decision on the ECB, the risks of buying Italian debt were too great, said Patrice Gautry, an economist at Union Bancaire Privee, as he mused on worst-case outcomes. “A bold option would be for Italy and other Club Med countries to split from the euro zone, with different, looser rules on the debt side,” he says. “It was something already discussed with the Greek crisis.” That is indeed the way to go. Splitting the euro into ‘northern’ and ‘southern’ units has long been the least bad way to fix the mess created by the belief that a ‘one size fits all’ currency would work for such a wildly disparate group of economies. Sadly and madly there appears to be no support for the idea amongst those that count, meaning that, in the end, the frugal four will at least concede some debt mutualization, although the form it takes may well now have to reflect the concerns of a watching BVG. But if the frugal four do concede, it will not be until the last moment. If I had to guess (and that is all anyone can do), Italian yields are going to go up a lot — and by a lot, I mean a lot — higher before that last moment comes.  

When Congress passed the CARES Act to respond to COVID-19, it tucked into the legislation $3 billion for governors to use on education as they see fit. This money is a rare opportunity for governors to do something big, bold, and lasting. There will be no end to ways to spend the money: Education is expensive, and there will be plenty of claims on the money. Teacher pensions are depleted. School workers — bus drivers, support staff, administrators — all will want CARES funds to fill gaps in their budgets. Then there are public colleges that have lost out on tuition dollars.  Trying to spread the money among all these causes would mean not accomplishing much on any of them. There is other federal-support money to fill the gaps. But with this pot of money, it is far better to try to make a lasting impact on one big initiative. Governors should entertain what I call “long runway” ideas — areas where the investment will pay off over a long period of time. Think about what has the best payoff: patching a lot of potholes, or rebuilding a major bridge? It’s true, the potholes need filling right now, but the bridge will be there in 50 years. That’s an investment worth making. Here are four long-runway ideas that governors should consider tackling in their states with these fresh education dollars:   Digital Learning. The future of learning is clear: It’s going to occur inside and outside traditional-classroom settings. But we see that many schools have struggled to teach students virtually. That’s no longer acceptable. Existing philanthropic efforts need to be leveraged, as we send a call to arms to those who know we can do better. Fortunately, there is massive private support for the goal of eliminating the digital divide. Governors could provide the jumpstart to a strategy that ensures every student can access learning digitally and from home. 
 With COVID-19 still impacting our nation, students urgently need basic laptops or tablets to continue learning. They need broadband access to the Internet. In addition to providing these resources, CARES funds could be invested in statewide virtual schools, which can be a perfect solution for students who need more than their current schools offer. A long-run benefit of eliminating the digital divide is that teachers will be empowered with tools to help them personalize instruction and transform their classroom models, even after we return to “normal.” Workforce Preparedness. States offer many workforce-education programs in their schools and community colleges. The problem is that far too few of these programs prepare students for high-skill and high-wage careers in industries such as advanced manufacturing, health care, logistics, artificial intelligence, and cybersecurity. In these industries even before the pandemic, the demand for labor outstripped the supply. Now, even more so.   Governors can change this by investing in programs to develop cross-sector partnerships and innovative career pathways. Here’s just one example: Florida’s share of the funds, $173.6 million, could be carved into 430 five-year grants of $400,000 each. Each grant would be large enough to fund a nursing-school faculty member for five years. Each of these 400-plus faculty could train 20 more nurses a year, thereby creating a fresh infusion of almost 8,600 nurses for the state each year and boosting the state’s nursing staff by 5 percent in just the first year. Elsewhere, Ohio could take its $104.9 million and carve it into 100 separate grants for advanced manufacturing-training programs — enough to produce an additional 7,500 advanced manufacturing workers a year and help the state respond to the retirement of older skilled workers. Closing Achievement Gaps. There is no problem in education quite as challenging as the achievement gap. It’s closely linked with socioeconomic inequality, which sometimes seems impossible to overcome. But with enough investment in programs that do work, we could achieve great things. Right now, one-third of fourth-graders can’t read at grade level — that failure is a proven predictor of failing to graduate high school. However, reading coaches trained in the science of reading can help teachers become even better at teaching their students to read. Two states that have adopted reading coach programs as a centerpiece in their efforts to address the achievement gap are Florida and Mississippi. Both states have seen meaningful gains in their statewide reading scores. We know that reading is critical to students’ future ability to graduate high school — why not invest more in a proven solution?  Stabilizing Private Schools. Finally, governors could help to stabilize private schools, which are responsible for roughly 10 percent of America’s K–12 students. Private schools, especially faith-based schools, often operate on shoestring budgets, yet in many cases their students are more likely to graduate from high school and go to college. With the impacts of COVID-19, many of these schools are at a breaking point. Families may have less money to pay tuition, and financial aid will be stretched thin. It’s worth a reminder that these schools are part of our education system. They employ teachers, buy textbooks, and educate students who would otherwise fill desks in public schools. They provide alternatives to parents whose needs aren’t being met by the public schools. Helping cash-strapped parents who were paying out of their own pockets to send their child to a great school seems like a simple way to invest in education — and it would keep a vital and successful part of our education system going well into the future. These four ideas have one common feature: They are all transformational. Rather than patching a one-year hole in the budget, funding these big ideas would create something new, something bold, and something lasting for our nation’s students, wherever and however they learn, long after this pandemic has passed. 

A Colorado county coroner says that state officials overruled him in classifying a man who had died from alcohol poisoning as a death due to coronavirus. The 35-year-old man was found lying dead in a city park in Cortez by police, and Montezuma County Coroner George Deavers determined he had died of acute alcohol poisoning, after finding his blood alcohol concentration at .55, nearly double the amount considered lethal. After the deceased tested positive for coronavirus, Deavers said that state health authorities immediately characterized it as a death due to coronavirus.  “Before the death certificate was singed, they had already listed it as a Covid death,” Deavers told Denver-based CBS4. “I can see no reason for this.” The classification raised Montezuma’s coronavirus death count from two to three. Earlier this month, Cortez requested that the state allow it to reopen some businesses, but was denied. “Our reviewers have some concerns about vulnerabilities in Montezuma County and want to monitor the situation before further considering a variance,” the state health department said in response. Another CBS4 Investigation last month found that the state health department had reclassified three deaths at a Centennial nursing home as Covid-19 deaths — contradicting the assessments of attending physicians, who ruled that all three were not related to coronavirus. Deavers said the situation raises questions as to whether the state is intentionally manipulating its Covid statistics.  “It does look like it, whether they are or not, I don’t know,” Deavers admitted. “I don’t know if that’s what their intentions are. Maybe they’re trying to do it for some of the two trillion budgeted in for the Covid.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

How lovely it is to have a high-profile job in our major media institutions. Let’s say you completely, hideously muck up a huge story. Let’s say you spend three years wildly misleading the public. Let’s say that, at the outset of the worst public-health crisis in a century, you mock people for being afraid and tell them to go about life as usual. When you’re proven wrong, you get to tell the next chapter of the story anyway. And if you feel like saying, “No fair noticing we were wrong!” you know other members of the mainstream-media cartel will rush to support you.  Media observers are today noticing how strange it is for reporters to juxtapose panic about Florida, where the virus has done relatively little damage, with robust defense of New York, the coronavirus death capital of the Western world. This week, after Politico Florida correspondent Marc Caputo noted that the long-predicted mass outbreak of coronavirus in his state still hasn’t happened, with three full months having passed since the first dire warnings about spring breakers partying on the beaches, Daily Beast Washington correspondent and CNN analyst Jackie Kucinich threw the yellow flag. So, given how much everyone is suffering everywhere – grieving loved ones, job losses and even the simple things like hugging your friends  – I fail to see how this snarky nonsense from @MarcACaputo – who I think is an awesome reporter – is helpful. pic.twitter.com/ZB4LPb2uMn — Jackie Kucinich (@JFKucinich) May 15, 2020  In other words, a reporter thinks it is not “helpful” to report things that are true if those things happen to reflect badly on reporters? The contrast in coverage of New York governor Andrew Cuomo and Florida governor Ron DeSantis seems to come from some bizarro world where the media considers nine deaths per 100,000 people (Florida) to be more alarming than 142 deaths per 100,000 people (New York). As Caputo and colleague Renuka Rayasam wrote, Cuomo “has something else DeSantis doesn’t: a press that defers to him, one that preferred to cover ‘Florida Morons’ at the beach (where it’s relatively hard to get infected) over New Yorkers riding cramped subway cars (where it’s easy to get infected).”   The media loves to run with “blood on his hands” stories about nefarious Republicans, but you’ll have a hard time finding even a quiet, pro-forma apology (much less an admission of bloody hands) from the media for their massive bungling of the early stages of the coronavirus story. On January 31, Vox stated, with the customary absolute metaphysical certitude that characterizes its generally undergraduate tone, “Is this going to be a deadly pandemic? No.” Vox later deleted the tweet, but instead of an apology, it said the remark “no longer reflects the current reality of the coronavirus story,” which was obvious if insufficiently humble. 
 The following day, the Washington Post ran a story shouting, “Get a grippe, America, the flu is a much bigger threat than coronavirus, for now.” The Post’s medical writer Lenny Bernstein opined, “Clearly, the flu poses the bigger and more pressing peril; a handful of cases of the new respiratory illness have been reported in the United States, none of them fatal or apparently even life-threatening.” The headline of this piece has been widely mocked. But its contents are even more amazing, because none of the experts quoted in it say what Bernstein’s headline says. He appears to have generated the idea himself based entirely on how much damage had been done by the virus to that date, rather than the prospective risk. He features a truncated quotation from Anthony Fauci that leads in the opposite direction from his thesis: Fauci says people ask him why people are more worried about the coronavirus than about seasonal flu and he says seasonal flu is more predictable. Bernstein, a former sportswriter whose only degree listed on his Post biographical page is a B.A. in American culture, has not publicly apologized, as far as I can tell. I’ll be happy to update the record if he does so or has done so.  On February 20, CNN gravely informed us that the real problem relating to coronavirus was racist remarks and decreased bookings at Chinese restaurants, under the headline, “What’s Spreading Faster than Coronavirus? Racist assaults and ignorant attacks against Asians.” (Number of actual assaults or attacks cited in the thousand-word article: one.) The piece quoted a Chinatown restaurant owner as saying, “No one in my restaurant has this disease. No one in Chinatown has this disease,” then followed up with these words from the reporters who wrote the piece: “Indeed, no one in the entire state of New York has been diagnosed with novel coronavirus.” So, nothing to worry about, then.   “Why are some fears misguided?” CNN asked. “While the novel coronavirus has infected more than 75,000 people and killed over 2,100 worldwide, it’s caused far fewer deaths than the flu.” Though 12,000 Americans die of the flu annually, the story continued, “By contrast, since the novel coronavirus was first detected in the United States in January, 15 people have been diagnosed with the illness as of Wednesday. None of them has died.” Oh, phew. We all know that something that hasn’t happened yet cannot happen. Just as we know that if something didn’t happen, we should pretend it happened anyway, if it reaffirms our political instincts. The Russia–Trump collusion yarn is perhaps the most-promoted false conspiracy theory in American history: Major figures who advanced the theory have now conceded that they had no evidence for it, and yet leading media personalities who hyped it are expressing no shame or remorse whatsoever. CNN’s Brian Stelter is telling his audience, not, “My God, I have failed you, and I hereby announce my retirement in disgrace from public life” but, “Why are those jerks so obsessed with this Russia story we talked up incessantly for three years?” Working in the major media is a (self) love story: It means never having to say you’re sorry. 

Shocked by the large numbers of people congregating on California beaches, Governor Gavin Newsom recently decided to shut some of them down altogether. Large numbers of people then congregated at the beaches in protest, and the beaches have since been reopened, for exercise at least. Earlier this week, a top public-health official in Los Angeles announced that stay-at-home orders might be extended through the summer. An uproar ensued, and Mayor Eric Garcetti almost immediately walked backed the announcement.  Similar “orders” across the country are now prompting reactions like this tweet, which captures the situation facing public officials: Haha, nope. Entering stores is one thing but no one is putting on a mask to take out their trash or walk their dog or whatever. https://t.co/yuXMMAYh9I — Rachel 🐶💙🇺🇸 (@RaychelTania) May 14, 2020  COVID-19 is an extremely dangerous virus. It will almost certainly be one of the top five leading causes of death in the United States this year, and may remain in the top five for years to come. But people are reaching the ends of their tethers with lockdowns. Amid the most massive job losses since the Great Depression, people sense that some draconian health measures aren’t worth the squeeze. Mass protests and noncompliance may be rare for now, and the lockdowns continue to enjoy substantial support in principle. But opinion varies widely from region to region and between rural and urban areas. As Scott Rasmussen has pointed out, a large majority of people think that every business that establishes safe social distancing should be allowed to reopen. Public officials struggling to find the right balance of health measures need to realize that the public will soon start making those choices for them. Dr. Anthony Fauci has said that the virus will determine the timetable for reopening, but that simply cannot be true. Rates of infection, mortality, and immunity are of course crucial factors in getting the policy right, but the most crucial factor of all is public choice. It is people who will decide when to reopen, what safety measures are reasonable, and what risks — to themselves and others — are worth taking. Government officials face a difficult set of incentives. They are held responsible for the impacts of both the virus and the measures taken in response to it. Their interest in political survival will make them increasingly sensitive to popular sentiment. It is worth asking whether public opinion should have such a decisive impact on health policy. But it does, whether we like it or not.   The reason that many states’ highway speed limit is 65 mph is not that some transportation expert decided that is the ideal speed limit from a risk–benefit point of view. People simply won’t accept a lower speed limit on the interstate, even if it would save 20,000 lives a year. On the other hand, most people agree that driving 100 mph is excessively dangerous. The moral of the story is that people need and want a lot of things; balancing those priorities is what sets the bounds of “reasonableness.” And as it turns out, people think it’s perfectly reasonable to do lots of things that put both themselves and others at risk. 
 That is true in virtually every major category of preventable death and serious injury, including those in which one person’s activity entails significant risk for others. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in 2017, a typical year, the third-leading cause of death in the U.S., and by far the leading cause of death for people under the age of 55, was “accidents.” Among accidents, the leading killers were drug overdoses, motor vehicles, alcohol, and firearms. In each case, preventive policies have been set not by experts but by public choice, often driven by priorities other than safety.  Among drugs, the leading killer is heroin, possession of which is a criminal offense. Many policy experts think that the War on Drugs is a bad policy because it entails social costs that cannot be justified by its meager benefits. But people are not willing to accept the legalization and regulation of such drugs, even if legalization might reduce both the risks to drug users and related externalities (such as ruined families and rampant crime). So the policy endures despite not yielding the hoped-for benefits. As former secretary of defense Donald Rumsfeld likes to say, public policies are usually judged by their intentions, not their results.  The second-leading cause of accidental death in 2017 was motor-vehicle accidents. Speed limits were long a matter of state law, but in the 1970s Congress enacted a national speed limit of 55 mph. Noncompliance was rampant, particularly in rural areas. The limit was raised to 65 mph in 1987, and in 1995 the law was repealed, returning the setting of speed limits to the states. Local preferences, based on regional variations, won out over a single national speed limit. Public-choice theory holds that, whereas unanimity entails prohibitive decision costs, simple majority rule maximizes the externality of people’s being forced to accept outcomes they do not want. This negative effect increases disproportionately with scale — a considerable downside of national majority rule.   The third-leading cause of accidental death was alcohol. In the 1920s, the U.S. tried prohibition, and the chief result was a stupendous increase in organized and violent crime. Today, moderate social drinking is a highly prized pastime. Most people accept the necessity of laws against drunk driving, but they aren’t willing to accept excessive restrictions on their use of alcohol even to save tens of thousands of lives a year, to say nothing of the countless lives and families ruined by alcoholism. Society accepts the risk of serious injury, from a variety of common activities, even more readily. Consider the sporting events you take your children to. Every year in American there are about three million emergency-room visits by children and young adults with serious injuries from sports and recreation. Football and basketball are the most dangerous of these, accounting for tens of thousands of emergency-room visits each year, followed by bicycling, soccer, skateboarding, and playing at playgrounds. But sports are important in child development, particularly nowadays, so good parents routinely rope their kids into activities that are considerably more dangerous than Instagram and Fortnite.  COVID-19 has already killed more people in two months than died from influenza and pneumonia in all of 2017, when those illnesses were the eighth-leading cause of death. Of course, to prevent the flu, many people don’t take even the most minimal precautions, such as washing hands, covering mouths when coughing, staying home when sick, or getting flu shots. People sick with flu routinely go to work or school knowing that they will infect others. Where conditions and attitudes vary greatly from one region to another, local choice maximizes the number of people who will wind up with the outcome they prefer. Of course, in a pandemic the problem of local choice is obvious: Infection spreads quickly from one jurisdiction to another, so loose public-health measures in any jurisdiction can endanger people everywhere. And yet, if a virus is pervasive, and the goal of public policy is to reduce the local risk of infection, then local choice is likely still the most attractive option — even in a pandemic.  Take bars and restaurants. It may be years before we fully go back to normal in that sector. When we do, people will likely keep up preventive practices, such as wearing masks (when not actually eating or drinking) and gloves, and washing their hands often. But to require social distancing in restaurants will have hugely disparate impacts from region to region. Such measures will entail dramatically higher costs for businesses where commercial rents are high, such as in New York City and San Francisco, compared with rural areas where space is plentiful and warmer areas where restaurants can offer more seating outdoors. In New York City and San Francisco, restaurants have to be great to survive at all; even operating at nearly full capacity, they still struggle. In Manhattan, apartment floor plans have long assumed that people are largely outsourcing their kitchens and living rooms. “Social distancing” used to mean that the music was set just loud enough so that you could hear the person you were eating with but not the person inches away at the next table. If social distancing is enforced for bars and restaurants in places like New York City, the only establishments that will survive are those than can charge prices two or three times higher than currently. That would make bars and restaurants a rare luxury for the very rich. Given a choice, many people who live in New York City are likely to prefer taking their chances with the virus over giving up the things that make living in New York City worthwhile. In coming weeks, communities all over the country are likely to start making similar choices. Officials need to start thinking of public choice not as an obstacle to good policy, but as the central driver of it. That puts a special premium on their role in ensuring that the public is as informed as possible.  Striking the right balance of safety and the resumption of normal activity depends on how countless individuals will seek to balance their own priorities. The government simply doesn’t have that information — which was Friedrich Hayek’s central observation about why socialism can’t work no matter how good the government’s planners are. That is why, as Dr. Joel Zinberg and I argued back in March, universally available testing for both the virus and antibodies is the key. The best response to the virus is the one in which individuals are making the most informed choices. As they consider when and how to lift the COVID-19 quarantine, public officials should start tracking public opinion. The ultimate arbiter of how to strike the balance will be the public itself. 

The coronavirus pandemic has challenged health care as much as any industry in America. Across the country, hospitals have confronted the dual burden of preparing for the possibility of being overwhelmed by COVID-19 patients while struggling to maintain financial viability in the face of catastrophic revenue loss as other patients stay away, fearful of exposure to the virus. Meanwhile, physicians, nurses, and other front-line health-care workers have desperately sought to learn and apply the latest information about the virus, only to find themselves picking their way through an unruly mess of strong opinions and weak data.  Yet somehow, out of this maelstrom, several surprisingly consistent themes have emerged, as I learned this week at a large medical-innovation conference convened virtually this week in Boston: Deferred care — the health services non-COVID patients should be receiving but aren’t — is an increasingly serious problem. “During March and April, many of our patients with heart disease, with lung disease, with cancer, with diabetes, were simply afraid to come to the hospital, so they didn’t get the care they needed,” said Dr. Elizabeth Nabel, the president of Boston’s Brigham Health, and they are “now returning to the hospital much sicker than if they came previously.” She also noted that the cardiac-catheterization lab — incidentally a key revenue-generator for the hospital — was less than half occupied when normally it would’ve been full. “We’re very concerned about the cases that we’re not seeing, the decreased number of cardiac and stroke patients showing up in our emergency room” added Dr. Peter Slavin, the president of the Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH). “The fear associated with this virus is very real and is going to take some time to be overcome.”   The use of telehealth has surged.  
 “Explosive” is how John Fernandez, the head of ambulatory services at the Mass General Brigham (MGB) system, described the growth, and growth prospects, for telehealth and virtual care: “I figure if my 86-year-old father can learn Zoom in a week, there’s going to be a lot of explosion in this technology.” The numbers would seem to bear out his point. At MGH, the use of telemedicine climbed from a baseline of less than 1 percent of outpatient visits to over 85 percent, Slavin said. According to MGB’s chief clinical officer, Dr. Gregg Meyer, the amount of care delivered virtually within the MGB system increased from 2 percent to nearly 60 percent. The actual number of virtual visits increased from 1,000–2,000 per month to 240,000–250,000 per month, said Dr. Alistair Erskine, the chief digital-health officer at Brigham Health — an extraordinary 200-fold change. It’s prohibitively difficult to gather and aggregate relevant clinical data in a timely fashion.  Dr. Paul Biddinger, who leads emergency preparedness at MGH, highlighted the need to gather “patient presentation data — the emergency-department visits, the clinic visits, the hospitalizations, the ICU visits that tell us whether or not the pace [of reopening] is too fast. . . . Right now, we don’t gather all that data from all those different sources in an aggregate way and link it to the decisions that are being made.”  Marcus Osborne, the vice president of Walmart Health, lamented that, “We [Americans] don’t really have a public-health infrastructure.” “Public health has been underrepresented in the tech space,” said Dr. Jim Weinstein, the senior vice president for Microsoft Healthcare. “Technology is fantastic, but if we can’t talk to each other, we can’t communicate the appropriate data.” Biddinger explained to me later that we lack “the ability to ‘flag’ patients associated with disasters [including outbreaks but also no-notice mass-casualty events] in all systems,” and to “define the basic data fields that are ‘always captured’ . . . when the flag is set.” Weinstein agreed, and was especially concerned about the learning opportunities that would be missed because of our basic inability to share data more effectively. He noted that in his previous role at Dartmouth, where he led the large Dartmouth–Hitchcock health system, he was able to cut the mortality rate for sepsis from 55 percent to 10 percent in about three months by enabling better data sharing and communication. He offered a similar prescription for the management of the coronavirus pandemic, arguing that there’s a need to share “data elements we agree on . . . tools that let these data flow.” This seems similar in intent to the COVID-19 Evidence Accelerator, championed by tech-savvy regulators such as Dr. Amy Abernethy, the principle deputy commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Big Tech projects restraint.    In contrast to the grandiose arrogance typically associated with tech giants and the irrepressible ideology of digital transformation, the representatives from large tech companies speaking at this conference exhibited deliberate, conspicuous restraint. Physicians from Microsoft and Google constantly emphasized the primacy of patient privacy, and the urgency of ensuring that tech doesn’t exacerbate social inequities. Dr. Karen DeSalvo, appointed in October 2019 as Google’s chief health officer after serving as a health and technology leader in the Obama administration, emphasized transparency and the need for “privacy-preserving” approaches. To the extent that she even mentioned AI, in a session focused on the topic, it wasn’t in the context of how it’s going to solve all human problems; it was to stress the importance of being “intentional in our development of AI so that we eliminate disparities and don’t aggravate them.” “I want to be sure that we don’t leave people behind,” Microsoft’s Weinstein said. “We have to be very thoughtful about how we move technology forward in the next generation, and the generation after that, to narrow the gap of disparities, which we still haven’t done.” Patient-centered medicine at last?  An inescapable takeaway from the conference was the sense that as a result of the COVID-19 crisis, some long-contemplated changes in America health care may have at last arrived. Chief among these is a vision of care authentically built around the life needs of a person, rather than the operational needs of the medical system. As Nabel explained, she and her colleagues recognized that the crisis represented “an opportunity to think bold and think differently, and implement those changes [that] maybe we’ve wanted to do all along but didn’t have the courage to.” In particular, Nabel emphasized the increased use of digital tools and the re-imagination of the ambulatory-patient experience, changes that would likely lead to less space for ambulatory care in the hospital. “Digital care will expand and be a foundation to all the care that we deliver,” Nabel said. “The transition to consumer-focused health care will accelerate,” which “will mean more choices are available, care will be less hospital-centric, more outpatient/ambulatory, in the home in many ways. We don’t even know what routine care is going to look like in the future.” Similarly, Walmart’s Osborne highlighted the increased opportunities to provide care and support for patients outside of the traditional medical clinic, whether through at-home kits or the provision of testing and care in more convenient settings. “As communities and individuals and families grasp for healthcare needs,” he said, “they’re not finding public-health infrastructure that exists at any kind of significant scale,” and instead often rely on other organizations to fill the gap. “We’ve done a disservice to consumers by not allowing diagnostic and lab pieces to be up front and more accessible, and COVID has just exposed that.”  A Better Normal?  Talk is cheap. But the emergent vision of health-care’s future is compelling. It’s encouraging to think about a health system that’s more patient-centric — more ready, willing, and able to meet patients where they live, in part by leveraging the convenience and scale of competitive private-sector offerings from both large, established corporations such as Walmart and nascent startups. It’s also a welcome change to feel that tech may be finally be deployed in the service of patients, rather than championed as an end in itself (if only the benighted masses would adopt it). Let’s hope as well that serious tech companies continue to approach health care with the humility and collaborative intent demonstrated this week, and that they forge partnerships with the health-care community that authentically prioritize patient privacy while enabling a permissioned and transparent approach to data-sharing. The rapid learning that would then be possible — chronically stifled by the impediments in place today — is essential not only during an outbreak, but also if we hope to iteratively improve the care our patients routinely receive. 

Today on The Editors, Rich, Charlie, and Jim discuss how Dr. Fauci has been handling his coronavirus role, the media’s shameful treatment of red-state governors during this crisis, and do an exit-question-style round about the emerging unmasking scandal. Listen below, or subscribe to this podcast on iTunes, Google Podcasts, TuneIn, Spotify, and Stitcher.  ﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
  

Newsweek offers a classic of the bad-reporting-of-coronavirus genre, declaring, “Wisconsin’s New Coronavirus Cases Rise As People Flock To Reopened Bars After Court Overturns Stay-At-Home Order.” From that headline, you might think that the new cases are because Wisconsinites are flocking to bars because of the court overturning the state stay-at-home order.  To give writer Jacob Jarvis credit, he at least acknowledges early in the piece, “The freshly reported cases are of infections that predate the end of Wisconsin’s lockdown.” But he gravely warns the state’s “cumulative cases throughout the pandemic rose to 11,275, with 373 of those recorded on Thursday, the third-largest daily peak for the month.” Thursday, May 14 was also the day the state did the most tests — 5,487. The percentage of tests coming back positive has actually declined by half over the past two weeks, from 12.7 percent to 6.4 percent. If you do more tests, you will get more positive results. The media are inadvertently creating a disincentive to conducting more tests, because every state that increases its testing finds more cases, generating “Cases Are Up, The Oubreak Is Getting Worse!” headlines. The Thursday total of new cases is the highest since . . . well, the previous Friday, which had 375. The worst day of the month for new cases was May 1, with 460! The sentence is “Thursday’s total of 373 new cases is down 19 percent from the beginning of the month” is equally accurate. There’s not really a clear pattern in the Wisconsin numbers; Monday and Tuesday were particularly low — perhaps cases diagnosed over the weekend get reported less quickly. The seven-day average has been pretty flat.   Wisconsin is doing a pretty good job of making updated data publicly available. As of this writing, the state’s hospitals are at 69 percent capacity, with 68 percent of current coronavirus patients not in the intensive care unit. There are 1,260 ventilators on hand. If the number of cases needing serious care go up in the coming days or weeks, the state appears to have the resources to handle it. Looking at it all, the state is doing . . . generally okay. Would you rather not see bar patrons shoulder-to-shoulder on social media? Sure. But the country is wrapping up week nine of these measures. The longer and tighter you try to keep people bottled up, the more pressure will build for a release.  But we know what narrative Daily Beast readers want to hear: “Big dumb Republican-led state supreme court ignores science, recklessly overturns Democratic governor’s wise restrictions on bars, dumb Wisconsinites will die.” Reopening bars could well be a bad decision, particular if patrons don’t make any efforts at social distancing. But it is hard to see why that is exponentially more dangerous than, say, riding the New York City subway right now.  

Hungary Prime Minister Victor Orban said Friday that he would give up his far-reaching coronavirus emergency powers later this month, despite fears that the nationalist leader would use the authority to consolidate power. “We expect the government will be able to return the special powers to tackle the coronavirus pandemic to parliament at the end of May,” Orban’s Facebook page read. The prime minister also took aim at detractors who had accused him of autocracy after Hungary’s parliament gave Orban the right to rule by unilateral decree in March.  “We successfully defended our homeland and our performance is comparable to any country’s,” Orban said after a meeting with Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic, who also took extensive emergency powers during the pandemic. “We did this within a democratic framework and we will return to the usual parliamentary order.” “There was no basis for the criticisms,” Orban during the visit to Serbia on Friday. “Once they apologize, we also expect their admiration for the success of Hungary’s defense [against the pandemic.” To date, Hungary has 3,417 confirmed coronavirus infections and 442 deaths among the population of nearly 10 million. On Thursday, European Union lawmakers asked that Orban be punished for his actions, after the European Parliament passed a resolution last month that singled out Hungary’s emergency powers for criticism.  “The Union has not taken any concrete measures to sanction [Prime Minister Viktor] Orban’s government,” Spanish lawmaker Iratxe García Pérez told European Commission Vice President Vera Jourova and other EU leaders. “And so he continues his action to centralize power, to interfere in the electoral system, to control the news media, education, culture, harassing civil society. Colleagues, this is shameful!”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic, the surgeon general exhorted Americans to “STOP BUYING MASKS!” Public-health officials argued that only medical workers needed personal protective equipment, and besides, people could not be trusted to put masks on correctly. A few weeks later, masks have become a symbol of civic responsibility, following new CDC guidelines encouraging their use. Politicians and journalists don them at press conferences, castigating their bald-faced colleagues. The surgeon general even posted a how-to guide for making masks out of T-shirts.  What explains the change? A large body of literature finds that surgical masks and respirators, while imperfect, reduce the spread of pathogens transmitted through droplets. An infected individual wearing a mask is less likely to shed the virus onto other people or surfaces, and even if droplets penetrate a mask, the viral load will be lower than it would have been otherwise, reducing the severity of an attendant infection. A 2003 study of the SARS outbreak in Hong Kong found that medical workers who wore masks were significantly less likely to contract the virus. Another study found that even homemade masks are better than nothing. But public-health authorities downplayed the effectiveness of masks in order to preserve the supply for medical workers in greater need of personal protective equipment. The belated guidelines are welcome. But for many on the political right, this initial “noble lie” reinforced a broader distrust of government. Bureaucrats’ willingness to obfuscate meant that individuals had to make reasoned decisions on their own rather than rely on government dictates. The mask imbroglio cast doubt on the claim that “experts” alone could address the pandemic and bolstered the case for a localized response.  Suddenly there’s a new trend: mask-skeptics on the political right. After Vice President Pence got flak for not covering his face on a visit to the Mayo Clinic, Trump’s base has come to see masks as a symbol of government overreach. Fox News host Laura Ingraham dedicated a segment to denouncing mask use: “They’ll say this whole mask thing is settled science just like they do with climate change. Of course, it’s not and they know it.” Ohio governor Mike DeWine, who initially mandated the use of masks in his state, rolled back the requirement in the face of public backlash, reasoning that “people were not going to accept the government telling them what to do.” Some pundits have even argued that mask-wearing is a sign of “cowardice.”  
 The irony is that civil-libertarian objections to masks make draconian measures more likely. The more people refuse to wear masks, the greater the risks of reopening. Where mask-wearing has taken hold — in Taiwan, Japan, and South Korea, for example — life has proceeded in quasi-normalcy: Many businesses and schools are open, and people are free to socialize. The comparatively repressive East Asian democracies have retained more civil liberties than the U.S. thanks, in part, to the rational behavior of their citizens.  The efficacy of masks strengthens the anti-lockdown case. It is exactly the kind of spontaneous decision-making that often renders government intrusion needless and inefficient. The “invisible hand” of the free market depends on rational individuals acting in their self-interest. We’ve seen this phenomenon in jurisdictions that did not lock down but nonetheless saw sizable reductions in economic activity. People did not want to contract COVID-19 and took reasonable steps to minimize their risk. But the anti-mask crowd now advocates eschewing one’s individual interest in favor of empty symbolic gestures — an example of the irrational behavior that statists use to argue against free markets. Conflating personal protective measures with government overreach all but guarantees that the latter will be necessary. 

I really, really hope President Trump and Vice President Pence don’t contract the coronavirus. Trump certainty seems to be full of energy for a 73-year-old man, but we know how dangerous this virus is to older men, and we saw how it put 55-year-old Boris Johnson into an intensive-care unit.  The report that the rapid test being used at the White House could have a high error rate is particularly unnerving. NYU researchers contend the error rate could be nearly half; Abbott Laboratories says that’s nonsense and that those running that study used the test the wrong way; they contend the test detects 90 percent of infections. Here’s the problem: Think about how many people are being tested at the White House each day. (Between three hundred and four hundred people work in the building, although only a fraction of those come in contact with the president.) Let’s be really optimistic and say that Abbot is overstating the rate of false negatives, and that only one out of every twenty is a false negative. If you’re testing fifty people a day at the White House, then two or three people per day are getting a false negative and walking around asymptomatic but still shedding the virus, that could still lead to serious problems! It only takes one carrier to give it to the president or vice president! Ideally, the president would be minimizing his in-person interaction with others. The president doesn’t want to wear a mask. That’s his choice, although it would still provide better protection if he wore one away from cameras. Hopefully Trump is back to avoiding handshakes again, everyone’s washing their hands religiously, and all of the minimally invasive precautions are being taken.  The federal government has its hands full responding to this outbreak as is; we don’t need to throw another problem on top of it with a president who is (hopefully only briefly) incapable of performing his duties.  

The $3 trillion coronavirus relief bill released by House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) earlier this week has received pushback from both moderate and progressive Democratic lawmakers. Criticism came from Representative Abigail Spanberger (D., Va.), a former CIA officer who is the first Democrat to be elected to Virginia’s 7th congressional district in 38 years. Spanberger announced her opposition to the bill, known as the HEROES Act, on Friday.  “I have a responsibility to be honest with the people of Central Virginia, including those who are suffering, sick, losing their jobs, or losing their businesses,” Spanberger said in a statement. “Unfortunately, many Members of Congress–including some in my own party–have decided to use this package as an opportunity to make political statements…and has no chance at becoming law, further delaying the help so many need.” The HEROES Act is expected to pass the House on Friday despite the concerns of many rank and file Democrats. While the legislation allocates funding for state and local governments as well as coronavirus testing and contact tracing, several provisions are unrelated to the pandemic. One provision of the bill would require federal banking regulators to regularly report on “the availability of access to financial services for minority-owned and women-owned cannabis-related legitimate businesses.” Representative Joe Cunningham (D., S.C.), the first Democrat to represent the state’s 1st congressional district since 1981, also announced on Friday that he would not vote for the bill.   “This is Washington politics at its worst. While South Carolina families, small business owners, and workers are struggling, now is not the time to advance a partisan wish list or refuse to come to the negotiating table,” Cunningham said in a statement. Another freshman moderate elected in a longtime Republican district, Representative Elissa Slotkin (D., Mich.), said on Thursday that she wasn’t sure whether the HEROES Act would be effective. “What I wanted to see in this package is sticking to the very specific emergency need that the country has,” Slotkin told CNN. “There’s money for testing, like really critical things, and then there are some things that I don’t feel like had to be in the bill, and what I’m trying to decide is does the net positive outweigh that negative.” Progressive representative Pramila Jayapal (D., Wash.) expressed dismay on Wednesday that her proposal for the federal government to pay workers’ salaries during the pandemic was not included in the bill. Jayapal is calling on the government to pay all salaries of up to $100,000 for up to three months for workers who have been laid off.  Jayapal “continues to be concerned that the current version of the package fails to meet the scale of this crisis, one that has seen 36 million Americans lose their jobs and at least 27 million lose their health care,” read a statement from the representative’s office.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

America’s worship of civil liberties was on display as anti-lockdown protests swept from Lansing, Mich., to San Diego, and from Madison, Wis., to Boston’s Beacon Hill. From London to Seine-Saint Denis, from Munich to Berlin’s Kreuzberg district, a similar defiance of state intrusion is now arising in parts of Europe. As in the United States, the question is still open: Will these protests channel the growing lockdown fatigue into a cogent, constructive case for reopening, or will they descend into paranoia?  A recent hotspot of anti-lockdown fuss has been Germany, where both media and the government have raised the alarm about the far right’s sway in driving people to break the quarantine and social-distancing rules. This past weekend saw radical groups co-opt protests in Dortmund and Munich, where a reporter was attacked and police had to disperse 25 vandals, respectively. A reporting crew from the center-left late-night satirical heute-show was similarly assaulted in Berlin the previous weekend, claiming the popular Moroccan-German comedian Abdelkarim as a victim. Germany’s crippling memory of extremism (so-called Vergangenheitsbewältigung) has a way of penalizing political deviance on the right to this day, and these acts of violence surely didn’t help give the protests a good name in the public eye, either. Resistance to lockdowns has gotten a bad name in France, too, after a young local from Villeneuve-la-Garenne was thrown off his motorbike and sent to the hospital with a broken leg by a police-car door flung open. The incident sparked a wave of riots across the northern Paris suburbs reminiscent of the three-week-long émeutes in 2005 that saw 8,000 cars set ablaze by restless youths protesting police abuse. The quarantine has brought long-simmering tensions in these largely low-income, immigrant, and poorly housed suburbs to a boiling point, with locals decrying heavy-handed policing, spending cuts in public services, and the unequal impact of school closures that leave low-income kids lacking Internet access with little means to keep up with schoolwork.  It is certainly true that the protests in Europe have attracted marginal actors and alt-right conspiracists, as have those in the States. But labeling all lockdown dissenters as somehow neo-Nazi or racailles misses the forest for the trees. In Germany, a closer look at the protests and public opinion reveals that quarantine fatigue is gradually taking root among the general population. Nearby the 25 hecklers dispersed in Munich, another 3,000 demonstrators were similarly flouting social-distancing rules, although for their non-violence police refrained from interfering “on the grounds of proportionality.” Peaceful protests have also been held in Stuttgart and Frankfurt, among other German cities. As Chancellor Merkel warns länders not to reopen too quickly, the country’s per capita death rate remains one of Europe’s lowest, in view of which the public gradually begins to question the health benefits of keeping the economy in lockdown. When stay-at-home orders were issued federally in mid-March, 92 percent of Germans supported the orders, but only two-thirds do so now, according to an official poll by the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment. Claims that the government is inflating the risks posed by COVID and accompanying calls to reopen businesses are being spearheaded by the right-wing Alternative für Deutschland (AfD). But they’re by no means limited to it. The lockdown battles have pitted the Große Koalition of Merkel’s center-right CDU-CSU and the social-democrat SPD against a big-tent coalition of skeptics, including some centrists. Thomas Kemmerich of the liberal FDP, whom the AfD’s support briefly propelled to state premier of Thuringia earlier this year, was seen at another anti-lockdown protest in Gura last weekend. He was swiftly rebuked by his party for it, but his presence shows that cracks are starting to appear, and societal support for the lockdown is waning. At several of these protests, mottos against Big Pharma were chanted, suggesting that even some of the far left may have been drawn to them.   Calls to prevent further economic pain through a swift reopening are being echoed in similar terms across the continent. Some of the lockdown’s earliest victims include cross-border workers from neighboring Poland and the Czech Republic, left stranded on both sides of the German border when all travel was banned. Groups of Polish workers have been seen protesting these measures by waving EU flags near the Zgorzeleg-Golitz border. As many as 20,000 Poles work in bordering Saxony, more than half of whom live in Poland and thus cross the border daily. Protests of this sort have spanned many other parts of the continent, including Belgium, Ukraine, the Netherlands, Georgia, and even Russia.  These protests aren’t just menaced by adventitious presence from the far right. Distrust of heavy-handed governmental power, even when warranted by a most deadly virus, rarely fails to attract conspiracists, and thriving beyond the unsavory fringes of society largely depends on keeping them at bay. In London, around 50 people gathered near Westminster Bridge on Saturday, blending much the same civil libertarianism that has erupted in the U.S. (“common law is sacred law” read one of their banners) with the wildest conspiracies around vaccines and 5G. The crowd derided COVID-19 as a “scamdemic” and a mere front for the world’s powerful to plot for control of their lives, blaming governments for bubbling up the death toll for a disease that they claim is less deadly than the flu. When not altogether negated, the health risk is oftentimes unfoundedly associated with 5G deployment, a conspiracy that lies at the root of several discrete instances of 5G tower-busting, proving that the fears stoked are real and run deep. “Even the bats didn’t know the hoax would last this long,” read another banner at the London gathering.  When COVID-19 and the accompanying health vs. economy tradeoffs are instead reckoned with, these protests are guaranteed a better image. A case in point is Austria, where the Initiative for Evidence-based Corona Information (ICI) has drawn several hundred to demand Chancellor Kurz’s resignation outside the Vienna State Opera several times in the past two weeks in defiance of bans, even warning of further mobilization. ICI seeks to give a voice to a wide cross-section of Austrian society whose lives have been impacted by the lockdowns, even offering pro-bono legal support to those claiming abuse by the police for breaking the quarantine.   But more than on civic mobilization, ICI’s claim to legitimacy ultimately hinges on its leveraging of science. The group was started by physician and epidemiologist Dr. Christian Fiala and claims to “put facts over panic” by publicizing a rolling stream of academic papers running counter to what they term as the “prevailing corona-alarmist orthodoxies.” One such piece of research was carried out by Germany’s CDC-equivalent, the Robert Koch Institute, and argues that the compulsory wearing of face masks may turn counterproductive when, upon several uses, the warmth and moisture of a mask ends up attracting viruses and bacteria instead of repelling them. ICI has launched a campaign on this basis calling on Austrians to label their masks mund-tot (mouth-dead or silenced), equating Chancellor Kurz’s response to the virus to some form of censure. 
 ICI’s reliance on science, however, may ultimately backfire. These appeals to heed the experts, when made in the early phases of the virus, were quickly voided by COVID’s unforeseen ravages. ICI’s uncompromising posture on civil liberties, echoed in protests across the continent, may also lead to a dead end when set against its urgent calls to lift the lockdowns. The two imperatives will be hard to square if and when new data-intensive technology of the contact-tracing sort arises as the best hope to ease the quarantines. It isn’t clear that people’s yearning for civil liberties will take precedent over lockdown fatigue in that scenario. This is not to mention Dr. Fiala’s dubious credentials, having made a name for himself advocating HIV denialism and running a popular abortion clinic in Vienna. He surely would rather not have conspiracy theorizing turned on his support of lifting quarantines.  Europe’s entire debate around the path to normality, in fact, looks increasingly like hit-or-miss, no less than in America. Absent conclusive evidence advising one pace of reopening or another, it has taken the shape of dueling wagers by hazily drawn constituencies struggling to substantiate with facts and numbers their instinctive weighing of economics relative to public health. Europe’s reopeners are no less angsty than in America, but their need for a fact-based, sound case may be greater. Natural rights and civil liberties are less instinctively understood and defended in Europe, so without it, they risk attracting even more of the unsavory characters seen parading in the downtown streets of Austin and Philadelphia. For this, don’t blame those who in good faith seek to chart a workable path out of costly lockdowns, for the experts are guessing their way out of this crisis, too. 

Yesterday, I recorded a podcast with Jeb Bush, here. The main topic, of course, is the pandemic and how to handle it. This is the governors’ hour, you might say: The burden of setting policy — locking down, opening back up — falls on them. Bush was governor of Florida for two terms and knows the nature of the job, including in times of disaster. (True, the pandemic is a unique disaster.)  “The great chance to serve is when people really need it,” he says. Now is “the time to suit up.” He has seen governors in action, serving very well. What the good ones have in common, he says, is a refusal to politicize the pandemic. They are just going about their jobs. “Servant leadership is great politics too,” he notes. Governors who have set petty politics aside “have seen soaring numbers.” Ron DeSantis, the incumbent governor of Florida, has not seen his numbers soar. But Bush gives him great credit, admiring his performance. “Florida has slowly opened up — very cautiously — as is appropriate,” says Bush. He then provides a snapshot of his state in normal times: “Disney alone is a huge economic driver.” On top of that, you have “the convention business, the airlines, the cruise industry, the whole visitor industry.” Something like 110 million people visit Florida every year.   But these days? The challenge is monumental, needless to say. Because it is the governors’ hour, it is federalism’s hour. Bush says that each state — with different populations, different geography, etc. — must address the pandemic in its own way. “You can’t nationalize something like this.” What’s more, “individuals have to take this seriously. We have to open up. We can’t quarantine ourselves into a depression.” And this requires that people “accept personal responsibility.” “The idea that you’re a manly man because you walk around without a mask on, where there’s contact with other human beings, is ridiculous.” I ask Bush about spending — the federal government’s spending, in particular. Emergency spending is well and good, he says. But the danger is, lawmakers will seize the opportunity to carry out a political agenda, an agenda not really connected to the emergency. “If we get to the point where we socialize all risk going forward, that’s a pact with the devil.” How about Campaign 2020? Will we have a campaign without conventions, handshaking, baby-kissing, and all those well-loved trappings (at least well loved by some of us)? It is hard for Bush to imagine conventions this year. “But everything is hyper-politicized now.” He then sketches out perceptions: “If you’re a Republican, you want to open up the economy. If you’re a Democrat, you want to keep people safe. The other side views that as, You want to destroy the economy if you want to keep people safe, and, You want people to die if you want to open the economy. I mean, that’s not how normal people think.”   But in our overheated political environment, Bush says, you may have a Republican convention, because the attitude is, “We’re gonna show ’em.” We also discuss balloting — how to conduct the 2020 elections. I, for one, am a ballot hawk. (I’ve made up that phrase in recent weeks.) I want things to be tight. I’m not crazy about early voting, mail-in voting, and so on and so forth. I’m an old voter-ID man. But this year, I’m feeling loosey-goosey. I think we should entertain options that would not be entertainable — at least by me — in normal times. Bush returns once more to federalism: Each state must handle things in the fashion most appropriate to that state. There should not be a uniform policy set by Washington. In Florida, Bush says, early voting, absentee voting, and all the rest has worked very well. And the belief that such voting disadvantages Republicans, he says, is a myth.  In this podcast, we also talk about China and other issues. We end by talking about Jeb Bush’s extraordinary parents. You may enjoy the entire conversation, as I did. Again, our podcast is here.  

On the menu today: We could all dunk on people who were wrong in their early assessments of this pandemic, but the more pressing question is who is not learning from getting things wrong during this outbreak; one mainstream publication notices that the conventional wisdom on Florida was far from the truth; why the media’s reflexive partisan sympathies are leading Americans to not understand the virus and what policies work best to mitigate it; and a funny and brutally honest assessment of what’s coming to higher education.  Errors Are a Part of Life, but We Shouldn’t Cling to Them According to the Johns Hopkins University Coronavirus Research Center, as of this writing, the U.S. death toll from the virus is 85,906. Worldometers, which tends to run ahead of JHU count, puts the toll at 86,912. You noticed that the arguments of “It’s just the flu!” or “This is comparable to the flu!” or “The flu kills more people each year!” stopped sometime in the past few weeks, didn’t you? Even the skeptics can count. (As our Robert VerBruggen noted, even that “the flu kills 80,000 Americans per year” statistic is a debatable statistical estimate.) You may recall that at the end of March, President Trump said, “so if we can hold that down, as we’re saying, to 100,000, it’s a horrible number, maybe even less, but to 100,000, so we have between 100 [thousand] and 200,000, we altogether have done a very good job.” Many commentators, particularly on the Left, thought Trump had not merely moved the goalposts from his past statements that the virus would go away, or that it was not as dangerous as the flu, but was setting an absurdly low bar for a “good job.” At the end of March, the United States had barely 4,000 deaths. Surely, Trump had to be setting expectations at an unrealistically high number, so he could come back later and claim victory, right?   No, apparently not! You may recall that by April 8, when deaths were at about 17,000, the IHME model — which week by week proved to be just too flawed to be useful — revised its projection to indicate the virus would kill 60,000 people in the United States over the next four months. That revision was 33,000 less than a week earlier, prompting many to argue that either the model was simply too imprecise to give any meaningful conclusions, or that the virus was less dangerous than initially thought. It’s five weeks later, and we’re at 85,906.  I think highly of Dr. Anthony Fauci and think just about everything he says during this outbreak is worth careful consideration. But there’s no getting around the fact that some of his early assessments were really off base, too. On January 21, the day the first U.S. case was discovered, Fauci said during an interview, “obviously, you need to take it seriously and do the kind of things the (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) and the Department of Homeland Security is doing. But this is not a major threat to the people of the United States and this is not something that the citizens of the United States right now should be worried about.” In another interview on January 26, he repeated, “The American people should not be worried or frightened by this. It’s a very, very low risk to the United States, but it’s something we, as public health officials, need to take very seriously.” They call it a novel coronavirus because it’s new, not because everyone is supposed to finish writing a novel during quarantine. Because it is new, all of us are trying to understand it, and our previous experiences may or may not be applicable to this virus and this outbreak. I suspect that the way countries reacted to SARS-CoV-2 was heavily shaped by their experiences with the original SARS, H1N1, Middle East Respiratory Syndrome, Ebola virus, and Zika. Hong Kong, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Singapore — all of those countries’ populations have endured much more severe outbreaks of contagious diseases in recent years. All of those countries’ populations have been conditioned to take any reports, or even rumors, about contagious diseases seriously. Other than H1N1, those previous outbreaks barely affected the United States and its citizens. Our experience told us that viruses in far-off lands almost never become a serious problem in this country.  The Hoover Institution’s Richard Epstein got an enormous amount of grief for writing an essay posted on March 16 about policies for the outbreak, initially estimating that the toll of the coronavirus would be only 500 people, and then revising it upward to 5,000, and then later to 50,000. Epstein called it, “the single largest unforced intellectual error in my entire academic career, when I included numerical estimates about the possible impact of the coronavirus in terms of life and death. Those estimates were obviously ridiculously too low.” Epstein’s numbers were wildly off-base, but his concluding point in that essay wasn’t cuckoo for Cocoa Puffs: The first point is to target interventions where needed, toward high-risk populations, including older people and other people with health conditions that render them more susceptible to disease. But the current organized panic in the United States does not seem justified on the best reading of the data. In dealing with this point, it is critical to note that the rapid decline in the incidence of new cases and death in China suggests that cases in Italy will not continue to rise exponentially over the next several weeks. Moreover, it is unlikely that the healthcare system in the United States will be compromised in the same fashion as the Italian healthcare system in the wake of its quick viral spread. The amount of voluntary and forced separation in the United States has gotten very extensive very quickly, which should influence rates of infection sooner rather than later. All of us, from the president and Fauci to the kids down the street are trying to grapple with the unknown. Just about all of us are going to get something wrong at some point. Here we are, May 15, and we’re still not entirely sure whether children are largely immune to this virus, or whether some portion will develop “multisystem inflammatory syndrome” some months or weeks later. (The current leading theory is that this is some sort of delayed reaction by a child’s immune system after fighting off the virus.) Thankfully, this syndrome appears to be unlikely to kill children. We think we’re less likely to catch the virus outside — it may be much, much less likely. Vitamin D might be a factor — or maybe it’s a more general sense that the vitamin is just good for your immune system in general. We’re not sure how long the antibodies against this virus will stay in human bodies. We’re pretty sure masks help, but we’re not sure how much, or how effectively people will wear them. A prominent virologist thinks he caught the virus through his eyes on a crowded flight because he was wearing a mask and gloves the entire time. It appears humans can spread the virus to dogs, but dogs cannot spread the virus to people. What we know can change. Perhaps our appetite for rubbing someone’s nose in their getting something wrong has created an enormous disincentive for anyone ever admitting they’re wrong — and an inadvertent incentive for stubbornly clinging to an assessment, even in the face of mounting counter-evidence.   Gee, Media World, Why Would Americans Be Divided Right Now? Yesterday, Mike Allen’s newsletter over at Axios lamented, “America’s cultural wars over everything have weakened our ability to respond to this pandemic. We may be our worst enemy . . . An existential threat — such as a war or natural disaster — usually brings people together. Somehow, we’ve let this one drive us apart.” Gee, do you think that deeply divided partisan reaction has anything to do with the fact that so much of the discussion of this virus and the response has been a wildly oversimplified and often flat-out factually wrong “Goofus and Gallant” tale of blue-state and red-state governors? Contrast the media coverage of Phil Murphy opening the Jersey Shore for Memorial Day weekend with that of Florida. Contrast the coverage of Brian Kemp reopening his state of Georgia and Jared Polis reopening his state of Colorado. Think about who’s discussing state policies regarding nursing homes and who isn’t. Yesterday, Politico’s Marc Caputo and Renuka Rayasam acknowledged the obvious: A lot of people in the media want to tell a tale of heroic Andrew Cuomo and dumb Ron DeSantis, and they aren’t going to let a little thing like the data get in the way of that: Florida just doesn’t look nearly as bad as the national news media and sky-is-falling critics have been predicting for about two months now. But then, the national news media is mostly based in New York and loves to love its Democratic governor, Andrew Cuomo, about as much as it loves to hate on Florida’s Republican Gov. Ron DeSantis. First, let’s just come out and say it: DeSantis looks more right than those who criticized the Sunshine State’s coronavirus response. According to the latest Florida figures, fewer than 2,000 have died, and around 43,000 have been infected. That’s a fraction of the dire predictions made for Florida when spring breakers swarmed the beaches… Cuomo also has something else DeSantis doesn’t: a press that defers to him, one that preferred to cover “Florida Morons” at the beach (where it’s relatively hard to get infected) over New Yorkers riding cramped subway cars (where it’s easy to get infected). In fact, people can still ride the subways for most hours of the day in New York, but Miami Beach’s sands remain closed. Maybe things would be different if DeSantis had a brother who worked in cable news and interviewed him for a “sweet moment” in primetime. Speaking of New York and the Worst . . . Remember, in what feels like another era, when New York City mayor Bill de Blasio ran for president? And the vast majority of the country — including Democrats — spent five minutes listening to him and asked, “How the heck did this guy ever get elected to anything?” You can make a strong argument that de Blasio and his team are the single-most destructive group of leaders in the country during this crisis. Yes, Trump blurts out something nutty like his injecting disinfectant comments with metronomic regularity. I would still argue de Blasio is worse, and it’s not just because he spent January, February, and early March telling New Yorkers to continue their usual routines, insisting into March that New Yorkers could not catch the virus from riding the subway. But the head of his public hospital system, Dr. Mitchell Katz, advised the mayor on March 10, there is “no proof that closures will help stop the spread,” according to the New York Times. Fans of “herd immunity” have an ally in Katz, who concluded, “The good thing is greater than 99 percent will recover without harm. Once people recover they will have immunity. The immunity will protect the herd.” But he might not even be the worst figure in the city’s health system. New York City’s health commissioner blew off an urgent NYPD request for 500,000 surgical masks as the coronavirus crisis mounted — telling a high-ranking police official that “I don’t give two rats’ asses about your cops,” The Post has learned. Dr. Oxiris Barbot made the heartless remark during a brief phone conversation in late March with NYPD Chief of Department Terence Monahan, sources familiar with the matter said Wednesday. Monahan asked Barbot for 500,000 masks but she said she could only provide 50,000, the sources said. “I don’t give two rats’ asses about your cops,” Barbot said, according to sources. The NYPD has recorded 5,490 cases of coronavirus among its 55,000 cops and civilian workers, with 41 deaths, according to figures released Wednesday evening. Can we please do away with this reflexive belief among the media that Democratic officeholders and their appointed staff are inherently wise and good and compassionate and smart? Because this far-too-credulous faith in the good judgment of Democratic officeholders — and knee-jerk certainty that Republican officeholders are stupid and malevolent and reckless, and must always be wrong — is probably costing some people their lives. ADDENDUM: A funny, and likely extremely accurate, assessment of what’s going on in higher education from Scott Galloway at New York University’s Stern School of Business: At universities, we’re having constant meetings, and we’ve all adopted this narrative of “This is unprecedented, and we’re in this together,” which is Latin for “We’re not lowering our prices, b*****s.” Universities are still in a period of consensual hallucination with each saying, “We’re going to maintain these prices for what has become, overnight, a dramatically less compelling product offering.” In fact, the coronavirus is forcing people to take a hard look at that $51,000 tuition they’re spending. Even wealthy people just can’t swallow the jagged pill of tuition if it doesn’t involve getting to send their kids away for four years. It’s like, “Wait, my kid’s going to be home most of the year? Staring at a computer screen?” There’s this horrific awakening being delivered via Zoom of just how substandard and overpriced education is at every level. I can’t tell you the number of people who have asked me, “Should my kid consider taking a gap year?”  

Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell on Thursday said his claim that the Obama administration left no plan for a national pandemic was “wrong” and there was in fact a playbook in place for the Trump administration. “I was wrong,” McConnell said during a Fox News interview. “They did leave behind a plan. So I clearly made a mistake in that regard,” the majority leader continued. “As to whether or not the plan was followed and who is the critic and all the rest, I don’t have any observation about that because I don’t know enough about the details of that to comment on it in any detail.”  Earlier this week, McConnell criticized the Obama administration for leaving no “game plan” for a health emergency on this scale. “They claim pandemics only happen once every hundred years but what if that’s no longer true? We want to be early, ready for the next one, because clearly the Obama administration did not leave to this administration any kind of game plan for something like this,” the Kentucky Republican said during an online Trump campaign event where he was interviewed by Lara Trump, the president’s daughter-in-law.  During the event, McConnell also responded to reports that Obama told associates privately that the Trump administration’s response to the health emergency is an “absolute chaotic disaster.” The Kentucky Republican said Obama “should have kept his mouth shut” and called the former president’s criticism of the current administration’s handling of the pandemic “a little bit classless.” Obama officials left the Trump administration the Playbook for Early Response to High-Consequence Emerging Infectious Disease Threats and Biological Incidents, which details questions officials should ask early on if faced with a potential pandemic, such as whether there is sufficient personal protective equipment for healthcare workers. The 69-page National Security Council plan also recommends that officials consider whether to invoke the Defense Production Act and urges a “unified message” from the federal government in such an emergency.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

For his critics, Dr. Anthony Fauci cemented his status as the Rasputin of public health with his Senate testimony Tuesday. The National Institutes of Health official gently, but unmistakably, struck a different tone than President Donald Trump, earning rebukes from radio talk-show hosts and Fox News anchors, as well as fueling the outrage of the #FireFauci claque on Twitter.  Although Fauci’s every utterance is now examined with the same care as pronouncements of the pope, his words weren’t exactly earth-shattering. He said that if there are careless reopenings, “we will start to see little spikes that might turn into outbreaks.” Does anyone doubt that’s a possibility? No serious person would argue that there are no hazards to reopening, only that some level of risk is worth taking to begin to ease the nation’s economic calamity. Fauci is an important voice in this debate, if only one voice. He is neither the dastardly bureaucratic mastermind imposing his will on the country that his detractors on the right make him out to be, or the philosopher-king in waiting that his boosters on the left inflate him into. He’s simply an epidemiologist, one who brings considerable expertise and experience to the table, but at the end of the day his focus is inevitably and rightly quite narrow.  
 This is why it’s a tautology for Fauci’s critics to say that he’s focused on the disease above all else. This is like saying the commerce secretary is too consumed with finding business opportunities for American companies, or the head of the Joint Special Operations Command has an unhealthy obsession with killing terrorists. What else are they supposed to do?  As a breed, epidemiologists tend to focus on the worst case. They don’t want to be wrong and contribute to some deadly pathogen getting loose when their entire job is to keep that from happening. So, they are naturally cautious. This, too, is as it should be. You probably don’t want a risk-taking epidemiologist any more than you want a highly creative, envelope-pushing accountant. For all these reasons, you wouldn’t choose an epidemiologist to run your country, either. And Fauci isn’t.  Trump has remained completely undomesticated in the White House. The idea that he has now, as some of his supporters imply, been seduced, bullied, or otherwise manipulated by a mild-mannered, nearly 80-year-old doctor is bonkers. The reason Trump issued his shutdown guidance was that the prospect of uncontrolled spread of the virus was too risky to contemplate.  Since populist critics of the shutdowns don’t want to criticize Trump, let alone say that they think he blew one of the most consequential decisions of his presidency, they focus their ire on the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases instead. In the attention-getting exchange between Rand Paul and Anthony Fauci at the Senate hearing, both were right. Senator Paul is obviously correct that we shouldn’t elevate one person as the authority to whom everyone submits, and Fauci was right that he’s a scientist who doesn’t even try to give advice on matters outside his ambit. Part of the Right’s hostility to Fauci is an understandable reaction to progressives putting him on a pedestal. His views should be taken seriously, but they can’t be determinative. The coronavirus crisis is a radically different phenomenon from, say, the Ebola outbreak because it implicates our entire society. What relative weight to give to the economy and public health — among many other weighty public-policy questions — is way above Fauci’s pay grade.  This is what we elect presidents, governors, and mayors to decide. It’s their responsibility to balance the competing considerations, and if they are found wanting, they lose their jobs. Anyone in this position obviously wants to hear from experts, though. Which is why if Trump really did fire Fauci, some other meddlesome epidemiologist would emerge soon enough. If Fauci didn’t exist, we’d have to invent him. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he Republican political power of the state of Texas has deployed itself in the cause of protecting from legal sanction a hairdresser who repeatedly and willfully violated the law, in this case a Dallas County order that had required businesses such as hers to suspend operations as part of the social-distancing regime.  Salon owner Shelly Luther refused to comply and was given a seven-day sentence for her violations. Senator Ted Cruz called the sentence “nuts.” Governor Greg Abbott called the sentence “excessive,” and Attorney General Ken Paxton, denouncing the move as “outrageous,” demanded Luther’s immediate release — an extraordinary thing for a state’s chief law-enforcement officer to do in the case of an offender who is guilty, prima facie, on the charge, in this case contempt of court. Talk radio and cable news made the case a cause célèbre. In Owosso, Mich., members of the self-style Michigan Home Guard militia staged an armed protest on behalf of a local barber reopening in defiance of the law. In Texas, bars and tattoo parlors witnessed similar scenes, with the familiar props: the Gadsden and Gonzales flags, red MAGA hats, black guns. Polite coastal progressives, among them the headline writers of the Washington Post, are scandalized and repulsed. That isn’t a question of public safety (the District of Columbia’s murder rate is four times that of Texas) but a matter of aesthetics, in much the same way that the corporate response of well-scrubbed progressives to the Tea Party protests was “Eww, gross.” But the Tea Party gang was a law-abiding bunch. Rhetorical flourishes from constitutional street scholars notwithstanding, the armed protests in Texas and Michigan and elsewhere are being organized on behalf of people who are breaking the law — not ordinary protest but civil disobedience.  Civil disobedience is a necessary item in the libertarian toolkit, but a dangerous one. The problem, as I wrote in the matter of Cliven Bundy, is “the fact that every Timothy McVeigh thinks himself a Paul Revere.” The theory of the American militia movement is that organized but decentralized groups of armed citizens are desirable in cases in which local social order breaks down and, in extremis, as a check on tyranny. Progressives scoff at that notion on tactical grounds — they simultaneously denounce the scary black guns as “weapons of war” and insist that those guns are insignificant as weapons of war — but the question isn’t who’d come out on top in a pitched battle between the Michigan Home Guards and the Green Berets. The question instead is that of the citizen’s relationship to the state. Progressives see the state as a magisterial and tutelary power over and above the citizenry — as individuals, businesses, churches, etc. — while the American order is founded on the assumption that the state is the instrument of the people. A conflict between a British king and an army led by a Virginia farmer implanted very deeply into our political culture the belief that the right to keep and bear arms is the difference between a citizen and a subject.  
 And for that reason, the American tradition of civil disobedience is not remarkable for its nonviolence. For every Henry David Thoreau or Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. we have a Patrick Henry, standing up in the general assembly and calling for the murder of the king, or a John Brown organizing a massacre in Kansas. The American self-conception is right there on the Virginia state seal, among other places: Virtue treading on Tyranny, Brutus over the bloody corpse of Julius Caesar. You may think of that as delusional, and you may be correct, but if it is a delusion, it is a delusion that is central to the American political character.  But we are greedy, and we are childish. We want to enjoy the pleasures and benefits of civil disobedience without paying the accompanying price for them. King George would have been doing his duty to hang George Washington et al. We hanged John Brown. Henry David Thoreau spent time in jail for his antiwar activism, as did the Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. in the cause of civil rights. Thoreau did his time happily. “Under a government which imprisons any unjustly,” he wrote, “the true place for a just man is also a prison.” That is part of the deal, too. If we were to take leave of our senses and take seriously the proposition that Dallas County’s coronavirus order is tyranny in the sense the Founding Fathers had in mind, then surely seven days’ imprisonment would be only a modest price to pay for opposing that tyranny. By way of comparison: Sister Megan Rice, 84 years old at the time of her sentencing, served two years in a federal penitentiary for her lawbreaking anti-nuclear protests, and she might easily have spent the rest of her life there had not her conviction been overturned.    Set aside the usual snobbery from our progressive friends, who take it as an article of faith that right-ish protest is categorically unacceptable. (Remember not only the tea parties, and the dishonest accounts of them, but the so-called Brooks Brothers Riot and other incidents of that kind.) Consider instead the perversity of having a state’s chief law-enforcement officer extend himself so far in the cause of programmatic law-breaking: If that is not the politicization of the attorney general’s office, then what is? And such politicization should be resisted, reversed where possible, and punished where necessary. The protests against coronavirus orders may resonate culturally on the right, but the attorney general’s job is not to be the Right’s cultural champion in Texas, any more than it is to be the Left’s cultural champion in New York. Shelly Luther’s part is to break the law. The part of law enforcement is to enforce the law. There is a time for willful lawbreaking. But if you are going to open up that can, you’d better be prepared to eat it all. 

If you judged by social media, you’d think that America in the coronavirus crisis had a pro-lockdown faction led by Dr. Anthony Fauci and a “let it rip” faction led by a handful of red-state governors and professional conservative saber-rattlers. This may be a useful narrative for people whose jobs thrive on controversy, myself included. It may even be helpful for organizing our thoughts on the virus. But mostly, it just isn’t true.  What is true is that people will feel themselves instinctively sympathetic to one message or another ringing out from these online camps, whether it’s, “I’m done with this” or, “The health of my spouse is more important than your haircut” or simply, “This is unsustainable.” The public polling seems to show that a significant minority thinks our pandemic-control measures have gone too far, even as a significant majority supports continued efforts at social distancing. Capable public leadership and institutions can, through heroic effort, more or less harmonize those instincts. In East Asian countries, a public conditioned by the 2003 SARS outbreak met a proactive public-health response, allowing cities such as Seoul and Singapore to get to back to something resembling normal more quickly than their European and American counterparts. (The plight of Singapore’s foreign workers does slightly complicate this narrative, to be fair.) The worse or more laggardly the response, the more that “the economy” and “public health” seem like irreconcilable goals rather than two parts of the same puzzle. Supposedly, Americans hate the experts. But overwhelmingly the American people have complied with their advice to socially distance, so much so that the curve has flattened into a plateau and is now starting to slope downward. In fact, in some ways, Americans were ahead of or anticipated the advice of officialdom. Perhaps one-fifth of the country has helped accomplish this by taking enormous leaps into the unknown, unsure whether life would be the same once the crisis began to pass. In an age when some conservatives have asked if their countrymen were capable of recognizing the common good, the coronavirus has provided enormous proof that our countrymen are willing to sacrifice for it.  Americans have also suffered tremendous personal losses. The ersatz expansion of our personal networks through social media means that almost everyone is acquainted with at least one of the over 85,000 people whose deaths have been attributed to COVID-19 in the United States, or at least knows someone else who is grieving.  
 All that sacrifice and suffering can make publicly debating the issues surrounding the pandemic and our response to it incredibly difficult. Someone venting an uncontrolled anger at masks may be hurting for a relative whose economic situation just became a lot more precarious, or for a loved one who just died. Someone shouting “grandma killer” at a conscientious person who nonetheless voices skepticism of or dissents from shut-in orders may be feeling real, coronavirus-related pain.  So, at the risk of sounding like a total drip, let me just say: People, try to be generous to one another. There is a good reason to hesitate to judge, namely our ignorance. Plagues are a time for scapegoats and blame-shifting precisely because they deal out suffering such a seemingly unjust and random fashion. Our leaders say they will follow the science, but they can’t, really. With a heretofore-unseen virus such as this one, the science is more like inherited wisdom and intuition from previous, similar maladies, at least at the start. What follows is a confused rush to catch up through trial and error. The results are not always pretty, or immediately useful. And although those who stay with their own carefully constructed echo chambers might think otherwise, where COVID-19 is concerned the evidence has not come down decisively on one side or the other of the false lockdown/let-’er-rip dichotomy. The fiercest skeptics have had to make embarrassing revisions to their models. Richard Epstein predicted 500 U.S. COVID-19 deaths, then revised upwards logarithmically. Skeptics had to put a lot of faith into a Stanford study on the prevalence of COVID-19 antibodies that indicated a much-wider and much-less deadly spread of the disease. This study has mostly fallen apart, and other sero-prevalence studies have indicated that in fact, most of us haven’t contracted the virus. They also touted the Swedish “herd immunity” approach, but on examination, social behavior there does not look so different from in other European countries, even if the official recommendations are looser.   On the other side of the ledger, the worst doomsaying predictions of millions of deaths have been memory-holed. The most dire epidemiological models, like the infamous Imperial College study, have danced around like a loose firehose as the store of actual data about social behavior in the crisis grew. Pandemic hawks who predicted major breakouts from spring breakers, from Florida beaches, or from Georgia’s re-opening before its number of cases declined all turned out to be wrong, not just on the scale of the outbreak but on the direction.  At the beginning of this crisis, I wrote that plagues have a tendency to tyrannize people with fear, or inspire a certain kind of heedlessness. Those extravagant reactions remain a danger. But I think if you polled the American people on their actual behavior in this crisis, you would not find two neat camps of “shut ins” and “exiteers.” Instead, you would probably find a rough and messy consensus of people trying to navigate the contrary impulses in their own hearts, the ones that incline them toward caution or even paranoia and the ones that urge them to be courageous or even defiant.  There are fewer neat divisions among public figures as well.  Dr. Fauci advised on a well-conceived plan for opening up. Some of the most vociferous dissenters against lockdown, such as the British journalist Peter Hitchens, are nonetheless conscientious about wearing a face covering and keeping distance in public. Among my own friends and family, plans for extensive plane travel have been put off indefinitely. Masks are worn in public places, but not on walks around the neighborhood, where socialization happens halfway across the street. At the same time, summer-vacation plans that are more local remain on. We hear the deposits are still coming in at normal rates for rentals in our usual Jersey beach town. And the beaches are opening up for the season (with restrictions).  We are all muddling through, trying to live the best we can while this threat is out there. We are tempted to take out the frustration, anxiety, and anger these months have generated on each other. But what most of us need now is the mercy of basic kindness. 

Authors’ Note: On May 6, the Washington Post published an op-ed by Cui Tiankai, Chinese ambassador to the United States. The article contained a series of factual misrepresentations and omissions, while painting a picture of Communist China as a victim of slander by those who “always blame” the regime for the spread of COVID-19. Cui Tiankai claimed such unfair accusations were a “burden” on China and were “undercutting” the international struggle against the virus. The op-ed is an element in China’s global PR and disinformation offensive aimed at obfuscating the truth about the regime’s willfully bungled handling of the pandemic. In response, we would thus like to present this public letter to Ambassador Cui Tiankai. *   *   *  Your Excellency:  Your article was entitled, “Ignoring the facts to blame China will only make things worse.” While you cited several facts about the origin of COVID-19 and your government’s response, a number of additional facts that can best be provided by Chinese authorities are needed as governments and societies around the world struggle to deal with the virus. We would thus like to ask for your clarification on a series of key factual problems. We seek these answers not to “blame China,” but to establish what really happened in China, and what that can teach us about responding to the coronavirus pandemic. The American and international public will be deeply grateful for these clarifications. Your Excellency, we agree: Facts must not be ignored, or obfuscated with propaganda. Global public health depends on respect for truth. We all share the urgent need to bring COVID-19 under control. Honest dialogue with civil society and international cooperation based on scientific integrity and transparency are of paramount importance at this critical time. Thank you in advance for your attention to our questions.  Jianli Yang is the founder and president of Citizen Power Initiatives for China. Aaron Rhodes is the human-rights editor of Dissident magazine and the president of the Forum for Religious Freedom Europe. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				hile several federal courts have recently issued decisions addressing the constitutionality of various stay-at-home orders, few state courts have done so. That changed late yesterday, when the Supreme Court of Wisconsin issued its much-anticipated decision in the state legislature’s challenge to Democratic governor Tony Evers’s “safer-at-home” emergency order, issued by his designee for secretary of the Department of Health Services (“DHS”), Andrea Palm. Every Wisconsinite has suddenly become interested in administrative law and the workings of the high court. It is a beautiful thing. The decision found the order immediately unenforceable. The governor responded by arguing that the Republican legislature now owns the “chaos.” In fact, what will likely follow is an orderly emergency rule-making process whereby DHS and the legislature will be forced to work in concert to establish legal guidelines for managing the reopening process. As with many Supreme Court decisions, while the concurrences and dissents contain the rhetorical mortar fire, the majority opinion, which garnered four out of seven votes, contained eight key takeaways. No. 1. The case was really about separation of powers. In a state that has experienced a partisan divide like almost none other over the last decade, the impact of divided government following Governor Scott Walker’s 2018 loss continues to reverberate. Many would argue that the court’s renewed focus on clearly establishing constitutional lines of responsibility between the executive and the legislative branches is a much-needed development. This decision should be viewed alongside the 2018 Tetra Tech decision, which did away with automatic agency deference, as a reestablishment of the proper constitutional order: The crux of the Legislature’s claims is that Emergency Order 28 was promulgated without following required statutory procedures applicable to an emergency, and in so doing, Palm impinged upon the Legislature’s constitutional core power and its functions under Wis. Stat. §§ 227.24 and 227.26. The Legislature’s claim is grounded in the concept of separation of powers that is inherent in the Wisconsin Constitution. No. 2. Was Executive Order 28, the stay-at-home order, a rule or an order? The court found emphatically that the “order” was in fact a rule and therefore it should have gone through the rulemaking process, or at least the emergency rulemaking process. Emergency rulemaking expedites the normal notice and comment requirements under the state version of the Administrative Procedure Act. Lest one think the definition of “rule” is too onerous, there are 72 different exemptions under Wisconsin law for various actions that do not require rulemaking. We conclude that Order 28 is a “general order of general application.” . . .  If we were to read the definition of “Rule” as Palm suggests, one person, Palm, an unelected official, could create law applicable to all people during the course of COVID-19 and subject people to imprisonment when they disobeyed her order. No. 3. The Court employed the “constitutional doubt” principle — it disfavored statutory interpretations that unnecessarily raise serious constitutional questions about the statute under review. In other words, the court attempted to avoid jumping to the most extreme framing of the issue to avoid a complete gutting of the statute in question. We do not construe § 252.02(6) as an “open-ended grant” of police powers to an unconfirmed cabinet secretary. The people consent to the Legislature making laws because they have faith that the procedural hurdles required to pass legislation limit the ability of the Legislature to infringe on their rights. No. 4. The court made clear that, while the legislature may delegate authority to agencies, it may do so only if there are “adequate standards for conducting the allocated power.” Again, this decision continues a clear trend, both in Wisconsin and elsewhere throughout the country, of courts’ reasserting the prerogatives of both the judiciary to review the legality and constitutionality of administrative actions and the legislature to employ robust tools for reining in administrative agencies that have flexed too much policy-making muscle. Palm cannot point to any procedural safeguards on the power she claims. At oral argument, she continuously referenced judicial review; but judicial review takes place after an allegation is made that an individual’s rights have been violated. . . . Rulemaking provides the ascertainable standards that hinder arbitrary or oppressive conduct by an agency. Judicial review does not prevent oppressive conduct from initially occurring. No. 5. It should come as no surprise that the images of law enforcement issuing warnings, and in some cases citations, to business owners trying to survive and to mothers allowing children to play with friends shocked many Wisconsinites. And the court seemed to agree by specifically finding that the issuance of criminal penalties can attach only to rules, and that therefore DHS was in error for attaching criminal penalties to an order that bypassed the administrative rulemaking process. It has long been the law in Wisconsin that in order for the violation of an administrative agency’s directive to constitute a crime, the directive must have been properly promulgated as a rule. Palm asserts that Order 28 is not a rule, yet she also asserts Wis. Stat. § 252.25 endows her with the power to create criminal penalties for violations of Order 28. No. 6. While not necessarily serving as a key basis for the decision, the court drew a distinction between emergencies requiring immediate response and pandemics, which can last for months. Those trying to spin the decision as having gutted the governor’s ability to directly address emergencies misread the outcome. If a forest fire breaks out, there is no time for debate. Action is needed. The Governor could declare an emergency and respond accordingly. But in the case of a pandemic, which lasts month after month, the Governor cannot rely on emergency powers indefinitely. No. 7. While the Court focused intently on the nature of the order, finding that it was in fact a rule, it did not ignore the DHS arguments that the authority provided it under Chapter 252 was broad and, some would argue, nearly limitless. This struck many observers as not possible. Remember, the governor’s original executive order, declaring the public-health emergency and directing DHS to act as the lead agency for managing the pandemic, was not at issue in the case. Under Chapter 323, such orders expire after 60 days unless extended by joint resolution of the legislature. Because the legislature did not pass, or even consider, such a joint resolution, the governor’s executive order expired in the second week of May. So how much authority does an unelected and unconfirmed DHS secretary have under Chapter 252? Is it constitutional for an unelected and unconfirmed secretary to essentially have limitless authority, with no legislative oversight, while the popularly elected governor can only issue an order that runs for 60 days? It turns out the DHS secretary does not possess as much authority as she thinks. If Wis. Stat. § 252.02(6) were the sole factual foundation for criminal charges, no criminal prosecution could result because § 252.02(6) does not have the specificity required for fair notice of the conduct required or prohibited. . . . Order 28 goes far beyond what is authorized in Wis. Stat. § 252.02(4). For example, Order 28 exceeds the § 252.02(4) authority to quarantine those infected or suspected of being infected. Instead, Palm quarantines “[a]ll individuals. . . .” Furthermore, nothing in § 252.02(4) permits Palm to close “All for-profit and non-profit businesses with a facility in Wisconsin, except [those Palm defies as essential businesses and operations].” No. 8. Act 21 still matters. Similar to decisions such as Tetra Tech, the 2011 landmark legislation reset the relationship between state agencies and the legislature. Gone are the days of implied authority. Instead, Wisconsin agencies must reference specific statutory or administrative authority (that survived the rigors of notice and comment requirements) when taking regulatory action. The court made clear that DHS’s reliance on the broad authority granted under Chapter 252 was simply too imprecise. Therefore, under 2011 Wis. Act 21, the Legislature significantly altered our administrative law jurisprudence by imposing an “explicit authority requirement” on our interpretations of agency powers. . . . The explicit authority requirement is, in effect, a legislatively-imposed canon of construction that requires us to narrowly construe imprecise delegations of power to administrative agencies. While not a takeaway, one final observation is worth considering. With Justice Dan Kelly’s spring election loss (a loss largely attributable to the wave of Biden/Sanders presidential-primary voters), it was assumed that the court’s conservative ideological majority bloc would be reduced from five justices to four come August. However, with conservative Justice Brian Hagedorn dissenting, some now wonder if the presumed 4–3 conservative majority is really a 3–3 split with Justice Hagedorn as the swing vote. Justice Hagedorn is a principled and thoughtful jurist. Time will tell if he remains a consistent vote with the conservative majority.   
 While DHS and the legislature work through the emergency rule-making process, much of the burden of providing clarity will likely fall on local units of government. Many will likely adopt a reasonable and balanced approach. But more important, as the dust settles following issuance of the order, it’s important that Wisconsinites continue to remain engaged. As we have all learned over the last two months, the three branches of government possess immense authority to regulate our daily lives. It is a somber responsibility that requires an engaged and constantly skeptical citizenry.  Put another way, as Justice Kelly observed in Tetra Tech (a decision that would seem to carry even more weight following yesterday’s decision), “We must be assiduous in patrolling the borders between the branches. This is not just a practical matter of efficient and effective government. We maintain this separation because it provides structural protection against depredations on our liberties. The Framers of the United States Constitution understood that ‘[t]he accumulation of all powers legislative, executive and judiciary in the same hands, whether of one, a few or many, . . . may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny.’” 

Rick Bright, the ousted Health and Human Services official who testified Thursday to Congress that the Trump administration was not prepared for the coronavirus pandemic, told lawmakers that the country still does not have enough coronavirus tests. Bright was asked by Representative Debbie Dingell to weigh in on the administration’s claim that anyone who wants to can get tested for the coronavirus.  “The administration said anybody who wants a test will get a test. Was that true then?” the Michigan Democrat asked Bright during Thursday’s House Energy and Commerce subcommittee hearing. “There still are not enough tests,” Bright responded. “So even this week as we’re being told anybody who wants a test can have a test, is that true in the United States of America?” Dingell pressed.  “No,” Bright responded flatly. Bright claimed he was fired from his roles as deputy assistant secretary for preparedness and response at HHS and director of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority after he criticized “efforts to fund potentially dangerous drugs promoted by those with political connections.” According to Bright, he was subsequently “involuntarily transferred to a more limited and less impactful position at the National Institutes of Health.” Bright also warned during the hearing that the nation could see “the darkest winter in modern history” without a better response to the pandemic than the actions already taken by the administration, which he said lacks a “standard, centralized, coordinated plan.”  The administration’s early attempts at widespread testing were plagued by logistical difficulties as medical testing companies admitted they became overwhelmed with a backlog of tests to analyze, forcing patients and doctors to wait to obtain a test. Early rounds of test kits distributed by the CDC were defective, causing further delays in testing capacity that continued until the virus was already widespread around the country. Trump dismissed Bright’s testimony, saying he “looks like an angry disgruntled employee who, frankly, according to some people, didn’t do a very good job.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Illinois governor, Democrat J. B. Pritzker, remains adamant that he will not begin to lift the lockdown he has imposed in his state or consider a phased reopening that loosens restrictions in less-affected areas. Several mayors and sheriffs in suburban and rural parts of the state have suggested that will begin easing local regulations and cease enforcing the stay-at-home order, as the number of cases of COVID-19 in their counties are far less severe than in urban areas of Illinois.  But yesterday, Pritzker warned that he will crack down on any business or local area that attempts to stray from his order before he allows it. “Businesses and individual professionals that are licensed by state agencies can be held accountable for defying public health orders,” he said. “Counties that try to reopen in defiance will not be reimbursed by FEMA for damage they cause themselves. Local law enforcement and the Illinois State Police can and will take action.” Meanwhile, in Waukegan, Ill., less than an hour north of the heart of Chicago, Planned Parenthood has just opened a brand-new abortion clinic, one of about 20 in the state. According to Illinois Right to Life, Planned Parenthood used shell-company names on its license applications so no one would be aware that an abortion clinic was opening in the area until it had been approved.  Despite the strict shutdown in Illinois, Pritzker’s stay-at-home order stipulated that “reproductive health care providers” were essential and should remain open. “Governor Pritzker reminds us every day in his press conferences that we are being confined to our homes so as to protect human life, yet a brand-new abortion clinic has been allowed to open,” Mary Kate Knorr, executive director of Illinois Right to Life, said in a statement. “Churches, schools, and businesses are closed but the nation’s largest killer of the unborn is expanding.”  

New Jersey governor Phil Murphy said all beaches in his state will be open effective Friday, May 22. I believe that is the cue for everyone who criticized Florida and Georgia to declare that “two and three weeks from now, the [New Jersey] death toll is blood on his hands. And as [New Jersey residents] move around the country, they’ll spread more death and economic destruction . . .”  I mean, besides the blood on Murphy’s hands from the New Jersey state policy that barred nursing and long-term care homes from turning down a new medically stable admission just because the patient has a confirmed case of COVID-19, despite warnings from nursing-home managers that this put the residents at considerable risk. I mean . . . it’s not like people could be basing their assessments of a reopening decision simply based upon whether the governor is a Republican or a Democrat, right?  

I wrote about the debate over Anthony Fauci for Politico today: Fauci is an important voice in this debate, if only one voice. He is neither the dastardly bureaucratic mastermind imposing his will on the country that his detractors on the right make him out to be nor the philosopher-king in waiting that his boosters on the left inflate him into. He’s simply an epidemiologist, one who brings considerable expertise and experience to the table, but at the end of the day, his focus is inevitably and rightly quite narrow. This is why it’s a tautology for Fauci’s critics to say that he’s focused on the disease above all other considerations. This is like saying the Commerce secretary is too consumed with finding business opportunities for American companies or the head of the Joint Special Operations Command has an unhealthy obsession with killing terrorists. What else are they supposed to do? 

A lot has been written about the  failure of the CDC during this crisis. For instance, Eric Boehm at Reason writes: The nonsensical war on vaping may have tarnished the CDC’s credibility on the eve of a crisis that would require the public to trust policymakers. And when the coronavirus did hit, the CDC only confirmed that it should not be trusted to make important decisions by forbidding private labs from developing tests for COVID-19. The federal agency’s monopoly on testing supplies produced inaccurate tests that had to be discarded en masse. The initial testing delay has certainly cost lives. It is also at least partially to blame for the severe quarantine policies that have tipped the American economy into a deep recession — without adequate testing, there was little else for policymakers to do except close the country in the hopes of slowing the disease’s spread. Between the COVID-19 test fiasco, the often-changed messages about the virus and mask-wearing, and the flop of the CDC’s initiative to create an early-warning system in selected cities, the first order of business once this is over should be to do a full audit followed by serious reforms of an agency that we shouldn’t be trusting blindly. Guiding those reforms should be the realization that the agency’s failure to perform its core public-health mission of infectious diseases and epidemics is in part due to a severe mission creep and other fashionable distractions. Michelle Minton of the Competitive Enterprise Institute has a new study on this. In her conclusion, she writes: Since 2014, the CDC has continued to dedicate time, energy, and funding toward issues that, while perhaps important, fall outside of its reason for existence. As a result, the CDC has devolved into an agency incapable of adequately addressing the serious threat posed by infectious disease, particularly novel diseases for which there is little information about risk, spread, and treatment. Chris Edwards has a great piece on this issue too for Cato at Liberty: Some pundits claim that budget cuts were the problem, but the table below suggests otherwise. The CDC workforce increased 12 percent between 2010 and 2019, based on data in CDC budget submissions here and here. The largest employment increase was in “Global Health,” a group that monitors foreign outbreaks of infectious disease. The group’s employment jumped from 272 in 2010 to 1,263 in 2019. The CDC says the group “supports global efforts to detect epidemic threats earlier, respond more effectively, and prevent avoidable catastrophes.” The agency should have been ready. . . . CDC leaders may have been distracted because of mission‐​sprawl. The CDC’s 512‐​page budget submission for 2021 reveals a vast and disparate array of activities. What are occupational safety and injury prevention doing in the government’s infectious disease agency?  The CDC highlights its recent accomplishments on pages 18 to 23. How is CDC Director Redfield supposed to remain alert to emerging epidemics when he is also supposed to manage programs on tiny teeth, colon cancer, opioids, child abuse, diabetes, workers’ compensation, lead‐​based paints, mold in buildings, and lifting heavy objects on construction sites? Unfortunately, instead of doing the hard work of cutting out programs that have nothing to do with contagious epidemics, Congress is likely to simply throw more money at the agency. The end result will be that the CDC’s attention will continue to be divided, and it will likely fail again the next time around. 

First: I missed it last week when it came out, but here is a study combining a lot of previous work from around the world. It estimates that the fatality rate (specifically, the infection fatality rate) is about 0.75 percent, or in a range between 0.5 and 1 percent. As the authors note, these are pretty high numbers for any country seeking to pursue a “herd immunity” strategy, which could require more than half of the population to be infected. In the U.S., we could be talking a million or more deaths. They also note, however, that different places seem to have very different fatality rates, though there aren’t enough data to create country-by-country estimates.  Second: Indiana is randomly selecting residents and giving them tests. (Why aren’t more states?) As the New York Times notes, “we now know that it’s likely that about 2.8 percent of Hoosiers have so far been infected with this virus. It also means that the fatality rate in Indiana is about 0.6 percent.” Third: Preliminary results from hard-hit Spain suggest that 5 percent of the population has had it, and that the fatality rate is around 1.2 percent there. Update: Make that four. A modeling study out of France (which is consonant with the limited testing data they have) finds that “3.6% of infected individuals are hospitalized and 0.7% die,” and that 2.8 million people, or 4.4 percent of the population, have been infected. It adds that “the lockdown reduced the reproductive number from 2.90 to 0.67 (77% reduction).” 

The United States was born amid an epidemic. As our Founding generation struggled to free themselves from tyranny, they faced a foe even deadlier than the king’s troops: a virus. America’s triumph over that unseen enemy can serve as a blueprint for our current battle. Smallpox swept the United States during the Revolutionary War. The most dreaded illness of the era, smallpox was an incredibly contagious virus that caused a high fever and rashes, killing 17 percent of those infected. Like COVID-19, the virus was readily spread person-to-person by inhalation, with the infected showing symptoms within 14 days of exposure.  Much like today, the virus not only sickened the civilian population but also ravaged the U.S. servicemen, leaving them vulnerable to enemy attack. During the Battle of New York City in 1776, the smallpox epidemic grew so dire that Commander-in-Chief George Washington described it as more dangerous than “the Sword of the Enemy.” And he was correct — for every soldier killed in battle, an estimated ten others died from disease. Also like today, there were concerns that adversaries might use disease against us. The British intentionally sent infected prisoners back to American communities to spread the scourge. In fact, one British officer recommended, “Dip arrows in matter of smallpox and twang them at the American rebels.” (Guns and bullets were almost universal at this point; this measure was intended specifically to injure and infect.) Whether actively spreading the virus or merely taking advantage of its natural spread, Washington’s enemies sought to leverage America’s weakened state. Despite being centuries of technological advancement behind us, our first commander-in-chief’s approach to the epidemic parallels today’s: Washington first moved to seal off his troops from foreign entrants, then he checked for symptoms within his camp and quarantined anyone suspected of being infected.   In the end, however, the quarantines proved difficult to enforce and ultimately unable to stop the spread, so inoculation emerged as the only real solution. But Washington faced fierce opposition. Inoculation was a grotesque procedure that involved first scratching the patient’s arm and inserting pus from a smallpox victim into the healthy person’s wound. This would cause the patient to contract a case far milder than if he were to inhale the virus or otherwise catch it more naturally. But he would enjoy lasting immunity. 
 While this inoculation procedure had been used in India for thousands of years, it was relatively new to the West. Many feared it would just spread the severe version of the disease. New York’s legislature forbade inoculation and even jailed a doctor caught treating Washington’s troops. But Washington followed the science: He had witnessed the successes other communities enjoyed with inoculation and asserted his authority as commander-in-chief to push for the procedure with his troops. This move was unprecedented: The American army became the first in history to employ wholesale smallpox inoculation.  Washington’s most important order during the war was not military, it was medical. But after his success in saving his troops, Washington never forced civilians to inoculate; he instead led them by example. He and the Founders believed in permitting individuals to prudently exercise their liberties, operating in their best interests while also collaborating with one another to protect their neighbors.  Like today, the epidemic fomented discord over the nation’s response. While politicians argued, different states advocated varying approaches. Sparsely populated rural Virginia faced different circumstances from the city centers of New York or Boston. And each reacted accordingly to balance health risks with longer-term consequences for liberties and livelihoods. Laws were local. Massachusetts required the head of each household to report any infections and raise a red flag outside their doors. North Carolina built “pesthouses” to isolate the infected in remote areas. Hard-hit South Carolina even put houses of the infected under armed guard. New Hampshire checked all visitors arriving from Boston.  In the end, our disharmony was also our strength: Rather than a single, top-down approach to the crisis, different communities employed diverse tactics tailored to their area’s specific needs. As with Washington’s inoculation saga, they learned from one another’s setbacks and successes as though in a living laboratory. And the American experiment triumphed. Rather than broad, government-imposed shutdowns, the Founding generation relied on individuals’ coming together in the manner that made sense locally. Port cities made incoming ships quarantine. The sick closed their shops. Children and elderly were separated from the less vulnerable. But just as market forces drove people away from typically crowded fish markets, printers kept operating, blacksmiths kept working, farmers kept to their fields, and so on according to particular circumstances. The Founding generation did not see it as the government’s role to meddle in healthy people’s businesses and communities, nor did they trust their politicians to make the correct call. The Founders valiantly fought against the overreaches of the British Crown. And they were eager not to trade in their hard-won freedoms for another overbearing government. Instead, they established a great American experiment of self-government that respected the individual.   Of course, things are different today, from technology to ease of travel to the expansion of government assistance. And no one is advocating that we simply replicate the medical directives of the 18th century. But the analogies to our Founding period are instructive, and the overarching questions of economic and political freedoms remain. Times change. But Americans’ fundamental rights need not. As Washington put it, we must “continue the utmost Vigilance against this most dangerous enemy.” That means responding to this latest crisis while guarding those liberties that our Founders fought to establish. 

An aptitude for solitude, I have come to believe, is one of the grand gifts. Not to fear solitude but to look forward to it, to enjoy it, is unavailable to the extroverted and the gregarious. As a boy, I qualified as both extroverted and gregarious. I yearned for company and had no trouble finding it on playgrounds, athletic fields, among a wide variety of friends. In those days the good life for me was the socially crowded life, filled with sports, dances, card games, just hanging out. I should like to be able to report how in those days I dealt with solitude, which I would then doubtless have characterized as loneliness, but, apart from the occasional illness, I don’t recall ever having to deal with it at all. Solitude and I were unacquainted.  All this changed when, sometime during my college years, I determined, fit for nothing else, to become a writer. I spent one quarter at the University of Chicago staying up all night, and, after classes, sleeping days. I was of course up alone, reading, thinking, dreaming up stories, letting my mind wander (the mind, the rabbis tell us, is a great wanderer). This was solitude in pure form, and I enjoyed it immensely. Easily the longest stretch of solitude I have known came during my second year as an enlisted man in the U.S. Army. I spent that year, 1960, as a clerk-typist at a recruiting station in Little Rock, Ark. There being no Army post near Little Rock, I lived, alone, in a studio apartment backing onto the governor’s mansion. In that apartment I had no television set, no radio, no telephone. Apart from a refrigerator, stove, bath, and toilet, my only appliance was a portable Olivetti typewriter. Five days a week I was by myself from 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. Weekends I was entirely alone. So much time did I have on my own that I bought a basketball, and would occasionally dribble it a few blocks away to shoot baskets by myself at a nearby schoolyard. I read a great deal, I wrote and published my first magazine article, I ate lots of Campbell’s soup. Today I think of these months as idyllic.  I set all this down to establish not only that I am no stranger to solitude but that I may even be said to have, more than an aptitude, a distinct taste for it.  A distinction needs to be made between solitude and loneliness. Solitude, though it implies aloneness, is of course much the preferable of the two. One chooses solitude, one is afflicted by loneliness. The American Heritage Dictionary definition of the two words suggests their radical difference. The definition of solitude is “the state or situation of being alone: she savored her freedom and solitude.” Loneliness, on the other hand, is defined as “sadness because one has no friends or company: feelings of depression and loneliness.” Solitude, note, suggests freedom; loneliness, depression.  One of the subsidiary pleasures of reading is that it is done in solitude. Reading gets you away from others, leaving you to the luxury of your own thoughts and those, if you select your reading with care, of someone likely to be more intelligent than you. Proust notes that books have over friends that you can call upon them only when you wish and dismiss them at your discretion. Proust also felt that reading could be an aid to solitude, especially to the indolent mind that is unable to think in solitude but requires rubbing up against, through the stimulus of reading, a finer mind than itself. I suspect Proust thought his own was a mind of this kind. I am certain mine is. For some solitude is so essential that they make it part of their daily ritual. Hannah Arendt, the political philosopher, used to set aside an hour or so every afternoon to repose on the couch of her Manhattan apartment and there do nothing but think in solitude. About what? One assumes about philosophical and political subjects, about the state of the world, about her own writing. I attempted this myself, but without success, once actually nodding off to dream about Chinese food. I apparently do best to take my solitude where I find it and not attempt, like Miss Arendt, to organize it. Literature and literary life are filled with examples and scenes of solitude. Henry David Thoreau tells us that he took up residence at Walden Pond seeking the profound connection with life that only solitude allows, though it has been revealed that Thoreau, who often needed the stimulant of company, may have written a better game than he lived. Emerson, in his essay “Self-Reliance,” noted that “it is easy in solitude to live after our own” opinion, “but the great man is he who in the midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of solitude.” Herman Melville’s character Bartleby the scrivener would seem to have solitude thrust upon him by his very nature. Perhaps the most profound scene in Henry James’s Portrait of a Lady has Isabel Archer, in solitude, understanding the grievous error she has made in marrying Gilbert Osmond and coming to realize why she must nonetheless remain in that marriage. Of course all the soliloquies in Shakespeare are delivered in solitude; in its stem the word “soliloquy” suggests solitude. Nearly all lyric poetry appears to be the result of thought created in solitude, though one of the few poems I know that are directly on the subject of solitude is Emily Dickinson’s poem #1695: There is a solitude of space
A solitude of sea
A solitude of death, but these
Society shall be
Compared with that profounder site
That polar privacy
A soul admitted to itself —
Finite Infinity. Two popular songs that touch on the subject of solitude are Gilbert O’Sullivan’s “Alone Again (Naturally)” and Duke Ellington’s “In My Solitude,” the latter sung by Billie Holiday, Ella Fitzgerald, Sarah Vaughan, and others, and one of the great torch songs of all time. Solitude has long been an element of religion. The author of the Bhagavad Gita instructs adherents to “turn all thought to solitude.” Only in solitude, Saint Augustine tells us in his Confessions, was he able to conduct his questionings and subdue his doubts about his own religion. Trappist monks, though not strictly vowed to silence, feel that much talk is a hindrance to the solitude needed to receive God. I don’t know that Judaism, being a community religion, speaks to solitude. A minyan of ten Jews is required for formal prayer, after all.  Might solitude be the silver lining in the vast dark cloud of our current COVID-19 pandemic? Pernicious in so many ways, the coronavirus crisis, requiring decrees in many states that one remain at home, encourages solitude and thereby, one would think, allows greater time for the thoughtful reflection solitude invites. But if the stories are true about the increased number of suicide attempts and actual suicides, the intensified alcoholism and opioid addiction, and the uptick in spousal abuse during the isolation required by the crisis, then the coronavirus is having quite the reverse effect.   One might have thought that I, a lover and self-proclaimed connoisseur of solitude, would have welcomed the isolation imposed by the coronavirus. But I find I don’t, not at all. As an older player I am in self-imposed quarantine, but mine is a quarantine in an apartment that houses 1,500 or so books, two computers, cell and landline phones, and the resourceful mechanical female who calls herself “Alexa” and who on command gives me the weather and plays the music of Mozart, Haydn, Schubert, Reynaldo Hahn. I share this quarantine, moreover, with a wife with whom I can talk about anything and with whom I laugh a lot and an affectionate calico cat named Dolly. No, what bugs me is that in the current instance, as never before, my solitude is enforced, specifically, of course, by the fear of death by corona germ. This element of enforcement, I find, is destructive of the rich benefits of solitude. Enforced, solitude feels more like solitary confinement than an opportunity for reflection. As perhaps never before, I long for the company of five or six dear friends. Contacting them by phone or email, viewing and conversing with them through Skype, will not do. If anything, the isolation imposed by the coronavirus has shown the limits of life lived, as it is increasingly in the digital age, remotely.  One of the striking side effects of the isolation imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic is to show us how little our many grand toys—smartphones, Netflix, and the rest—avail us in crisis. Something here, surely, to think about, and after this crisis is past I hope to find the solitude to do so.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

In the middle of the 20th century, there was an expression: “He had a good war.” It was unseemly, maybe, but everyone knew what the expression meant: The person in question had come out of World War II in good shape — even advantaged. In the same way, we might say that Taiwan is having a good pandemic.  Those words are terrible to type, but readers may indulge them. Taiwan is enjoying good press all over the world, for its handling of the crisis. One headline reads, “Taiwan’s Coronavirus Moment.” Lots of headlines speak of “lessons” to be learned from Taiwan. The phrase “Taiwan model” is in the air. It is used by the U.S. State Department, for example. So, Taiwan has been handed an excellent opportunity: an opportunity to earn recognition, good will, and sympathy. But there is a danger, and that danger is, as always, the government of the People’s Republic. This government claims Taiwan as a mere province of China. Taiwan has shown up the PRC in the pandemic — which makes the men in Beijing angry. The headline I quoted above, I quoted incompletely. In full, it reads, “Taiwan’s Coronavirus Moment — and Delicate Balancing Act.” Taiwan must find a way to strut its stuff, or seek its due, without provoking Beijing into greater fury.   “Taiwan has been isolated from the international community for many years,” says Mab Huang, an eminent scholar at Soochow University in Taipei. This isolation is “painful” for Taiwan people, as he says. Taiwan has often given me occasion to reflect that the very word “isolate” comes from “island,” in Latin. “Our government and civil society have been working very hard to gain access to the international community,” Professor Huang continues. They have also been working to “gain dignity” within that community. Ah, yes. Taiwan has suffered many indignities over the last 50 years. It was replaced by the PRC at the United Nations in 1971. The U.N. has a “One China policy,” which means that the World Health Organization excludes Taiwan, too. The WHO is a U.N. agency. But from 2009 to 2016, Taiwan was granted status as an “observer” at the World Health Assembly. (This is the decision-making body of the WHO.) Taiwan was called “Chinese Taipei,” as it is at the Olympic Games.  What happened after 2016? More on that in a moment.  Johns Hopkins University, the renowned institution in Baltimore, keeps an interactive map, charting the coronavirus. At first, they listed Taiwan as “Taiwan.” Then they changed the designation to “Taipei and environs.” This is what the WHO is currently calling Taiwan. After criticism, Johns Hopkins switched back to “Taiwan.” The coronavirus started in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei Province, China, sometime in December 2019. This made Taiwan a “frontline state,” as Jacques deLisle says. He is a China and Taiwan expert at the University of Pennsylvania Law School. Taiwan had a number of things going against it, as a frontline state. Taiwan is only 81 miles from the mainland. People travel between the mainland and the island all the time. In 2019, there were almost 3 million visitors from China to Taiwan. Also, Taiwan is densely populated — not a natural place for “social distancing.” As soon as there was a hint of a virus from China, Taiwan swung into action. Why? How to explain the alacrity?  First, “Taiwan does not trust China,” as Jianli Yang says, bluntly. He is a Chinese democracy activist who heads Initiatives for China in Washington, D.C. “Probably Taiwan knows better than any other country the nature of the Chinese Communist regime. Taiwan knows that you cannot rely on accurate information from China. So, from Day One, Taiwan acted to protect itself.” Second, Taiwan had been hit by SARS — which also originated in China — in 2003. This epidemic was devastating for the country, as Taiwanese tell it. There were 346 cases of the illness and 73 deaths (in a country of 22.5 million). Is that a lot? It must depend on what one’s standards are. “We could not get any information from the World Health Organization because we were excluded from it,” a Taiwanese official tells me, reflecting on 2003. “They refused to engage with us, because they were so afraid of China. So, we could not handle SARS well. But this time, when the coronavirus came, we were ready.” In the years after SARS, the world in general understood that the PRC had behaved badly. The world also understood that Taiwan should have a part, somehow, in the WHO and not be blindsided. In 2009, the PRC relented.   This relenting followed the election of Ma Ying-jeou as president of Taiwan. Ma is part of the Blue coalition in Taiwan, which favors relatively close ties with the PRC. Him, Beijing could tolerate. Ma served two terms, ending in 2016. In that year, Tsai Ing-wen was elected president. She is part of the Green coalition, which is independence-minded. Her, Beijing could not tolerate. So Taiwan was booted from the health organization, even as an observer. Near the beginning of the pandemic — on January 11 — Tsai was reelected in a landslide. This “really angered and humiliated Beijing,” as Jianli Yang says. Jumping on the pandemic, Taiwan implemented 124 measures — an almost famous 124, at this point. They deserve an article unto themselves, but, in this one, I will bring up only masks. At first, Taiwan banned the export of masks. And rationed them. By April, however, Taiwan was ready to donate them abroad. Taiwan donated 10 million masks, marked, significantly, “Made in Taiwan.” This was at a time when the PRC was selling such equipment, and often faulty equipment at that. Taiwan sent 7 million masks to Europe, 2 million to the United States, and the remaining million to scattered others.  There was a slogan to go with all this: “Taiwan can help.” The vice president, Chen Chien-jen, said, “We can see that this is a good opportunity for us to let people know that Taiwan is a good global citizen.” Chen, by the way, is an epidemiologist, who earned his doctorate at Johns Hopkins. He did not run with President Tsai in this recent election. The new vice president, to be sworn in with Tsai on May 20, is Lai Ching-te. He earned a master’s in public health at Harvard. In Taiwan so far, there have been 438 confirmed cases of the coronavirus and six deaths. Schools have been open since February 25 — although with precautions — and professional sports are being played, without spectators. With the country serving as a model, why does it need the WHO? According to Taiwanese officials, the country can use all the information it can get. Every scrap helps. So too, Taiwan has information, and experience, to share. Friends of Taiwan are pushing for its inclusion in the WHO, just as they did after the SARS epidemic. The PRC, as always, is pushing back, strong-arming anyone it can. China’s hold over people and institutions is remarkable. Beijing is a master instiller of fear. On March 27, Yvonne Tong interviewed Bruce Aylward, by video hookup. She works for a Hong Kong news program called “The Pulse”; he is a Canadian official of the WHO. A stranger interview you never saw. Ms. Tong said, “Will the WHO consider Taiwan’s membership?” Dr. Aylward did not answer. He looked into the camera, for a long period. Finally, Ms. Tong said, “Hello?” He said, “That’s okay, I couldn’t hear your question.” Ms. Tong said, “Okay, let me repeat the question.” Dr. Aylward said, “No, that’s okay, let’s move to another one then.” But the interviewer persisted (politely). Then Dr. Aylward appeared to sever his connection. Persisting, the show got a hold of him again. Ms. Tong said, “I just want to see if you can comment a bit on how Taiwan has done so far in terms of containing the virus.” Dr. Aylward replied, “Well, we’ve already talked about China, and, you know, when you look across all the different areas of China, they’ve actually all done quite a good job.” With that, he bade farewell. Even race has made its way into this drama. The director-general of the WHO is an Ethiopian scientist, Tedros Adhanom. He said that he had been the target of racist attacks from Taiwan people on social media. President Tsai took offense at a broad charge of racism against Taiwan, and invited the director-general to visit her country, if ever he cared to defy China to do so. In Washington, Congress passed the TAIPEI Act — unanimously, in both House and Senate — and the president signed it. “TAIPEI,” an acronym you had to work at, stands for “Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative.” Name aside, the bill basically requires that the U.S. government support Taiwan in its effort to integrate itself into the world. A co-author, Senator Chris Coons (D., Del.), said, “The TAIPEI Act sends a clear message that the United States stands with Taiwan’s free-market democracy.”  Beijing, evidently, got the message. A foreign-ministry spokesman said, “We urge the United States to correct its mistakes, not implement the law,” etc. Otherwise, the U.S. “will inevitably encounter a resolute strike back by China.” The U.S. mission to the U.N. signaled its support of Taiwan in a tweet. The Chinese mission did not care for the tweet, saying, “It gravely interferes with China’s internal affairs and deeply hurts the feelings of the 1.4 billion Chinese people.” The mission further declared that “Taiwan is an inalienable part of China.” China appears rattled and ticked, battling a public-relations problem in the world, as well as a virus. They look like a bully — bullying Taiwan, bullying international bodies — because they are. They are playing petty political games in the middle of a pandemic, as Jacques deLisle points out: a situation that is literally one of life and death. They are also playing war games, increasing their drills in the vicinity of Taiwan, just to intimidate. The pandemic, says Jianli Yang, has laid bare the contrast between authoritarian China and liberal-democratic Taiwan. Beijing will suffer from the contrast. Wanting to suppress the truth as much as possible, Beijing evicted reporters for the New York Times, the Washington Post, and the Wall Street Journal. Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, lost no time in inviting the reporters to come work from Taiwan — “a beacon of freedom and democracy.” If Taiwan emerges from the coronavirus more appreciated — and the Chinese government more appreciated for its villainy — that will be an outcome to hail, even if so much else is dark. 

Ithink I’ve been red-pilled by the coronavirus. For nearly 30 years, I was part of the New York City matrix of the proud and content. “I love this dirty town!” the wicked newspaper columnist J. J. Hunsecker exclaims, amused by a senseless fistfight on the street, in Sweet Smell of Success. My thoughts exactly. Even better: Cynical newspaper editor Henry Hackett screams on the telephone, “I don’t f***ing live in the f***ing world, I live in f***ing New York City!” in The Paper. Do the residents of any other region take so much perverse pride in being a strange, angry, chaos-loving tribe? The way we New Yorkers talked ourselves into talking up Gotham’s manifold flaws was the urban form of vice-signaling, avant la lettre. As Andre Gregory puts it in My Dinner with Andre, New York is “the new concentration camp where the camp has been built by the inmates themselves and the inmates are the guards and they have this pride in this thing they’ve built.”  Since my family decamped to Long Island on St. Patrick’s Day, in a desperate vortex of unusually thick midday traffic, I haven’t slept a night in the city in eight weeks. The last time that happened was a quarter of a century ago. I still make occasional forays back to the apartment to pick up items, but the virus has wiped the snarl of perverse urban arrogance from my face. What was it that was so great about living in Manhattan, anyway? I’m trying to remember, and I draw a blank. I miss going to the theater, a bit. I miss (some of) my friends. That’s . . . about it. Fancy restaurants I don’t miss, not their $18 glasses of pinot noir nor the way the staff expected you to beam with delight when presenting you with a $38 entrée containing five scallops and a hunk of polenta. Nor do I miss the crowds, the subway, the homeless dudes, the traffic, the cramped aisles of the overpriced grocery stores, the subway, the weird and unnecessary aggression, the mountains of garbage on the sidewalk twice a week, the rats, the dilapidation, the potholes, the bedrooms the size of closets, the closets the size of lockers, the subway, the subway, or the subway.  It’s kind of funny (and by “funny” I mean funny in the New York sense, i.e., horrifying) that the New York City subway system now looks like a hypodermic needle of poison that injected America with a deadly virus. We don’t know exactly what happened yet, not all of the facts have been adduced, but certain patterns have emerged. Like when you come home from work and there’s a guilty-looking dog with boot breath lying in close proximity to a boot that’s been chewed to pieces: We wouldn’t want to jump to conclusions, but suspicion appears to be warranted. Learning that we are the fount of America’s worst crisis in a century has, naturally, made New Yorkers humble and abashed. Just kidding: We spend all day on Twitter yelling at people in Florida for going to the beach, then telling each other the real problem is that President Trump wants us to inject Lysol. Some 27,000 New York State residents are dead, with lots more in the commuter belts of New Jersey and Connecticut, but did you hear the president just said something wacky on Twitter?  You’ll pardon me if I seem reluctant to take another bite of the Rotten Apple anytime soon. Out here by the beach, life is comfy. My children adapted so smoothly that I worry I’ll never be able to talk these two into understanding why a cramped apartment beats a large house with a yard where bunnies come to play in the grass. It’s been a while since any of us have had to step over an unconscious drug addict on a sidewalk or negotiate the Road Warrior–like series of vehicle-threatening obstacles on Ninth Avenue in Midtown. Miraculously, my wife and I kept the girls adhering to the B.Q. (Before Quarantine) bedtime treaty even though school now starts an hour and a quarter later than it used to. Being well rested, everyone is less grumpy in the morning, and there’s no mad rush to get the kids in their uniforms and out the door. By 9 o’clock they’re in virtual school, the alert faces of their classmates visible in neat boxes on their computer screens.  On parole from the metropolitan concentration camp, my wife and I snooze late daily in a king-size bed that wouldn’t fit in our bedroom in the city. The morning commute is a trip down the stairs instead of a nervy foray into the honking fury of rush-hour traffic (or the even more sinister precincts of the subway trains). I no longer have to grip a filthy metal pole clawed by thousands of others each day, I no longer have to spend three hours a week sitting in my car waiting for the streets not to be cleaned during the twice-weekly ritual we call “Alternate Side Parking,” and my car no longer acquires a new mystery dent or scratch every week or so it spends in the asphalt jungle. Dinner, thanks to my able wife, is a proper multidish meal every night, with salad and fresh-baked bread and other wonders, instead of the previous can of soup or frozen pizza. Child-care costs have retreated from high to nonexistent and no one ever gets caught in the rain without an umbrella because who needs to go outside on rainy days anyway? America should reopen soon, but in the meantime my family will manage fine. Now if you’ll excuse me, I’ve got to go sign for the case of wine that just arrived. Oh, rosé this time? Lovely.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

https://us04web.zoom.us/j/8043111983
Meeting ID: 804 311 1983 You have been invited to a ZOOM video conference by BIGJOEBIDEN
Please click on the link to join the conference “Sir?” “Sir?” “Sir? You’re on mute, sir.”  “Still on mute, sir. We can see your mouth moving and your hands waving, but we can’t hear you.”  “Okay, well now you’ve changed your background to outer space. But you’re still on mute.” “And now you’re in front of the Golden Gate Bridge. Okay, sir, just unmute yourself and we can start the meeting.”  “What about now?” “Okay! Yes! We can hear you, sir!” “Great! I guess when you click on this thing here — ” “Okay, sir, you’re on mute again so whatever you just did — ” “What about now?” “Yes! Please just don’t touch anything else. Just keep your hands off the device.” “Hahahaha! That’s what she said, huh?” “Sir, really, we’re going to have to work on that. You can’t make those kinds of jokes.” “I know, I know. Believe me, I learned my lesson. I even watched those HR videos you sent me, where the guy puts the moves on the gal in the office. Sexy stuff, actually.” “Please don’t joke, sir.”  “Not joking at all. Did you see the one where they’re at the big conference at that hotel? Man oh man. But I get it. Completely removed that kind of nutty stuff from my vocabulary, and you know what else? Before we get going here just want to say thanks to this terrific team for handling the whole thing with that lady who I, God love her, have no memory of. Just zero as in nada. And bless her heart, not an attractive gal as per her most recent — ” “Sir, I just want to stop you right now and remind you that these Zoom calls are not secure.” “Not secure.” “No.” “As in?” “Well, we just don’t know who is listening. So we should be mindful of how we characterize certain people. Is what I’m saying. I mean, if you were to say something that might be construed — wrongly, of course — as sexist or cavalier about sexual-harassment issues, it might be overheard by someone in the news media and they might . . .” “They might what, tiger?”  “Well, I was going to say they might use it in a negative story about you, but I can see your point.” “Feelin’ pretty bulletproof down here in my basement, gotta say. I am very much liking this kind of campaign. See, what I do is I sit here and watch stuff on TV and I’ve got this giant roll of that packing stuff — you know? The little bubbles? And I just pop pop pop them all day — I gotta do stuff with my hands, you know? I’m a tactile man. I’m a sensual man.” “Yes, sir, we know. Now if we could just get back to the next 30 days, we’re seeing some strong tracking in the swing states and we’re making inroads with Trump voters and we’re noticing that you do your best in those places following several days of nonactivity.” “Nonactivity?” “Sir, many voters in key areas prefer you as, how can I put this, as an idea. They feel very favorable towards the idea of Joe Biden.”  “What about the actual Joe Biden?” “There is some softening of support in that category.” “Can’t keep hiding here in this basement, fellas! I gotta get out there and touch people, touch their faces and their bodies and smell their hair. Classic retail politics! C’mon, now.” “Of course, sir, and yes, that’s part of the plan. But we’re suggesting that maybe the next 60 or 90 days you could just, you know, keep enjoying your time in the basement — ” “Ninety days?! That puts us to, what? August?” “September, actually. But try to see it this way, sir. The American voter is like the virus, and for you to stay healthy, it’s a good idea to shelter in place as far away from them as possible.” “Well, that’s a strategy. I’d prefer to be out there, you know, mixing it up with the people and getting in their faces with my face or whatever, but okay, I see what you fellas are driving at. You know what you’re doing.”  “Yes. In the meantime, we keep doing what we’re doing and keep the message loud and clear and watch your numbers get stronger and stronger. Sir?” “Hmmmm?”  “What are you doing?” “Taking off my shirt.” “Why, sir?” “Around this time every day I give myself a massage with sesame oil. Learned it from a swami I once hung out with. Good for the skin and for the sense of calm. See, you squirt it on your chest and let it kind of ooze down the front — here, let me tilt the camera so you can — ” LEAVE MEETING  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

Los Angeles Times business-column headline: “The Cruise Ship Industry Is Sinking. I’m OK with That.” Without reading the article, what do you think might be the author’s reasons? Cruise ships are bad for the planet! Any large machine that does not use the wondrous power of wind or the sun is a bad thing that should be stopped, because the computer models say Antarctica will shrivel to the size of a playing card. Maybe we could keep one cruise ship handy to rescue the scientists who will be treading water and sending up flares.  Even if they converted to wind, and erected huge sails to power their voyages, this would be bad: The fabric required to make the sails probably wouldn’t be sustainably produced. They’d probably cast huge amounts of shade that would prevent photosynthesis, and this would cause a die-off of the plankton, leading to a decrease in the krill population the whales depend upon, so the whales might lose some weight. This would suggest that the whales were overweight to begin with, and the Guardian would have a series of stories about Blubber-Shaming and how cretaceous beings are beautiful precisely because they are huge. Blubber Acceptance now! Even if they converted to solar, and figured out a way to be carbon-neutral and zero-waste, they’d still be bad! The entertainment is garish, the buffets encourage gluttony, and they’re either full of louts who start drinking at breakfast or glowering old people who put black socks over pale legs and totter ashore to be shuttled inland five miles for tacky tourist experiences.   Well, enough torching the straw men; let’s read the article and see how wrong I am. “If we’ve learned nothing else from the coronavirus catastrophe, it’s that cruise ships are a breeding ground for nasty, potentially lethal little germs — and that the vessels are perfectly positioned to transport those germs around the world.” He’s got a point — if the Chinese Communist Party hadn’t lobbed a huge cruise ship from Wuhan into a New York nursing home we wouldn’t be in this mess. He quotes a senior citizen who had a cruise canceled because of the Chinese-Originated Viral-Infection Disaster, a.k.a. “COVID,” and this person does not seem likely to take the chance of getting sick. Even before COVID, people worried about norovirus. True. But I’ve taken a dozen cruises and never gotten the dreaded ship-trots. I have gotten about ten colds from eleven plane trips. Let us study the difference between a plane and a cruise ship: Plane: Sealed tube of people packed together and breathing recirculated air, with bathrooms visited 30 times per flight, with no disinfection in between.   Ship: Enormous structure with vast open decks pounded by the purifying sun, with rooms that open up to admit fresh air, with all common surfaces constantly scrubbed down by a staff of 9,000 people who sleep four to a room below deck but still say “Good morning” with bright cheer. Yes, by all means, put me on a plane. The author never explains why he’s okay with the industry’s death, aside from the whole “people moving around can spread germs” thing. But lots of joyless folk hate the big ships. They shouldn’t. Cruise lines are a progressive dream. Really! Think about it. Leftists don’t like the suburbs, because the preferred model for living is dense, with people stacked and packed into featureless monoliths in expensive cities. Well, cruise ships are dense. It’s a lot like living in a New York high-rise, except it moves around and you get a chocolate on your pillow and a towel tied in the shape of an animal at the end of the night. Leftists don’t like cars, because they will make the earth an unlivable hellscape in seven years, and they encourage that whole ridiculous American “individuality and unfettered freedom of movement” thing. They want you shoved into mass transit, clattering along underground in a box that was overdue for disinfection during the Wilson presidency.  Well, cruise ships are mass transit. There aren’t any other single vehicles capable of carrying so many people. If the Left were honest, they’d skip their dreams of high-speed rail and put people on cruise ships towed by horses. Sure, it’s 48 days from New York to Los Angeles, and you lose a lot of horses, but it’s dense! It’s mass! Cruise ships also train you to disconnect the relationship between food and money. You eat three squares a day — and there’s never a bill. Food is a human right! In the leftist mind, once we decouple food from capitalism, there are not only endless amounts of omelets but midnight chocolate buffets that just . . . happen! It’s awesome. Personally, I’m not okay with the cruise-ship industry collapsing. I’ve had some of my happiest memories on ships. Sliding away from Venice, sailing from a Russian port into a red sunset, beholding the fjords of Norway, experiencing the rise and fall of the Panama locks, and of course basting in the glare of a Caribbean sun at a time when my home state was locked in frost. I could get COVID by going to the store. I could get COVID by going to New Zealand on a ship. In the former case I got bread. In the latter case I saw the world.   That’s what it comes down to, isn’t it? I could get COVID. That makes you either stop and cower forever, or mask up, wash up, and sally out. The cruise industry, I suspect, will survive, because people need to get out in the world, with all its dangers and glories, and live. I’m okay with that.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

• X Æ A-12? Isn’t that more of a girl’s name? • Like so many other things these days, the coronavirus has become a political football. It’s only in blue states! Red-staters on beaches are morons! Etc. ad infinitum. Unfortunately this is no new thing. In the 1790s, Philadelphia, then the nation’s capital, was subject to repeated outbreaks of yellow fever. Medical science had no idea how to treat it (mosquitoes would not be identified as the vector for a century). So doctors and journalists engaged in a partisan scrum. Benjamin Rush, medico and supporter of Thomas Jefferson, whose party had just taken over the battleground state of Pennsylvania, believed in bleeding and purging. William Cobbett, arch-Federalist journalist, attacked Rush as a murderer of his patients. A Rush-friendly court slapped Cobbett with a libel judgment so heavy he fled the country. Meanwhile Philadelphians died. Treat the sick, do your jobs, dial it down. We’re all Americans here.  • The idea that COVID-19 escaped from a Chinese lab was supposed to be a wacky conspiracy theory. But the circumstantial evidence keeps mounting, as our Jim Geraghty has documented. Wuhan is home to not one but two labs that study bat coronaviruses, and Chinese labs have a track record of poor management and even virus leaks. Leaked cables from the U.S. State Department reveal concerns about one of these labs in particular, the Wuhan Institute of Virology, in 2018. A Chinese academic paper — posted and quickly removed from the Internet in February — posited that COVID-19 “probably originated from a laboratory in Wuhan.” Now NBC has reported evidence that there was “no cellphone activity in a high-security portion of the Wuhan Institute of Virology from Oct. 7 through Oct. 24, 2019, and that there may have been a ‘hazardous event’ sometime between Oct. 6 and Oct. 11.” The suspicion is that Chinese researchers accidentally lost control of the virus while studying it, not that they deliberately engineered and released COVID-19. But U.S. officials must get to the bottom of this, inform the public of their findings, and if appropriate hold China accountable. • Most advanced countries have responded to the pandemic with roughly the same strategy, which is a reason to regard the approach of highly civilized Sweden as something more than an idle curiosity. Large gatherings are banned, but restaurants, bars, gyms, parks, and elementary schools remain open — even in Stockholm, whose metro area holds more than 20 percent of the country’s population. Chief epidemiologist Anders Tegnell says the nation will sidestep the economic consequences of mass lockdowns while building immunity to stave off a “second wave” of infections. But the results are mixed. Excluding microstates, Sweden ranks seventh in the world in per capita COVID-19 fatalities, worse than the United States and far worse than its Scandinavian peers. Its economy is projected to shrink significantly, though less than locked-down Denmark and Finland. Its hope of building enough immunity to avoid a second wave is conjecture. The Swedish approach has been ridiculed and hailed, but it is too early to render a verdict. That suggests it is neither catastrophe nor panacea. • It’s been a rough couple of months for the University of Washington’s Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME). The group’s statistical model, which predicts the trajectories of COVID-19 deaths and hospitalizations in the U.S. and each individual state, surged to prominence with a de facto endorsement from the White House. But then the problems set in. New information dramatically reduced the model’s projections; at one point it predicted only about 60,000 deaths nationally, which the country has already blown past. Other researchers pointed out that the state-level predictions were appallingly inaccurate even over the very short term. And now, the model’s fundamental workings have been completely overhauled, giving us an untested tool to consult as we enter the next phase of the pandemic. The IHME model is not a conspiracy to over- or underpredict the toll of COVID-19; it just doesn’t work. Policymakers should ignore it until this latest iteration proves capable of making accurate predictions.  • Panicked by a Twitter stampede, California governor Gavin Newsom issued an executive order, not obviously legal, closing the beaches of Orange County. A news photo making the social-media rounds had shown the beach looking like spring break; other photographs showed a much more dispersed and socially distanced crowd. It was the sort of thing a more responsible government might have responded to with investigation rather than headlong autocracy. Orange County has been faring relatively well, with fewer COVID-19 cases and deaths than nearby counties such as Riverside and San Bernardino even though it has a larger population. Like many places, it has continued to see an uptick in cases, but there is no evidence that this is linked to the enjoyment of the beaches, which, in any case, have reopened in Orange County as they have elsewhere in California. People are more likely to accept the legitimacy of rules when the decisions governing them are made in a way that is reasonable and democratic, when decisions are made locally and respect the diversity among our communities, and when those entrusted with the extraordinary authority of using emergency powers are not themselves acting out of hysteria or in response to hysteria. Governor Newsom fails on all counts. • What Jefferson called “the spirit of resistance to government” is a valuable thing. It can keep lawmakers mindful of the rights of all, and humble in the exercise of their responsibilities. Protests against Michigan’s statewide lockdown partake of that spirit. But there are protests and protests. Swarming the state capitol, shouting and carrying weapons, is menacing or, if not meant in that spirit, bad theater. The mobbing of the Wisconsin state capitol during Scott Walker’s tenure went on far longer, and was therefore worse, but we deplored that too, for the same reasons. Rally, write, vote. It’s a free country.   • Shelley Luther, a salon owner in North Texas, was fined $7,000 and sentenced to seven days in jail after she reopened her business in defiance of statewide lockdown orders. Luther appeared before Dallas Civil District judge Eric Moyé, who called her decision to buck the COVID-related order “selfish.” Moyé said he would consider leniency if Luther apologized, paid a fine, and closed the business until state regulations changed; Luther refused, and disagreed with Moyé’s assessment of her behavior: “I have to disagree with you, sir, when you say that I’m selfish — because feeding my kids is not selfish. I have hairstylists [who] are going hungry because they’d rather feed their kids.” We sympathize with Luther. The economic hardship faced by businesses right now is not a result of their mismanagement or other failures in which their executives are inculpated, but rather of twin forces beyond their control: a highly contagious pandemic, and the lockdown policies that officials enacted in response to that pandemic. One can argue that those policies were a justified response to the virus, but in either case, throwing a business owner in jail for a violation of such policies seems excessive — if not downright cruel.   • The early days of the coronavirus epidemic were an awfully busy time for Capitol Hill stock traders: Just before the market crash, Senator Dianne Feinstein (D., Calif.) dumped millions of dollars’ worth of stock. So did Republican senator Kelly Loeffler of Georgia, who is married to the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange. So did Senator Richard Burr (R., N.C.) and his wife, who were unloading shares in 33 different transactions even as he made relatively rosy statements — far too rosy, in fact — to the public about the likely course of the coronavirus epidemic. And now we learn that Senator Burr was joined in that selloff by his brother-in-law. The Burr family’s timing is exquisite: The sales came after the senator attended a January 24 committee briefing on the epidemic but before the market crash a few weeks later. The best gloss for Burr is that he is a very lucky trader and a very unlucky politician.  • After weeks of revelations that exculpatory evidence had been withheld, the Justice Department moved to dismiss the case against Michael Flynn, Trump’s first national-security adviser. Special Counsel Mueller’s prosecution of Flynn had raised enough red flags that Attorney General Barr appointed a prosecutor from outside Washington to review it. It emerged that the FBI had opened a counterintelligence case against Flynn (part of its Trump–Russia probe) but was about to close it in early January 2017 for lack of evidence that he was a clandestine agent of Russia. After learning that Flynn had had phone conversations with the Russian ambassador in late December, though, the FBI sought to keep it open. The conversations were proper for an incoming White House adviser, and Flynn made no concessions to Moscow — though he later misinformed Vice President Pence about whether the subject of Obama-imposed sanctions had come up. The FBI nevertheless theorized that Flynn might have violated the Logan Act (a constitutionally dubious prohibition on freelance diplomacy by unauthorized Americans that the Justice Department has never tried to enforce). The bureau conducted an ambush interview of Flynn, but the agents concluded he had not lied to them. The FBI appeared to drop the matter once Flynn had been fired for misinforming Pence. Months later, however, Mueller’s prosecutors pressured Flynn into a false-statements guilty plea — he was broken financially, and prosecutors threatened to indict his son if he held out. But Flynn eventually changed his mind, found aggressive new counsel to fight the case, and moved to vacate his plea. On review, the Justice Department has concluded that the case is not viable: Any alleged false statement would be difficult to prove, and could not be material because there was no legitimate predicate for investigating Flynn. As we go to press, the judge has yet to rule on the DOJ’s dismissal motion, while former president Obama — who appears to have been deeply involved in the Flynn investigation — leads the usual suspects railing that Barr is politicizing justice and undermining the rule of law. That’s rich.  • In his virtual town hall at the Lincoln Memorial, President Trump said, “I am greeted with a hostile press the likes of which no president has ever seen.” Recollecting that the man in whose memorial he sat had been murdered by a critic, he conceded that Lincoln had a pretty bad press too. Lincoln, and how many other presidents? Washington: depicted in a newspaper poem and cartoon being led to the guillotine. Jefferson: atheist, Jacobin, sleeps with his slave (they got one out of three). Jackson: bigamist. McKinley: William Randolph Hearst published a ditty about him being shot — and then he was . . . But enough. This is a boisterous country, with a free press that runs the gamut from the Federalist Papers to the sewer. If the president doesn’t like being smacked, he should have checked the job description before he applied for the position.   • Twice now, President Trump has told Fox News that Joe Biden sent him a letter of apology: a letter apologizing for earlier criticisms of the president’s handling of the pandemic. The Biden campaign flatly denies that such a letter was ever written or sent. Someone’s lying. In this case, we fear that it is not Biden. • Donald Trump likes to say that elections are, were, or will be “rigged.” He said it most recently with regard to a special House election in California, which took place on May 12. Mike Garcia (R.) and Christy Smith (D.) were running to replace Katie Hill, who resigned in scandal last November. The balloting was done by a mixture of mailing in and in-person voting. The mayor of Lancaster, Rex Parris, requested a voting center in his town, which he got. Parris is a Republican, a supporter of Garcia, and a supporter of Trump. But Trump objected to the opening of “a voting booth in the most Democrat area in the State. They are trying to steal another election. It’s all rigged out there.” In the end, Garcia, the Republican, won in a landslide. There are boys who cry wolf and boys who cry rigged. Both are unhelpful. • Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) wants the U.S. to withdraw from the World Trade Organization, which along with its precursor has been a forum for the global reduction of trade barriers since World War II. We would be better off, he thinks, negotiating trade deals one on one with other countries. Yet these are not mutually exclusive options: We have many trade agreements with individual countries and with groups of countries. The Trans-Pacific Partnership was an attempt to achieve one of his objectives, “a new network of trusted friends and partners to resist Chinese economic imperialism.” It was the WTO’s opponents, not it, that blocked U.S. participation in it. Hawley has not yet identified any particular proposal that he thinks would help American workers but that the WTO would prevent, or any specific decision it has made that has harmed them. (He claims that the WTO has forced Americans to compete against forced labor in China, but this isn’t true.) Nor has he reckoned with, or even mentioned, any of the gains for Americans that the WTO has enabled. Doubtless there are ways to change the WTO, or our practices toward it, that better serve American interests. We should bring many more cases against Chinese abuses to the WTO, preferably with support from other countries. But the case for withdrawal is not persuasive; indeed, it has barely been made. • Betsy DeVos has enraged the Left with promises of . . . due process. The education secretary has revised Title IX rules pertaining to the investigation of sexual assault and sexual harassment on college campuses. The new rules are a lot like the old rules — the very old ones, dating back to the Magna Carta and beyond, including such non-novelties as the right to question witnesses and evaluate evidence. Joe Biden, who is accused of the forcible sexual assault of a former aide, promises to throw out the new rules even as he claims the right to a full and fair hearing himself and enjoys the power to make that happen, something that is not true of the typical college sophomore. The new rules are an improvement to the process, but part of the problem is the process itself: Colleges and their administrators are simply not equipped to handle the investigation of sexual assault, a serious crime that is properly the business of police departments and prosecutors. Some victims of sexual assault are reluctant to go to the police or in no state of mind to do so; universities can help these students by offering support and mental-health services. Some police departments and prosecutors may be callous or incompetent, but that is an argument for police reform, not for making a policeman out of Professor Plum. The best way for victims of crime to seek justice is through the criminal-justice system. • Ahmaud Arbery, a 25-year-old black man in Georgia, was out for a run. A white father-and-son team, the father a former police officer, say they took Arbery for a possible criminal suspect — a black man had been reported lurking around a construction site — and gave chase in a pickup truck, brandishing a shotgun and a .357 Magnum. They caught up to him. In the ensuing confrontation, Arbery was shot twice in the chest with the shotgun, and died. The vigilantism in question is not even close to a permissible “citizen’s arrest” under Georgia law, which requires would-be freelance policemen to witness a felony. The vigilantes in Georgia probably had committed a felony themselves (unlawful imprisonment) even before they killed Arbery. Local officials made the situation worse by initially declining to pursue a criminal investigation of the killing, saying that the vigilantes had acted in self-defense. If Georgia’s “stand your ground” law is a factor here, it is in confirming Arbery’s right to defend himself from armed assault, not the right of the vigilantes to shoot him down. Gregory McMichael and his son, Travis, have now been arrested and charged with murder, and rightly so. John Quincy Adams famously described the United States as a nation committed to liberty, but one that “goes not abroad, in search of monsters to destroy.” Much less possible misdemeanor-trespassing cases. The nation’s responsible gun-owners should take some note of that.  • Reaction to Bridgegate was unanimous when it hit the news in 2014: New Jersey officials had behaved badly in cutting down the number of available lanes for commuters from Fort Lee in retaliation for its mayor’s refusal to endorse the reelection campaign of Governor Chris Christie (R.). Unanimity was again achieved when all the justices of the Supreme Court determined that the official malefactors had violated no federal law. While a state prosecution might have been successful, federal convictions had to be voided because “not every corrupt act by a state or local official is a federal crime.” Justice Elena Kagan wrote those words for her colleagues, and we will take the rare occasion to endorse her words. • Once again, the Little Sisters of the Poor are in court defending their right to follow Catholic teaching while ministering to the needy. The Obama administration sought to force the nuns, and other religious employers, to sign forms allowing the use of their health plans to cover sterilization and contraception, including methods of “contraception” that prevent already-conceived human embryos from developing. The Trump administration is attempting to exempt employers who object. But a lawsuit, backed by Biden and nearly everyone else in the Democratic Party, is asking the Supreme Court to coerce the nuns and block the new policy. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg used the oral argument (on conference call in these COVID days) to argue for the lawsuit, claiming that Trump had “tossed to the wind” the intent of Congress that all women have access to contraception at no out-of-pocket cost. But Congress had no such intent: The Affordable Care Act didn’t include a contraceptive mandate in its text and didn’t exempt itself from the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Obey the law, and let the nuns obey their faith. • The legal team of the three female high-school athletes in Connecticut who are fighting a trans sports policy has filed a motion for the presiding judge to recuse himself after he insisted that they describe biological males as “transgender females.” Alliance Defending Freedom’s lead attorney, Roger Brooks, who is representing Selina Soule, Alanna Smith, and Chelsea Mitchell, told District Judge Robert Chatigny that “the entire focus of the case is the fact that the CIAC [Connecticut Interscholastic Athletics Conference] policy allows individuals who are physiologically, genetically male to compete in girls’ athletics.” ADF first filed a civil-rights complaint with the Education Department last summer, in response to the CIAC’s policy permitting two boys (unambiguously male until three years ago, when they began to present socially as female) to compete in the female category and win 15 women’s state championships, titles that were held by ten different Connecticut girls the year before. The Department of Justice issued a statement in the girls’ support in March. Still, Chatigny maintained that “referring to these individuals as ‘transgender females’ is consistent with science, common practice and perhaps human decency” and said that continuing to call them male would be received by him as “unfortunate.” It’s beginning to look as though it’s not just the sports competitions that are rigged. • Having given him kid-glove treatment through the presidential campaign, Joe Scarborough and Mika Brzezinski have become obsessive critics of President Trump in office. Trump has fired back in Trumpian fashion, most recently in tweets that bragged about Trump’s use of the couple’s MSNBC show, disparaged its current ratings, and called Scarborough “nuts.” For good measure Trump urged that the network’s parent company, “Concast,” open up a “cold case”: the death of an intern in Scarborough’s congressional office in 2001, which was ruled an accidental effect of her undiagnosed heart condition. Trump has a penchant for conspiracy theory: Remember when he speculated that Antonin Scalia had been murdered? And that Ted Cruz’s father was involved in the assassination of John F. Kennedy? Plausibility does not matter. Malice is the goal. Bad enough usually, worse when a dead girl’s family is collateral damage.  • For almost 60 years, the word “fiasco” has been associated with the Bay of Pigs. In Venezuela, there has been another fiasco, although this one smaller, and not organized by the U.S. government. Evidently, it was organized by Jordan Goudreau, a former Green Beret who is now for hire. His plan was called Operation Gideon, and its mission was to overthrow the Venezuelan dictatorship, led by Hugo Chávez’s successor, Nicolás Maduro. There was an extensive report about Goudreau and his activities from the Associated Press on May 1. Operation Gideon was launched on May 3. Sixty men took off in two boats from Colombia. The men vomited all the way, and the boats nearly ran out of gas, according to Goudreau himself. The operation was quickly foiled. Eight men were killed. Among the captured were two Americans, former Green Berets, recruited by Goudreau. Venezuelan television showed them handcuffed, face down on the pavement. A fiasco, all the way around. “They were playing Rambo,” said Maduro, an insult that landed. The Venezuelan people will have to be liberated by some other means. • Officials in Prague have removed a statue of Ivan Konev, the Soviet marshal who led Red Army troops into the city at the end of World War II. The statue was erected in 1980. Since freedom, it has often been vandalized: spattered with blood and so on. Konev led the suppression of the Hungarian Revolution in 1956; led Soviet forces in East Germany when the Berlin Wall went up; and prepared the crushing of the Prague Spring in 1968. In place of the Konev statue, officials will erect a monument to Prague resistance fighters. The Konev statue will be placed in a future museum of the 20th century. Moscow reacted furiously to the removal of the statue, saying that Prague was “defiling symbols of Russia’s military glory.” The Czech president, Milos Zeman, was critical too, if not furious. He is a Putin ally. Zeman called the removal of the Konev statue “ridiculous and miserable.” But the city of Prague acted independently, and admirably, too. • In 2010, the Russian Duma acknowledged that the Soviet Union was guilty of the Katyn massacre. In April and May of 1940, the Soviets killed about 22,000 Polish military officers, intellectuals, and others. Since 2010, however, the Russian government has done a good deal of backtracking. Soviet conduct is being defended or denied, in numerous ways. On May 1 of this year, the Russian mission to the European Union sent out a tweet, commemorating the 75th anniversary of the end of World War II. The tweet showed a picture of pretty Polish girls and women greeting Soviet soldiers with flowers in July 1944. The tweet also had this quaint observation: “Defending their motherland, 26 thousand Polish troops were killed or went missing.” In the Russian city of Tver, about 100 miles northwest of Moscow, there were two plaques on the façade of a medical-school building: a building that once housed the secret police, where Russians and Poles alike were tortured and executed. The plaques commemorated both the Great Terror and the Katyn massacre. They were placed there by the city government in the early 1990s. On May 7 of this year, the government removed them, on the grounds that the plaques were “not based on documented facts.” If the fight against tyranny is “the struggle of memory against forgetting,” as Kundera wrote, the Russian government has chosen its side. • When we last published, Kim Jong-un, the dictator of North Korea, was out of sight. Was he dying, dead, recuperating? Something else? Whatever it was, Kim has now been seen in public. He was shown cutting a ribbon at a ceremony marking the completion of a fertilizer factory. Over a picture of this act, President Trump tweeted, “I, for one, am glad to see he is back, and well!” We, for one magazine, will be glad when Kim Jong-un and his multigenerational dictatorship are gone for good.  • On May 8, 1945, a 19-year-old Princess Elizabeth stood in uniform on the balcony of Buckingham Palace with her parents, her sister, and Winston Churchill, smiling and waving at the jubilant crowd below. Germany had surrendered unconditionally; the war in Europe was over. It was, King George VI said in a radio broadcast that evening, a “great deliverance,” which called for “an act of thanksgiving.” Seventy-five years later to the hour, Queen Elizabeth addressed the nation in a televised speech from her desk in Windsor Castle. She recalled her father’s words, her own vivid joy that day, and her enduring gratitude for the wartime generation, whose sacrifices meant that their descendants could “live as free people in a world of free nations.” Long may it be so. • Nikole Hannah-Jones and the New York Times did a hatchet job on the American Founding in the 1619 Project. The American Revolution? Mostly about slavery, never mind that the Revolution started in Massachusetts, or that slavery was banned in half the new nation decades before the British Parliament did anything about it. Lincoln? Mostly just a racist. Civil-rights laws? Passed without the help of white people, never mind that nearly everyone in Congress who voted for them was white. Preeminent historians objected to the fact-challenged history. A historian who was consulted said her warnings were ignored. After seven months of Hannah-Jones’s crudely trashing her critics (“LOL. Right, because white historians have produced truly objective history”), she admitted she had erred, and a correction and lengthy editor’s note were appended to the worst line in her essay. The Pulitzer Prize Committee thought that this unedifying spectacle deserved an award for commentary. A commentary it is, but not in a way that reflects well on the writer, the newspaper, or the award. • The editors of the Associated Press Stylebook announced on Twitter that “we now say not to use the archaic and sexist term ‘mistress.’” The recommended alternatives are “companion,” “friend,” and “lover.” In 2016, the AP Stylebook had been revised to merely advise against using the term and stipulate that it applied strictly to a woman who was in a long-term sexual relationship with a married man from whom she received financial support. Regrettably, these types of arrangements are not so archaic that they have ceased to exist. “Bezos Probe Concludes Mistress’ Brother Was Enquirer Source,” the AP reported as late as 2019. But “mistress” must now be banished because it offends on two fronts: It isn’t “gender neutral,” and it supposedly places the blame for an illicit relationship on the woman rather than the man. Wives who see their husbands’ mistresses described in news stories as “friends” or “companions” might justly wonder whether these euphemisms are an improvement. • The U.S. women’s national soccer team sued the U.S. Soccer Federation for “equal pay” even though its lowest-paid member made more money than the highest-paid player on the men’s team. Both teams collectively bargained for different compensation packages: The men took more risk and got the upside if they played well, while the women accepted a lower upside in exchange for more job security and benefits. Because the women played well and the men did not, it turned out that each would have made more money under the other’s contract. Now, thanks to their guaranteed contracts, the women are still getting paid with no games being played, and the men are not. A federal judge in Los Angeles ruled that the women could not have a do-over after seeing how the games went. It is refreshing to see the law recognize that women are adults who can and do make different choices from those of men, and respect those choices. • In the continuing story of Life Imitates Exodus, Pacific Northwest residents were given yet another reason to stay indoors with the arrival of Asian giant hornets, a.k.a. “murder hornets,” nasty flying creatures two inches long with a sting that has been described as “like having a nail driven into your flesh.” Sometimes, just to be ornery, they will invade a bee colony, decapitate all the adults, and then eat the larvae. According to a news story, health officials discussing the murder hornets have “advised people to seek medical help if they were stung more than ten times and to treat more than 30 stings as a medical emergency.” Best, we’d further advise, not to count too carefully. • The original “Gerber baby” was Ann Turner Cook, now 93. A charcoal sketch of her cherubic face became the company’s official trademark. Since 2010, Gerber has held a photo contest to select a new baby brand ambassador each year. In 2018, the first Gerber baby with Down syndrome was chosen. This year, the contest winner was an adopted baby, another first. Magnolia Earl, age 1, charmed the judges “with her joyful expression, playful smile and warm, engaging gaze.” Her mother, Courtney, confirmed in a statement that Magnolia brings “joy to everyone she meets” and recalled speaking on the phone a year earlier with Magnolia’s birth mother, who was in labor. “The real heroes in this story are Magnolia’s birth parents,” she told the Today Show. “They chose her life and they sent her on this incredible journey.” It’s a story, and a photo, worth sharing — kudos to Gerber for recognizing it as much. • Marilee Shapiro Asher, 107, met COVID-19 at the wrong age. She showed symptoms in March. In April, she went to the hospital, where she tested positive for the coronavirus, which is notorious for concentrating its virulence on the elderly. Her doctors, saying she had twelve hours to live, called her daughter. Five days later, Asher was back home, recovering at her senior living community in Washington, D.C. Against world-famous pathogens, Asher is now 2–0. She was six when she met the Spanish flu. Her successful bout with the virus when she was a girl turns out to have prefigured her successful bout with today’s virus. The solo exhibit that Asher, an artist, had scheduled for a gallery in Washington in May has fallen victim to the pandemic, but she has not. In her memoir, she thanks God for giving her “30 more years than are usually allotted according to your Bible.” L’Chaim. • Richard Wayne Penniman, better known to the world as Little Richard, did more than anyone else to give rock ’n’ roll its riotous, unrestrained sound and anything-goes stage presence. Born in Macon, Ga., in 1932, and starting his performing career as a black 14-year-old in the Jim Crow South, Little Richard always threw himself against limits of any kind. He redefined loud. His sound, and that of his many imitators, was defined by the howling abandon with which he sang, and by the cacophony of piano, horns, guitars, and drums that accompanied him. Acts such as the Beatles and the Rolling Stones were openly in his debt. He understood before anyone else that rock music is a world where nothing is too ridiculous to pull off, so long as you throw everything you have into it — not even “Wop bop a loo bop, a wop bam boom.” His performances were equal parts sweaty revivalism and pompadoured, technicolor camp. He did nothing halfway: He was intensely Christian, intensely and ambiguously sexual, intensely proud, and for a time in his life intensely self-destructive with substance abuse. He evangelized rock music, the Christian gospel, and his own reputation with equal fervor. We can still hear him. R.I.P. • As the son of Hungarian immigrants in a fishing village on Lake Erie, Don Shula grew up at that fruitful intersection where middle-class values meet blue-collar circumstances. “Everything was planned, orderly, clean,” he said of his childhood. “Religion was involved — the way my mom and dad brought me up.” A last-minute football scholarship to John Carroll University in suburban Cleveland led to a college career that impressed the Browns enough to draft him, a halfback, in 1951. After hanging up his spikes in 1957, he turned to college coaching. By 1963, he was back in the NFL, as head coach of the mighty Baltimore Colts. He left in 1970 for the Miami Dolphins and coached them for the next quarter century, leading them to an undefeated season in 1972, to a repeat Super Bowl championship in 1973, and to a composite .659 regular-season winning percentage through 1995, when he retired. The Pro Football Hall of Fame inducted him two years later. No NFL coach has won more total games, 347, or regular-season games, 328. A model of discipline and determination off the field as well, he could be “competitive eating breakfast,” said an associate. Dead at 90. R.I.P.   The coronavirus crisis is easing. New York is clearly on the other side of the curve, with deaths down to levels of the beginning of the outbreak, and confirmed cases have been declining nationwide despite increased testing. The disease is coming into better focus. It has been overwhelmingly, although not exclusively, a phenomenon of New York City and its surrounding suburbs, which, in turn, spread it to the rest of the country. Keeping the virus from gaining a foothold in New York, a densely packed major international hub, with a subway system with millions of riders a day, was going to be a nearly impossible task. President Trump would have had to act much earlier to cut off travel from Europe, which seeded New York, and Governor Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio would have had to sound alarm bells and start shutting down the city weeks before they did. Instead, de Blasio gave false reassurances about the safety of the subway. It was only months into the crisis that Cuomo decided to start shutting down the subway system overnight to clean the cars. Meanwhile, New York had a policy — finally reversed — of requiring nursing homes to take COVID-positive patients from hospitals, which must have accelerated the devastating outbreaks among those most vulnerable to the disease. Indeed, our inability to protect nursing homes even as we shuttered public life in much of the country has to be counted as a signal failure of our initial response. Nursing homes have accounted for more than 50 percent of deaths in some states. Avoiding this would have required much more testing and much more of a public focus (we overreacted when it came to hospitals, banning elective surgeries even in places not likely to experience major outbreaks, and underreacted when it came to nursing homes). Given that we have achieved the initial goals of the lockdowns — namely keeping the hospitals from getting overrun and stopping the virus from running out of control — we are entering a phase when it is entirely appropriate to begin to reopen. It is absurd for progressive politicians and the media to treat anyone pushing in this direction as a member of a death cult, heedless of the lives of his fellow Americans. The lockdowns were never supposed to last until we had a vaccine and the virus had been entirely snuffed out — a goal that isn’t humanly possible, at least not if we don’t want a wasteland economy. Hospitals have much more running room to deal with outbreaks than they did at the start of the crisis, and not every place in the country is New York City — in fact, no place is. None of the dire warnings about what would befall Florida because Governor Ron DeSantis was supposedly late in handing down a statewide stay-at-home order have proven out, in part because counties had already shuttered on their own, in part because Florida cities aren’t densely packed or heavily dependent on subways for their transit. We aren’t going to have the resources or wherewithal to implement some of the more ambitious goals for testing and tracing that experts and think tanks have proposed in their reopening plans. We aren’t going to have 22 million tests available a day, nor does it seem likely that Americans will submit to the elaborate app-based tracking we’ve seen in places such as South Korea, nor are we going to quickly hire and effectively deploy small armies of contact-tracers. But testing, after hitting a plateau, has been increasing, with a steady stream of technological breakthroughs augmenting the supply. That, combined with the reduced trajectory of the disease, puts us in a better place. States should aim to have as robust a program of testing, tracing, and isolating as possible, toward the goal of identifying and limiting outbreaks before they run out of control. The wearing of masks is another important measure to limit spread. The culture of mask-wearing in Asian countries certainly contributed to their success in containing the virus, and wearing masks is not nearly as disruptive or costly as a lockdown. President Trump should get over his allergy to being seen in one, which would be an implicit rebuke to some of the anti-mask bravado on the right. There’s no doubt that beginning to resume normal activities will increase the likelihood of spread, but continued restrictions have their own crushing downside. The starkest indicator is the unemployment rate of 14.7 percent, which is almost certainly headed above 20 percent, a level not seen since the Great Depression. The formal lockdowns didn’t necessarily cause this damage, or at least all of it, since people were already deciding on their own to hunker down and change their habits. Yet the economic and human cost of people sheltering in place has been immense. There will be yet another relief bill. Whatever its flaws, the Paycheck Protection Program will need another round of funding. States whose revenues have cratered through no fault of their own will have to be bailed out, although the measure should be carefully crafted to avoid subsidizing pre-coronavirus profligacy. Business should get liability protection for outbreaks that they aren’t responsible for. None of this, though, is a substitute for a fully functional economy. We have, at great cost, bent the proverbial curve of the virus. States shouldn’t be reckless, not least because people aren’t going to return to anything like their old habits until they feel safe. But we are in the next phase of this crisis, and intelligently navigating it should be the goal.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

Senator Cory Gardner (R., Colo.) has joined the effort by Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) to pass legislation that would see the federal government essentially pay the salaries of workers laid off during the coronavirus pandemic. Hawley’s “Rehire America” plan would pay up to 80 percent of wages for employees that have been laid off. The legislation also provides payroll assistance for up to 120 percent of pay for rehired workers, an attempt to incentivize businesses to bring back former employees.  “Without additional support, it’s possible that many jobs will never come back and many businesses will never reopen,” Gardner said in announcing his support for the legislation. “More must be done, and we must think big as we continue to search for solutions to help the American people through this pandemic.” Gardner faces a tough reelection campaign against former governor John Hickenlooper this fall. Versions of the initiative he is now cosponsoring have gained traction on both sides of the aisle. Progressive representative Pramila Jayapal (D., Wash.) has proposed similar, albeit more far-reaching, legislation that would pay full salaries for laid-off workers for three months. Jayapal’s initiative, however, did not make it into House Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s proposed $3 trillion relief bill, which was proposed on Monday.  “We should put forward a proposal that is focused on jobs in contrast to what House Democrats are doing. They could have done something like this. They had an opportunity to put forward a jobs proposal and they didn’t,” Hawley told Politico. “It is unbelievable that you would propose $3 trillion in federal spending and you wouldn’t have a focus on workers.”  Most Senate Republicans have yet to back Hawley’s legislation. Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) has resisted efforts to pass more spending after Congress has allocated about $2.8 trillion on economic relief efforts since the start of the pandemic. “You’ve seen the talk from both sides about acting, but my goal from the beginning of this, given the extraordinary numbers that we’re racking up to the national debt, is that we need to be as cautious as we can be,” McConnell said in April.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

On the menu today: a long look at the myriad challenges facing the person to take the oath of office to be president on January 20, 2021. Being President Is Going to Stink for Years to Come Imagine that through some entirely unforeseeable sequence of events, the person who takes the oath of office to serve as President of the United States on January 20, 2021, is not Donald Trump or Joe Biden but . . . you.  How would you feel? Some of you might feel excited, but I suspect quite a few people would feel trepidation and pressure and think, “Ugh, what did I ever do to deserve this?” Being president is going to stink for at least the next two years, and probably more — even by the historical standards of a job that appears to be powerful and glamorous but that tends to age its occupants about a decade for each term. The task of overcoming this virus and recovering from its enormous cost in human lives, human health, and economic ruin will rank among the greatest challenges in American history, and for a long while, the job of the president is going to be an endless series of hard choices, picking from menus with only bad options.  We don’t know exactly how our lives will be in January, but it’s not so far away that we can’t get some ideas.  If we’re lucky, we will have a vaccine. On the home page today, I talk about what the two months of self-quarantining and lockdowns have bought us in our fight against the virus. Perhaps the most pleasant surprise comes from the market-research firm MorningStar, which reviewed the work of a variety of pharmaceutical companies and concluded, “encouraging preclinical data, strong partnerships and funding, and rapid clinical progress all seem to indicate that use in high-risk populations could be possible by the end of 2020, with tens of millions of doses potentially available by that point.” If that comes to pass, we would be able to inoculate our most vulnerable populations, and that would be a big step. But it would still take a long stretch of 2021 to bring the vaccine to all Americans, and any morally responsible American government would recognize a need to help the rest of the world get vaccinated, too. Depending upon how much this virus mutates and how much our immune systems can adapt to the changes in the virus, we may need regular vaccinations against it for the foreseeable future.  Yesterday, World Health Organization emergencies director Dr. Mike Ryan ruffled some feathers by warning that the coronavirus may never “go away.” He pointed out that we have a vaccine for measles, yet the measles killed 140,000 people worldwide in 2018 — mostly in the Third World, where people don’t have access to the vaccine. When roughly 130 million children are born each year, and the vaccination rate is 86 percent for the first shot and 70 percent for the second dose, you’re still going to leave a lot of vulnerable children out there.  And if and when that vaccine is developed and available for the general public . . . how does America handle the anti-vaccination crowd for this virus? The American economy in January 2021 will probably better than it is now — a really low bar to clear! — but it will probably not be “back.” The Congressional Budget Office crunched the numbers for a projection and concluded the unemployment rate would “decline to 9.5 percent by the end of 2021. Under that projection, the unemployment rate at the end of 2021 would be about 6 percentage points higher than the rate in CBO’s economic projection produced in January 2020, and the labor force would have about 6 million fewer people.” By one count, “100,000 small businesses have shut permanently since the pandemic escalated in March.” One analyst thinks that by the time the pandemic is over, a million small businesses will have shut their doors permanently. People’s life savings will be gone. Certain industries will probably never be the same. Air travel will probably only return slowly, and with it, most businesses connected to tourism — hotels, restaurants, shops, rides, amusement parks. Any business that involves large gatherings — conventions, concerts, sporting events without considerable television revenues — will be slow to recover. Movie-theater chains have no idea how they’ll get through this. Film and television production is halted. Professional sports leagues will carry on, but no one will be watching in person for a long while.  Will Americans trust nursing and long-term care homes with their elderly parents anymore? If enough Americans look at the past few months and conclude they can’t trust them with mom and dad, do those facilities bring in enough money to stay open?  Our medical community has responded in a way that should inspire legends of their heroism being told and retold for generations. But the cost of that Herculean effort, in terms of burnout, is going to be enormous. (I came across a quote from a doctor declaring, “physicians are the highest profession in terms of rates of suicide, that’s pre-COVID,” and that doesn’t seem to be statistically quite right. That said, I’ll bet the suicide rate among doctors is way higher than most expect, and the experience of watching patients die, over and over again, must be extremely psychologically stressful. Thankfully, most of us encounter death rarely and can put aside the grim thoughts about our own mortality. Doctors — and cops and firemen and other key professions — get reminded of this every day.) When 2021 arrives, how many of America’s doctors will retire? Or need a lengthy sabbatical? Or be struggling with physical- and mental-health issues of their own?  The American education system can handle hobbling through the second half of the spring semester with distance learning. Teachers, kids, and parents are stressed, but almost everyone is doing the best they can in unforeseen and extraordinarily difficult circumstances. But if the nation’s schools don’t restart under something resembling normalcy in late August and September . . . do we run the risk of a generation of kids who are at least partially less-educated than their peers? The nation’s children have endured months of social distancing, and apparently have more months of this to come. Just what is that doing to their minds? Reformers warned about the unsustainability of America’s higher-education system, with its runaway tuition hikes, for decades now. Now, large university systems are concluding that the fall semester will be entirely online, much most of the concluding spring semester. Why on earth would any parents or students pay a premium for a program run entirely through their computer? The world beyond our borders is not going to be safer in the era of the coronavirus. China realizes the world will blame it if it doesn’t convince the world to blame America first. Iran is not going to become freer, more stable, or less extreme with a terrible, ever-increasing death toll. The same goes for most of Africa — 500,000 could die because their AIDS treatments are disrupted — South America, or India. God only knows what’s happening in North Korea right now. America’s food supply chain is secure, but many countries’ ability to get enough food to their people is not. Around the world, people are angry, scared, experiencing enormous economic disruption, and looking for scapegoats. It’s a fertile field for extremists looking to recruit new followers.  For most of 2020 and perhaps into 2021, Americans will not be able to gather in crowds. Handshakes may well be gone. I think the aspect of this ordeal that I am contemplating the most these days is the psychological effect on all of us. We have been through tough times before, but this experience is different. You may have noticed that in both your history education and the general discussion of American history in our culture, you read, heard, and saw very little about the 1918 Influenza outbreak. (The name is a little misleading; the waves of the pandemic continued into 1919, and even had a minor wave in 1920.) It’s odd hearing a decent amount about events shortly before, during, and after the outbreak — the sinking of the Titanic, the Ford Model-T coming to the market and the development of automobiles, the digging of the Panama Canal, the sinking of the Lusitania, World War I, Woodrow Wilson’s presidency, the Roaring Twenties . . . but the deadliest pandemic in world history is so rarely mentioned, it’s almost airbrushed out of the picture. On some level, that’s what the survivors of that pandemic wanted. Kenneth C. Davis, author of  More Deadly Than War: The Hidden History of the Spanish Flu and the First World War, told PBS that once that pandemic was over, Americans just wanted to forget it. “The Spanish flu aspect of [World War One] has really been buried and hidden in history . . . It’s particularly complicated by the fact that so many people who lived through the Spanish flu didn’t want to talk about it or remember it — even some of the doctors who were on the front lines of trying to figure out this medical mystery of what was killing so many people, so quickly and so violently.” Those insufferable commercials and celebrity videos declare, “We’re all in this together.” But we really aren’t. As I joked on the pop-culture podcast, if celebrities are going to declare that this is a time of unity and shared experiences, they should at least try to make their spacious southern California estates behind them look a little less luxurious. It has always been that if you were rich or well-connected, you could get through a crisis more easily than the poor and powerless. We’ve rarely had people feeling the need to show us how well they’re getting through it. Idris Elba is a terrific actor and I’m glad he recovered from the coronavirus. But when he proposes, “I think that the world should take a week of quarantine every year just to remember this time. Remember each other. I really do,” he is demonstrating that his quarantine was basically a pleasant “staycation.”  You thought populism was a powerful force in the world’s politics before the coronavirus? Just wait until afterwards. At this point, it is impossible to ignore the fact that most of the people calling for the reopening of society either no longer have a paycheck or are at risk of losing theirs. But everyone making the decisions to extend the lockdowns or publicly supporting that decision still has his. Even if they have the best of intentions and an accurate sense of the risk, the haves are choosing to further immiserate the have-nots. It is as tall an order, and as complicated and multifaceted, as any president has faced — comparable to the challenge of the Cold War, or World War II, or the Great Depression, or the Civil War. Few in their right minds would want to be president right now. Even if you make many more right decisions than wrong ones, people will still be frustrated with the sweeping changes to our life, all driven by a virus jumping into humans from some bat. These will be remembered as extraordinarily different times. Maybe you’re the kind of person who looks at the White House now and is thrilled at the prospect of four more years of this kind of steadiness, single-minded focus, overflowing empathy and magnanimousness, and even-headed rationality from President Donald Trump. Or maybe you’re the kind of person who watches Joe Biden’s remote interviews and remarks from his basement in Delaware and can’t wait to see that eloquence, concentration, attention to detail, and original ideas and sharp-minded incisiveness in the Oval Office next January. We are truly blessed to have these two vital, fresh, hale and hearty options before us this November. ADDENDUM: Todd Myers with a surprising observation that the lockdown is not making the air cleaner, as many environmentalists contend: “According to the EPA’s air-quality monitors, levels of particulate matter — known as PM 2.5 — are not lower now and have, in fact, been higher recently than the median level of the last five years. Consisting of particles smaller than 2.5 microns, PM 2.5 includes natural sources such as smoke or sea salt, as well as human-caused pollution from combustion.”  

New York City health commissioner Oxiris Barbot dismissed a request during the onset of the coronavirus pandemic to provide the police force with a large stockpile of masks, the New York Post reported on Wednesday. In a phone conversation in late March, NYPD chief of department Terence Monahan asked Barbot for a supply of 500,000 masks to deliver to officers. Barbot said that she could only provide 50,000.  “I don’t give two rats’ asses about your cops,” Barbot told Monahan. “I need them for others.” That conversation came before the NYPD reported the first death of a police officer from coronavirus on March 28. Since the onset of the city’s outbreak, 5,490 officers and civilian employees of the NYPD have contracted coronavirus, out of about 55,000 total personnel. The police have seen 41 deaths from the illness. Following Monahan’s request, the NYPD learned that the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene had a collection of masks and other medical equipment stored in a warehouse in New Jersey. Police officials succeeded in obtaining about 250,000 masks for officers and employees.  In comments to the Post, Department of Health press secretary Patrick Gallahue said Barbot had “apologized for her contribution to the exchange.” “During the height of COVID, while our hospitals were battling to keep patients alive, there was a heated exchange between the two where things were said out of frustration but no harm was wished on anyone,” Gallahue said.  While the NYPD declined to comment, Police Benevolent Association head Patrick Lynch said Barbot’s remarks were “despicable and unforgivable.” U.S. representative Max Rose, a Democrat whose district includes Staten Island and southern Brooklyn, also criticized Barbot. “This kind of attitude explains so much about City Hall’s overall response to this crisis,” Rose wrote on Twitter. “Dr. Barbot shouldn’t resign, she should be fired.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Close to three million people filed jobless claims in the past week, bringing the total number of unemployed Americans to 36 million. Some 21.8 percent of the American workforce is now unemployed, a result of mass business closures imposed to mitigate the spread of coronavirus. While the closures initially hit retailers, restaurants, and the hospitality industry, the shock has spread to other areas of the economy including health care and other professional services.  “The scope and speed of this downturn are without modern precedent, significantly worse than any recession since World War II,” Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell said on Tuesday. “Among people who were working in February, almost 40 percent of those in households making less than $40,000 a year had lost a job in March. This reversal of economic fortune has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future.” President Trump has urged states to lift business closures when possible, however Dr. Deborah Birx, response coordinator for the White House coronavirus task force, has warned that social distancing recommendations will most likely remain in place through the summer. States including Florida and Georgia that are currently reopening businesses have imposed certain restrictions on the amount of customers permitted to congregate at the same time.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Trump administration plans to extend restrictions on border crossings imposed during the coronavirus pandemic indefinitely. Under the restrictions, legal border crossings between Mexico and Canada have been closed to tourist travel, and people caught crossing the Mexico-U.S. border illegally are immediately returned to Mexico. President Trump signed an executive order in March implementing the restrictions and the order was renewed in April.  “I am extending the duration of the order until I determine that the danger of further introduction of Covid-19 into the United States has ceased to be a danger to the public health,” reads a draft of the newest extension of the order obtained by the New York Times. The extension requires the approval of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention head Robert Redfield before it takes effect. Since the border closures were implemented in March, just two asylum seekers who crossed the U.S.-Mexico border have been permitted to remain in the country. During the pandemic, Immigration Customs and Enforcement has released hundreds of illegal immigrants from various detention centers because of the threat of coronavirus outbreaks among detainees.  ICE also announced in March that it would cease making arrests of illegal immigrants already in the U.S. who are not deemed a threat to public safety, and would not make arrests of illegal immigrants attempting to seek medical treatment.  “ICE will not carry out enforcement operations at or near health care facilities, such as hospitals, doctors’ offices, accredited health clinics, and emergent or urgent care facilities, except in the most extraordinary of circumstances,” the agency said in a statement. “Individuals should not avoid seeking medical care because they fear civil immigration enforcement.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Wisconsin Supreme Court on Wednesday ruled against the state’s extension of its stay at home order, which was put in place to stem the spread of the coronavirus. In a win for the Republican majority in the state legislature, the court ruled in a 4-to-3 decision that Democratic Governor Tony Evers’ stay at home order is “unlawful, invalid, and unenforceable.”  “In the case of a pandemic, which lasts month after month, the Governor cannot rely on emergency powers indefinitely,” the justices wrote. Before Wisconsin’s initial stay at home order expired on April 24, Evers extended the emergency order to last through May 26 over the objections of Republican state lawmakers. Republican leaders in the legislature filed a lawsuit last month against state health officials, saying that if the stay at home order is extended, “many Wisconsinites will have lost their jobs, and many companies will have gone under,” leaving the state “in shambles.”  The GOP lawmakers also argued that Evers’ administration must consult with the legislature on such emergency orders and “failed to provide any reasoned basis for discriminating between ‘essential’ and ‘nonessential’ businesses.” Evers slammed the court’s decision later Wednesday, saying the ruling “puts our state into chaos.”  “Today, thanks to the Republican legislators who convinced four Supreme Court justices to not look at the law but look at their political careers I guess, it’s a bad day for Wisconsin,” Evers said. In her dissent, Justice Rebecca Dallet said the decision “will undoubtedly go down as one of the most blatant examples of judicial activism in this court’s history. And it will be Wisconsinites who pay the price.” As of Friday morning, the U.S. has seen more than 1.3 million cases of the virus, and more than 84,100 people have died.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

FBI agents served a warrant at Senator Richard Burr’s (R., N.C.) Washington, D.C., home on Wednesday and confiscated his cell phone as part of an investigation into stock trades the senator made before the coronavirus pandemic sent Wall Street crashing. A spokesperson for the senator declined to comment to reporters regarding the developments, according to the Los Angeles Times.  Burr, the chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee, sold between $628,000 and $1.7 million worth of stocks on February 13, after receiving a classified briefing on the burgeoning coronavirus outbreak in January. The senator claims that the trades were made solely based on publicly-available information, and has asked the Senate Ethics Committee to review the trades. On February 27, Burr described the coronavirus in stark terms in a private meeting organized by the Tar Heel Circle, a nonpartisan group of North Carolina businesses. “There’s one thing that I can tell you about this: It is much more aggressive in its transmission than anything that we have seen in recent history,” Burr said in comments obtained by NPR. “It is probably more akin to the 1918 pandemic.”  Fellow North Carolina senator Thom Tillis in April indicated that Burr should be as forthright as possible regarding the trades. “Regardless of what happens with the investigation, I think Senator Burr owes everybody in North Carolina and the United States an explanation, and we’ll see where the investigation goes,” Thillis said on The Hugh Hewitt Show.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					J
				ust about every day, someone claims that the air is cleaner. That, we are told, is a small benefit of the coronavirus-induced economic lockdowns. By reducing traffic on our roads, we are polluting the air less, providing a visible example of the supposed benefits of imposing more environmental regulation. In my hometown of Seattle, one environmental activist told the local paper that people can “physically see that difference in the cleaner air.” The air-quality data tell a different story.  According to the EPA’s air-quality monitors, levels of particulate matter — known as PM 2.5 — are not lower now and have, in fact, been higher recently than the median level of the last five years. Consisting of particles smaller than 2.5 microns, PM 2.5 includes natural sources such as smoke or sea salt, as well as human-caused pollution from combustion. In Philadelphia, a city health commissioner said, “I would expect our air pollution levels will probably go down because the number of vehicles in the streets are less.” Recent particulate-matter levels, however, have been close to the five-year average. In Dallas, the levels of PM 2.5 are higher than average. In Boston, they are slightly lower.  
 This counterintuitive result could be due to a number of influences, including weather. The key factor, however, is that in most places, human-caused pollution is small relative to natural sources. Even a significant reduction in the human contribution makes only a small difference. So, why do so many activists claim the air is ‘physically cleaner’ in the United States?  In part because they want to believe it. Opposition to cars is a major theme in left-wing environmental politics, and it is simply assumed, without looking at the data, that less driving equals cleaner air. The large gap between the political rhetoric and scientific reality is a reminder that costly environmental regulations should be based in real-world data, not ideologically driven assumptions. Many of the stories focus on far away cities such as Beijing or Delhi where there is, in fact, cleaner air. Those examples may be interesting, but they say nothing about what policy in the United States. Additionally, they highlight that pollution often goes hand in hand with poverty. If the assumption is that shutting down the economy is good for the environment, the fact that poor countries see the biggest improvements is a counterpoint. There is also some sleight-of-hand in these claims. Articles that cite data focus not on particulate matter, but on NO2, a pollutant associated with driving. They show satellite photos of reductions in NO2 as evidence that air quality is improving.   The satellite photos, however, are not a reliable method of calculating NO2 levels during the shutdown. The European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts, which operates these satellites, has pointed out that these media reports are based on a flawed analysis, “by comparing too short time periods and/or insufficient filtering of the data” and that, when used correctly, “no marked trend is detected, for example, over the USA for the first three weeks of March.” Dan Goldberg, an atmospheric researcher at Argonne National Laboratory, recently explained that media claims about changes in NO2 levels in the U.S. since COVID-19 have been incorrect, and are driven mostly by the influence of clouds and routine seasonal changes in the angle of the sun. While exposure to high levels of NO2 can present health effects, all parts of the U.S. attain the most recent national NO2 standards, which were set at a safe level by the Obama administration in 2010, a standard retained by the Trump administration in 2018.  Although it can be harmful, NO2 is a concern primarily because it is a precursor to particulate matter and ozone. Rather than look at just NO2, we should track the actual pollutant that concerns us. Ironically, many of the misleading articles specifically leave out PM 2.5, perhaps because the data tell the wrong story. One such article in National Geographic notes that NO2 levels in Dallas declined by three percent between March 1 and April 5. Particulate-matter levels, however, were 24 percent higher than the five-year median. In Seattle, NO2 levels fell in March, but the level of particulate matter increased. National Geographic highlighted the health problems associated with PM 2.5, but left out the relevant data. Many factors over time influence air quality. Looking only at one or two months, or only one factor, is not enough to draw true conclusions. Some may argue that short-term increases in air pollution do not prove anything. That is fine. But it has not stopped political activists from claiming that the air is cleaner — even when it isn’t — and that reducing car travel caused it. Scientific rigor must go in both directions.  All of this is important for three reasons.  First, the economic lockdown has provided a painful, but useful, natural experiment to test the potential benefits of future air-quality regulations. If a policy claims to reduce PM 2.5 by more than we are seeing currently, under a drastic reduction of car travel, we should be very skeptical. Second, it is a reminder that despite mindlessly repeating the word “science,” politicians and activists do not always check the real-world data, or they cherry-pick the data they think are useful, ignoring what doesn’t fit their narrative. People assume they can use common sense, but the scientific process is designed specifically to identify where reality conflicts with popular assumptions. Science means following the data, especially when it conflicts with your most cherished assumptions. Finally, even those (or most of those) claiming our air quality is better admit that shutting down the economy is not a good approach. Considering the painful economic impacts of environmental policy is important, not just for our prosperity, but for the environment. Every dollar spent to help the environment should be spent wisely, to yield the greatest environmental benefit, because the recent economic collapse shows us those dollars may not always be there.  During the past five decades, the air quality in the United States has dramatically improved, thanks in part to government regulations. Reducing the impact of air pollution is a goal we should continue to strive for. The small impact from the lockdown on particulate matter, however, reminds us that our air is very clean and dramatically better than in the past, and that adding even more costly regulations would likely provide limited benefit. To successfully identify the best ways to make additional progress, we need to look closely at the data, and not base our efforts on misguided assumptions. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					D
				avid Dayen of The American Prospect is not very much impressed by Nancy Pelosi’s latest dog’s-breakfast spending bill: The bill is modeled after all the pre-pandemic omnibus legislation that bundled together dozens of ideas (remember H.R.1?), sent over to Mitch McConnell’s legislative graveyard and immediately forgotten. It’s not a particularly good public relations strategy because there’s nothing to latch onto, just a jumble of ideas. And it hasn’t worked as a negotiating strategy either. It reflects the real incoherence of the Democratic position; they don’t have any organizing principle about how to fight the economic crisis other than to throw a bunch of words on a page. I hope Mr. Dayen will forgive my saying so, but he isn’t wrong about that. The so-called HEROES Act — and, please, please, please, can we finally stop with the sophomoric acronyms? — is another wish list from the House Democrats. It contains the usual Democratic wish-list items, one of the more expensive of which is a proposal to shunt vast streams of federal revenue into badly managed states and cities in order to buy them out of their self-inflicted financial troubles. More than $1 trillion of the $3 trillion package would be in the form of aid to state and local governments, with almost all of that money — $915 billion of it — in unrestricted cash. This will be a great boon to states and cities (largely but not exclusively Democratic) that have hamstrung themselves financially by promising government workers fat pensions and retirement benefits without actually spending the money necessary to fund those programs. States and cities generally cannot go into debt to finance regular operating expenses such as salaries (they do borrow money for infrastructure projects and the like), but they can effectively borrow from their pension systems by promising benefits in the future but using the cash today for other purposes. That creates real problems. But those problems have almost nothing to do with the coronavirus epidemic and the subsequent economic shutdown. The cities and states have taken on some extra expenses during the public-health emergency, but the biggest effect on their finances will come from lost revenue. There is a case to be made (a reasonable one if not a completely persuasive one) for helping cities and states backfill some of that lost revenue in these extraordinary times, though leaders in states with more responsibly managed finances and well-maintained rainy-day funds object to subsidizing their spendthrift neighbors. That’s a question of “fairness,” which, in politics, means . . . whatever anybody wants it to mean.  The basic problem is financial, not ethical. Many states already are spending more on their retirees than they are on current priorities such as higher education. So out of whack are the state pension systems that the Pew Trusts estimated their 2018 liabilities at more than $1.5 trillion. That doesn’t mean that $1.5 trillion would solve the states’ pension problems — it means that $1.5 trillion would get them to the point where their pension systems are broke rather than laboring under $1.5 trillion in unfunded liabilities. Even with those liabilities gone, the states would be required to continue to make ongoing pension contributions that are heavy today and only getting heavier. The question is: How much do you want to shortchange today’s first-graders and college freshmen in the service of tomorrow’s retired DMV clerks? Round your answer to the nearest trillion dollars. Uncle Stupid could put off the day of reckoning, but the reckoning is coming. The states are going to have to renegotiate their pension and retirement-benefit plans — even in states that have purported statutory or constitutional guarantees that pensions cannot be reduced. The money isn’t there, it isn’t going to be there, and stamping your feet isn’t going to exnihilate that money into existence.   Again, very little to do with the virus. 
 But that’s true of most of the so-called HEROES Act. For example, the bill would put federal student-loan repayments (and interest accrual) on pause and make it easier for certain government employees to get their student loans forgiven in exchange for those workers having engaged in the selfless public service of receiving inflated compensation in accountability-free jobs from which they effectively cannot be fired. (How much porn can a government worker watch while on the clock without getting fired? A lot.) The Democrats were pushing for student-loan forgiveness before the coronavirus. They’ll be pushing for it after the coronavirus. The proposal is evergreen. Student-loan debt is a lot like those unfunded pension liabilities. For one thing, it comes to around the same figure, about $1.5 trillion. For another, it is the result of political money-laundering. Student loans are a way for politicians to spend money on a favored constituency without having to collect taxes, vote on appropriations, or balance a budget. That constituency isn’t young people who want to learn. (Ha.) It is the burgeoning administrative ranks of the U.S. higher-education system, an archipelago of full-employment programs for mediocrities and hacks who can be parked on college payrolls and trusted to vote the right way. Rather than spend money on education and account for the spending, government offers subsidized loans to students, which lets politicians pretend that their spending is an asset, which is how loans show up on the books. It’s nonsense, and it’s obvious nonsense, but it’s how we insist on doing things.  David Dayen of The American Prospect is too kind in calling this a “jumble of ideas.” It is a jumble, but these aren’t ideas. It’s a jumble of ordinary, naked political opportunism, with Pelosi et al. looking for a good opportunity to maximize the transfer of wealth to their constituents and do their allies in Springfield and Sacramento a solid, along with the usual assortment of public-sector union bosses and other special-interest groups.  Find a cure for that virus, and you’ll be on to something. 

Seventy-five years ago this month, Germany surrendered, ending the European theater of World War II. At the war’s beginning, no one believed Germany would utterly collapse in May 1945. On the morning of December 7, 1941, the day of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, German invaders were on the verge of capturing Moscow. Britain was isolated. London had barely survived a terrible German bombing during the Blitz.  A sleeping America was neutral, but it was beginning to realize it was weak and mostly unarmed in a scary world. But by 1943, a booming U.S. economy was fielding vast military forces from Alaska to the Sahara. Britain and America were bombing the German heartland. The Soviet Red Army had trapped and destroyed a million-man German army at Stalingrad. How did the Allies — Britain, the Soviet Union, and the U.S. — turn around the European war so quickly?  The huge Red Army would suffer close to 11 million deaths in halting German offensives. Britain would never give up despite terrible losses at home and at sea from German bombers, rockets, and submarines. 
 Yet the key to victory was the U.S. economy. It would eventually outproduce all the major economies on both sides of the war combined.  But how did the U.S. arm so quickly, build such effective weapons so soon, and from almost nothing field a military some 12 million strong? Neo-socialist president Franklin D. Roosevelt unleashed American business under the aegis of successful entrepreneurs such as Henry Ford of the Ford Motor Company, William Knudsen of General Motors, Henry Kaiser of Kaiser Shipyards, and Charles Wilson of General Electric. They were all given relatively free rein from New Deal strictures to work and profit without burdensome government regulations. The result was a military juggernaut that overwhelmed America’s enemies. Politics went on, but in less partisan fashion. Republicans picked up seats in the House and Senate in 1942, while Roosevelt won a fourth presidential term in 1944.  Roosevelt was able to dodge charges of rank partisanship during the war by appointing Republicans to key positions in his administration. Republican Henry Stimson became secretary of war. Former Republican vice presidential candidate Frank Knox was the all-important secretary of the Navy. Roosevelt stocked the War Production Board with Republican capitalists. The media turned from either propagandizing the success of the New Deal or hyping its failures to warning Americans of the looming existential threat that would soon make their differences irrelevant.  Most importantly, Americans lost their fears. From 1929 to 1938, the U.S. economy was in ruins. FDR’s New Deal could not restore economic growth or consumer confidence. As late as 1938, economic growth had sunk to negative 3.3 percent. Unemployment soared to an unsustainable 19 percent. Only the threat of war terrified Americans into taking a gamble — to work feverishly and to ramp up industry. By the end 1941, the early rearmament effort had spiked GDP growth to 17.7 percent. Unemployment had fallen to about 10 percent and would soon fall to about 2 percent. Americans began losing their dread that they could do nothing against a decade-long depression. The less they feared the Axis powers, the more they restarted the economy and began to produce a plethora of goods and services. After Pearl Harbor, Americans did not stay neutral, wait for government assistance or expect other nations to protect them.  Does World War II offer any lessons regarding our wrecked economy and staggering unemployment from the lockdown reaction to the coronavirus? Perhaps. Government cannot restore prosperity. Only entrepreneurs and risk-takers can. Americans must master their fears of the virus and dare to go back to work. Otherwise, locked-down states will continue to borrow to pay out public assistance without creating wealth from labor, production, and investment. Bankrupt states will beg the federal government to print money that it doesn’t have for bailouts to pay those who are not working and not creating collective wealth. The media must stick to reporting on the virus and the ailing economy. Their often-petty obsessions with destroying President Trump are long past monotonous. Trump himself must keep working with any Democratic governors who realize they must put their states back to work in order to have the money to pay for the fight against the virus. Interest rates are low. Gas is as cheap as it’s been in years. Inflation remains moribund. People are tired of being housebound. They want to get back to work to make and spend money.  All that is missing is confidence — or rather, the conviction that the coronavirus is no more dangerous than were the Axis powers and can be beaten far more quickly if we show the sort of will our grandparents had. © 2020 Tribune Content Agency, LLC 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					F
				rom coast to coast, Americans have put their lives on hold over the past eight weeks. We shut down “nonessential” businesses and placed the nation’s economy in an induced coma until unemployment reached levels on par with those of the Great Depression. We effectively ended the school year in mid March, when schools were closed and the inadequate substitute of “distance learning” was implemented. We delayed almost all “elective” medical care, including everything from joint replacements to treatments for non-life-threatening cancers to cataract surgeries. We have “socially distanced” from friends and relatives, canceled almost all events and travel, and, in some cases, barely left our homes.  That all sounds pretty bleak, and it most certainly is. But there’s good news, too. Those eight weeks of disruption bought us quite a lot in our fight with the coronavirus. *    *    * 1. With only a handful of exceptions, most of America’s hospitals did not get overwhelmed with a deluge of patients.  Thankfully, most hospitals across the country never came close their maximum capacity levels. The Army Corps of Engineers spent more than $660 million to turn 17 convention centers and other sites into emergency field hospitals. Nine of the 17 never saw any patients. The Javits Center in New York City treated 1,095, the TCF Center in Detroit treated 39, and the McCormick Center in Chicago treated 37. The hospital ship USNS Comfort treated a total of 182 patients over a three-and-a-half week period in New York City, while the USNS Mercy treated a total of 77 patients over a six-week period.  Certain hospitals in New York City, Detroit, and Prince George’s County, Maryland had stretches where patients had to be transferred to other hospitals to ensure space. Many hospitals in hard-hit cities and regions needed staffers to work at a relentless, breakneck pace, and they responded heroically. But we avoided the doomsday scenario seen in some cities in Italy and Spain, where the sick were denied care because there was no space for them in any hospital. 2. With each passing week, our ability to treat COVID-19 is improving.   There is no cure for the coronavirus, so the outbreak has forced American doctors and hospitals to try all kinds of measures — and they’re keeping track of which ones seem to be working the best. Many doctors have found that having patients lie on their stomachs or sides can generate higher blood-oxygen levels by reducing pressure on the lungs. After an enormous push to obtain and build massive numbers of ventilators, doctors are finding the machines less useful than they’d originally anticipated. 
 Meanwhile, research has continued apace into a handful of drugs that might mitigate the effects of COVID-19. Remdesivir, in particular, is being hailed as a “game changer” by some epidemiologists, and medical researchers are running six separate trials to determine whether it can be even more effective when combined with other medicines. Doctors in Hong Kong say they’re getting encouraging results from a three-drug cocktail of the HIV medicine lopinavir-ritonavir, the hepatitis drug ribavirin, and the multiple-sclerosis treatment interferon beta. We now know that the much-debated immunosuppressant drug hydroxychloroquine is probably going to be most useful in the 15 percent or so of coronavirus patients who go into a “cytokine storm,” during which the body’s immune system kicks into overdrive and starts attacking healthy cells in important organs. In short, doctors know a lot more and have a better chance of saving those who get sick from the virus now than they did a few months ago.   3. Our testing capacity has been beefed up. The number of tests conducted in the country each day has increased dramatically, from less than 100,000 in March to between 200,000 and 300,000 in May. It is one thing to call for more testing; it takes time and the right materials to make more tests, and it takes lab manpower to conduct them. The Food and Drug Administration has granted 69 companies “emergency use authorizations” to produce tests, which has helped. Roche, the first commercial developer to receive such an authorization for a SARS-CoV-2 test, says it is now producing 15 million tests per month — or roughly 500,000 per day. Meanwhile, Quest Diagnostics, the nation’s largest lab-testing company, says it now “has the capability to perform approximately 50,000 of these diagnostic tests per day, or approximately 350,000 tests per week.” In fact, one of the surprising problems in this pandemic has been unused testing capacity. A few hospitals, doctors’ offices, and labs are getting more tests than they can use.   4. We’ve bought time in the unprecedented global race to develop a vaccine. By “flattening the curve,” we’ve managed to keep our hospital systems from being overwhelmed, saving lives and giving researchers the breathing room they need as they search for a vaccine. There are more than 100 potential vaccines in development around the world. The White House developed “Operation Warp Speed,” which would pick a diverse set of vaccine candidates and pour virtually limitless resources into unprecedented comparative studies in animals, fast-tracked human trials, and manufacturing. Separately, several U.S. vaccine producers are contemplating doing joint trials to save time. The Oxford vaccine already appears to work in monkeys; now the question is whether it will work in human beings. Pfizer has already started human testing and hopes to scale it up dramatically by September. The market-research firm MorningStar reviewed the work of a variety of pharmaceutical companies and concluded that our entire fight with the virus could look dramatically different by the end of the year: While coronavirus vaccines have yet to produce clinical data, encouraging preclinical data, strong partnerships and funding, and rapid clinical progress all seem to indicate that use in high-risk populations could be possible by the end of 2020, with tens of millions of doses potentially available by that point. If just two of these vaccines succeed, we could have enough supply to protect high-risk populations in late 2020 and for broader vaccination as we enter 2021. 5. We’ve managed to avoid widespread shortages of personal protective equipment by ramping up production. Hospitals will want to build up their own stockpiles of PPE — in New York, Governor Andrew Cuomo is requiring medical facilities to accrue a 90-day supply — but the worst shortages are over. Despite many valid complaints about the federal government’s not moving as fast as health-care professionals wanted, by April 20, it had delivered 55 million N95 respirators, 69 million surgical masks, 10.5 million surgical gowns, and 10,000 ventilators to hospitals. *    *    * Americans will probably spend the rest of their days arguing about whether the nationwide shutdown was “worth it.” The cost in lost jobs, closed businesses, and depleted life savings is unparalleled and will probably take many years to fully recover from. Calls to suicide hotlines are increasing. Potentially preventable deaths from heart attacks and strokes may be rising, as people remain reluctant to go to the hospital because they’re scared to catch the virus. Children’s vaccinations are being put off. State and local budgets are wrecked. But our collective sacrifice has also generated much-needed advantages in the fight against this pandemic, and that’s worth noting, too. 

A  charge that one hears thrown around these days runs like this: (1) Reopening this or that segment of our economy or society will result in more deaths; (2) many people who are professedly “pro-life” are arguing for doing so, and in some cases are explicitly arguing that accepting a risk of death is an acceptable tradeoff; and therefore (3) these people are hypocrites and never really believed their pro-life rhetoric. This syllogism fails on two levels: It promotes a common misunderstanding of how pro-lifers think about life and death, and it ignores the extent to which the reopening debate involves both grave tradeoffs and major uncertainties.  What “Pro-Life” Means
To start with, it is important to define our terms. “Pro-life” does not mean the same thing to everyone: Some people use it simply as shorthand for opposing abortion, a position that different people come to through different reasoning. For others, “pro-life” encompasses a broader set of ideas about the value of human life and the moral justifications for ending it. Still, most people who are pro-life on abortion draw to one extent or another from the same universe of Western, Judeo-Christian traditions of moral philosophy on life-and-death issues. Moreover, the majority of American pro-lifers (though by no means all) are Christians influenced by specifically Christian views about life and death. Consider, as an example of pro-life reasoning, the Catechism of the Catholic Church. While not all Christian denominations use precisely the same arguments, Catholic teaching against abortion is notably rigorous and longstanding, drawn from a 2,000-year-old philosophical tradition on the sanctity of life, and set down in a document intended as authoritative around the world and down through the centuries. It is thus a sample of pro-life thinking that goes beyond situational responses to present-day American politics. Most American Christian traditions draw from similarly deep waters.  The Catechism emphasizes that the Fifth Commandment (“Thou Shalt Not Kill”) “forbids direct and intentional killing as gravely sinful.” Yet, it draws a distinction in three different areas that illustrate what it means by “direct,” “intentional,” and “killing”: (Emphasis, in all cases, in original.) Taken together, this is a philosophy that treats every human life as sacred and imposes a stern burden of justification for the taking of life. But it also draws lines to allow for real-world distinctions. Deliberately taking a life is different from accepting the “inability to impede” death, which is the natural end of all life. It is different from actions that are expected to lead to deaths as a matter of probability. It matters if actions that aren’t intended to cause death are justified, but justification demands “proportionate reasons.”   To the pro-lifer, looking at a particular person and taking their life away — actively, or by refusing life-or-death assistance — is a deliberate choice that is different in a morally meaningful way from simply adopting this or that public policy that is statistically projected to increase risks of death. This distinction has a long pedigree in Western philosophy and Christian theology. It tends to get hand-waved away by progressives who reject both, but rejecting other people’s premises does not make them hypocritical. 
 The Things We Know and the Things We Choose
There are real-world reasons for drawing a distinction between direct, intentional acts and the probability of undesired consequences. Simply put, there are limits to what we know. Estimated projections about the death toll from various policy choices are just that: estimates, which may be disputed and may be wrong. Just because you put a number on something does not make it so. A little over two weeks ago, when Georgia governor Brian Kemp decided to begin reopening parts of the state’s economy, Amanda Mull of The Atlantic branded it, in a screaming headline, “Georgia’s Experiment in Human Sacrifice: The state is about to find out how many people need to lose their lives to shore up the economy.” It was not an unusual media characterization of Kemp’s decision. Kemp’s choices may not have been the right ones, and statistics remain a moving target, but thus far, the sky has not fallen. Yesterday, the number of hospitalized patients reported by the state fell to 1,125, the lowest since Georgia began keeping those statistics on April 8. The seven-day moving average reported by the Georgia Department of Public Health dropped from 709 cases on April 27 to 242 cases at this writing on May 13; the seven-day moving average of deaths fell over the same period from 34 to 12.   The actual results are probably less optimistic than that, given the lags that exist in reporting data on a daily basis, but a spike in deaths large enough to amount to “human sacrifice” would be pretty hard to hide in that data. The lesson for all of us should be a little more humility in making sweeping claims about what we know will happen. Our philosophical framework for distinguishing between direct killing and probability is not just some sort of moral smokescreen; it reflects our long human experience with uncertainty. Abortion or euthanasia, by contrast, involves no uncertainty: The end of life is the point. On the question of what constitutes “proportionate reasons” for reopening businesses, churches, and other core institutions of the economy and civil society, there are also serious tradeoffs to weigh on the other side — tradeoffs that are themselves subject to all the same uncertainties. We know that prolonging lockdowns is likely to lead to damage to the economy, which in turn means more poverty, more unemployment and dependence that saps human dignity, and fewer social resources to alleviate suffering. We know that prolonging lockdowns is likely to exacerbate other problems: deaths from suicide and addiction, domestic abuse, missed diagnoses of other life-threatening diseases. We know these things, but we can only estimate their size to compare them with other estimates of lives lost.    Proportionality, when applied to big questions of social policy and probability, includes not only life but living. Humans were put on this earth not only to exist, but to make something of the time we are given. We know that staying away from church risks our immortal souls. We know that we will all die someday, and that we are likelier to die the older we get. Yet, as a society, we do not adopt and never have adopted the view that fear of death should be the only thing we value. Even the Catechism’s litany on end-of-life medical choices sees limits to “medical procedures that are burdensome, dangerous, extraordinary, or disproportionate to the expected outcome.” Weighing economic and social factors in reopening decisions is something everyone does anyway, whether or not they are willing to admit it. Why hasn’t the New York City subway shut down completely, given its outsized role as a vector for disease? Mainly because some people need it to get to work to make a living. Guess what? Lots of people need to get to work to make a living, even people who do not take subways. That does not mean we impose no restrictions on anyone; it does mean that everybody’s analysis of the question already includes those kinds of considerations.  Indeed, it is only in our modern age — since the discovery of penicillin in 1928 — that it is even possible to consider living without constant fear of infectious disease. Societies before us took steps, sometimes harsh ones, to fight disease, but they never just stopped living for fear of dying. Pro-life has a real meaning when it comes to the prohibition on deliberate taking of lives, but it has never meant that we cannot also be pro-living when it comes to accepting a certain level of risk, and trusting in the Lord or to chance. The idea that weighing life against living is forbidden to pro-lifers is simply a failure to understand that crucial distinction. The same is true of evaluations of the relative risk to older and younger people. Being pro-life means you reject the view that Grandma should be unplugged because she’s old. But it does not mean that you close your eyes to the stubborn reality that we all die, and we all run more risk of death as we age. We can accept some additional risk to older people, in going about our daily business, because we already all live with more risk as we get older.  Public officials need to consider risks to life and health in deciding what to reopen, when, and how. Pro-life public officials should take very seriously the risk that the wrong choices will lead to more deaths, and they should weigh that more heavily than any other factor. But pro-lifers are in no way required to shut their eyes to all other forms of human life and need, or to shut the country just to prove a point. 

According to this report in the New York Daily News, there was a cruel and vicious attack on Hasidic Jews in Brooklyn on Sunday: A husband and wife face hate crime charges after jumping out of their car in Brooklyn and attacking a group of Hasidic Jews, pulling protective masks from the victims’ faces and blaming them for spreading coronavirus, police said Monday. Paulo Pinho, 35, and his wife, Clelia Pinho, 46, pulled up in their vehicle at Bedford Ave. and Ross St. in Williamsburg shortly after 8:30 p.m. on Sunday to confront the victims, according to cops. “You Jews are getting us all sick,” the couple allegedly yelled at a trio of men, according to police sources. “The mayor says you Jews are the reason we’re getting sick.” Moshe Rosenbaum, 39, one of the victims, said Paulo Pinho stepped out of the car and was recording people on his cell phone. “They came into our area to videotape us without masks,” Rosenbaum said. “But we all had masks on. So he started ripping off the masks of females, mothers with small children.” Hasidic Jews were subject to evil attacks on Brooklyn streets and worse, as we know before all of this coronavirus business. Bill de Blasio’s recent message “to the Jewish community” and threat to shut down places of worship was dangerous because it kindles flames that we all know exist, and at a time of such anxiety for so many. (And then there is the disregard it shows for religious freedom, and at a time when people are struggling with the kind of existential questions religion sure can help with.) Yes, the funeral he was responding to broke the gathering rules so many of us have been cooperating with. As someone who is longing for Mass and heartbroken for the families who haven’t been able to have funeral Masses for their beloved who have died, I certainly understand though (surely more than I understand anti-Semitism).  Yesterday on his radio show, New York’s Cardinal Timothy Dolan had religious leaders on talking about people’s need for community and navigating things forward, easing worship in with protections. People need God. People want God. There’s so much seeking going on right now — God is seeking us in this time, reminding us that there’s something greater than days filled with press conference viewing and Zoom meetings. Let’s be careful and be patient with one another. I remarked on social media earlier that I don’t think I’ve appreciated the sun as much as I have during these coronavirus weeks. Staying connected to the Source of all light, we can be light amidst darkness as we combat evil in all its forms for the protection of human life, especially our most vulnerable.  

1. Pandemic Piles New Pressures on Foster Children, Caretakers 2. My Sister Died of Coronavirus. She Needed Care, but Her Life Was Not Disposable 3. Coronavirus in Pa.: Hospitals seeing more severe child abuse injuries 4. N.J. Officer Known As ‘Mr. Glen Ridge’ Dies of Coronavirus 5. Religious Liberty in COVID-19’s Wake  6. Nurses on the Front Lines: A History of Heroism from Florence Nightingale to Coronavirus  7. Maria McFadden on Motherhood 8. U.S. Bishops Call for Federal Pornography Crackdown 9. Pandemic Means Americans with Disabilities Aren’t Getting the Services They Need | PBS NewsHour 10. Questions of Bias in Covid-19 Treatment Add to the Mourning for Black Families 11. The Glory and Risk of Cities 12. ‘Discovering What’s Essential’: Strengthening Marriages During Lockdown 13. Sometimes the Life of Faith Is Just Walking, Not Fainting 14. The Beauty and Simplicity of the Family Rosary  15. Kay Hymowitz on the series on Phyllis Schlafly 16. Catholic Parish Life (As We Knew It) Is Not Coming Back Anytime Soon 17. For Bookstore Owners, Reopening Holds Promise and Peril 18. Obviously, people handle this pandemic and stay-at-home orders (and regulations to wear masks) differently. Some handle it very well publicly, but privately struggle with it all. Others are clearly struggling publicly and very vocally.  Let’s be patient with each other. — Fr. Thomas Petri, OP (@PetriOP) May 13, 2020  19. “There are no ordinary people …” — Rick Garnett (@RickGarnett) May 12, 2020  20. A little bit of hope is a powerful thing . . . I hope Pastor Tom’s story and tips on navigating a relationship with a parent with mental illness will be an encouragement to you today. #mentalhealthmonth  https://t.co/dBJcwbAOa5 — Kay Warren (@KayWarren1) May 12, 2020   

This one is to file in the two wrongs don’t make a right file: Amazon is asking Congress to pass a federal price-gouging legislation. According to Politico Pro: Amazon today called on Congress for the first time to pass federal price gouging legislation that would give regulators expanded powers to crack down on profiteering related to the coronavirus pandemic. It seems that the giant company sees this as a solution to having to comply with 30 different state price-gouging rules. Amazon, which has at times taken heat from state enforcers and some lawmakers for not policing price gouging sufficiently in its massive online marketplace, said a federal framework would fill holes left by laws at the state level. State legislators are notoriously bad at economics, and they repeatedly fail to understand the importance of price increase in times of crises. Unfortunately, in their eagerness to combat price hikes, which they often describe as immoral, these legislators are keeping resources from being reallocated and supplies from rising. In other words, they are making things worse. Of course, I am sure that Amazon’s cost of complying with the 30 states that have price-gouging rules on the books is annoying and expansive. But that’s no reason for lobbying for a bad policy to be implemented at the federal level. As I said, two wrongs don’t make a right. A bad state policy is still a bad federal policy. Considering the level of economic ignorance all around, I would be tempted to make everything on this anti-price-gouging page created by Russ Roberts mandatory reading and listening. But if you are lacking time, read this piece. A tidbit: When there’s a fixed supply of something — say seats for opening night for Hamilton at the Richard Rodgers Theatre on Broadway — higher prices just mean more money for the theater and less money for the customer. The theatre can’t add more seats to accommodate a bigger audience, so StubHub allocates the seats to the people willing to pay the most. But for goods that you can produce more of, allowing prices to rise gives producers the incentive to make more, which eventually bring prices down toward where they were before the increase in demand.    

How much of what we hear from day to day is really just meant to please the Chinese Communist Party? When LeBron James said that Daryl Morey’s pro-Hong Kong comments were “either misinformed or not really educated on the situation,” had he engaged in a direct conversation with a Chinese dignitary or had the NBA merely relayed its concerns to him on China’s behalf? Did some officious CCP official get a pat on the head when the World Health Organization kept praising China’s response to the emergence of a new coronavirus in Wuhan before it declared a global health emergency? When Governor Andrew Cuomo started bizarrely referring to the coronavirus as the “European virus,” was he hoping to preserve Chinese investment in New York?  It’s no longer paranoid or irrational to ask these questions. This week, an op-ed signed by the EU’s ambassador to China and his counterparts from the 27 EU member states was revealed to have been censored and edited by the Chinese government, apparently without the permission or foreknowledge of many of the authors. How common is such chicanery? We’ve had lots of recent occasions to see China’s pettiness. The CCP made Marriott shut down its own website for having referred to Macau and Tibet as something other than part of China. The Johns Hopkins University COVID-19 tracker quickly changed Taiwan to “Taipei and environs” amid what one presumes was Chinese pressure. German-owned Mercedes is just one company that has had to ask China’s forgiveness for merely mentioning the Dalai Lama. The United Kingdom once had to read an abject statement of apology aloud to Chinese dignitaries after committing the same sin.  Australian prime minister Scott Morrison is one leader who seems to have lost any illusions about China. He’s not calling COVID-19 a “European virus,” and he has demanded an investigation of how the World Health Organization botched things in Wuhan. In response, Chinese state-media outlets have urged consumer boycotts of Australian agricultural products and called Australia “gum stuck to the bottom of China’s shoe.” China doesn’t just get the first helpings of BS, it gets the bull as well. Going back to the 1990s, Smithfield has a history of preferring foreign workers because native-born workers are easier to unionize than illegal workers. As globalization advanced, it also found it preferred foreign owners: It was bought by the China-backed Shuanghui Group in 2013. Now, English is just one of the top ten languages at the Smithfield pork-processing plant in Sioux Falls, S.D.   The language barrier that Smithfield deliberately creates through the liberal use of our “guest worker” visa system is not just a major impediment to labor organization. It turns out to be a big impediment to communicating public-health information, and a major reason that the Sioux Falls plant became the site of one of the worst COVID-19 outbreaks in the country. 
 Which brings us to Donald Trump. Trump was elected in no small part because of his opposition to immigration and globalization. He asked who really benefited from these phenomena, and proposed doing something about them. China, as a Communist nation that profits remora-like from the global market that it didn’t build and doesn’t defend or respect, was prominent on his ostensible list of targets, and continued to be after he took office. Unfortunately, the key word there is “ostensible.” As is the case on so many issues, Trump is not as tough on China as he’d like everyone to think. Yes, he initiated a U.S.–China “trade war” aimed at reining in Beijing’s economic malfeasance, but he has steadfastly refused to bring up any ancillary issues about the human-rights abuses in Xinjiang or the political abuses in Hong Kong. Yes, he signed a bill aimed at pushing back on the latter abuses after it passed Congress with overwhelming, bipartisan support, but his secretary of state has now delayed its implementation. Yes, he’s called COVID-19 the “Chinese virus” and bragged about his travel ban on China. But his administration somehow let nearly half a million people through anyway, and he’s proven just as likely to praise the Chinese regime in stomach-churning terms as he is to scold it: One of the many great things about our just signed giant Trade Deal with China is that it will bring both the USA & China closer together in so many other ways. Terrific working with President Xi, a man who truly loves his country. Much more to come! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) January 22, 2020  Trump’s supporters might plausibly claim that his reluctance to more forcefully attack Xi’s regime in public comes from a desire to preserve the trade deal he negotiated. They’d have a much harder time arguing that the trade deal is actually a desirable outcome for the U.S. All in all, Trump’s administration deep-sixed the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would have put more pressure on China, then engaged in a short, inconclusive series of trade skirmishes with China that did nothing to repatriate industry to the U.S., and then announced the trade deal while giving Xi a tongue bath.   Even if, as seems likely, the deal was always a cynical ploy to get Wall Street frothing in an election year, that gambit has been overcome by events, namely the global pandemic. So why is our “nationalist” president still sticking with this trade agreement? Why can’t he criticize the Chinese government? Who benefits from the rise of this new American “nationalism,” anyway? 

I have to say, I admire the way Democrats are using every opportunity they have to grow the size of government to levels unseen before, one “stimulus” bill at a time. Case in point: their new proposal to spend $3 trillion on top of what Congress has already agreed to in the past few weeks. The proposal is particularly striking in contrast to how far the Republicans in Congress would be willing to push for their policies if they were the ones in the minority.  The ink on the previous $2.2 trillion bill and the individual checks is barely dry, but Democrats are demanding the following: The hypocrisy of some in Congress is on full display here. In addition to more spending, the Democrats — the same ones who are always complaining about the rich not paying their fair share of taxes — propose a repeal of the $10,000 State and Local Tax Deduction cap for two years. That would, of course, disproportionately benefit higher-income taxpayers. There is a chance that this proposal goes nowhere in the Senate. That said, Republicans usually feel the need to respond to massive government-expansion proposals with relatively smaller government-expansion proposals — which still expand the government. They should resist the temptation. There will be a life after this crisis. The impact of the already-approved spending increase will be severe. This new study looks at the projected impact the spending and the debt will have on our (and every other country’s) growth prospects: Large fiscal expenditures, as well as more loans by households and firms, will lead to sharp increases in public and private debt in the near future. The resulting debt burdens may impact both post-lockdown economic recovery and medium-run growth prospects. This column presents evidence on the effects of the total debt burden on output dynamics. The results suggest increases in total debt to GDP have significant negative effects on growth.  As a reminder, in a new paper, Jack Salmon and I review all the recent academic papers on the issue of debt and growth since the Great Recession. What we find isn’t encouraging: A large majority of studies on the debt-growth relationship find a threshold somewhere between 75 and 100 percent of GDP. More importantly, every study except two finds a negative relationship between high levels of government debt and economic growth. This is true even for studies that find no common threshold. The empirical evidence overwhelmingly supports the view that a large amount of government debt has a negative impact on economic growth potential, and in many cases that impact gets more pronounced as debt increases. The current fiscal trajectory of the United States means that in the coming 30-year period, the effects of a large and growing public debt ratio on economic growth could amount to a loss of $4 trillion or $5 trillion in real GDP, or as much as $13,000 per capita, by 2049.  

On Mother’s Day, social media took note of a suburban Denver restaurant, in the town of Castle Rock, that was jam-packed with customers in flagrant defiance of state restrictions, which currently limit restaurants to takeout and delivery. Pictures showed customers at C & C Coffee & Kitchen not wearing masks and sitting shoulder-to-shoulder. The owner of the restaurant cited the Constitution as her basis for staying open. The health department predictably yanked the restaurant’s license.  The Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment told ABC News it “has issued an Order of Summary Suspension to the restaurant for its retail food license, which complements the Tri-County order closing the restaurant. Summary suspension actions are immediate and require the restaurant to shut down as soon as they receive the suspension order. Both agencies may choose to pursue additional legal action if the restaurant owner violates their respective orders. If a business remained open after its license was suspended, the next step would be to get a court order to close the business.” Customers replied by taping cash to the window of the shuttered restaurant. Support for C&C Coffee & Kitchen in Castle Rock displayed in CASH taped to entrance. By our count, $289… business shut down by @GovofCO & @TCHDHealth.More this afternoon 3-7pMT @710KNUS pic.twitter.com/rdYvRqeZud — The Steffan Tubbs Show🇺🇸🎙️🎧 (@TubbsShow) May 12, 2020     While the owner’s frustration is understandable, it was pretty obvious that this would happen. Violate the law, and you’ll get busted.  Still, different people have different levels of risk tolerance, and this is the fissure that is cracking open. The Democratic governor of Colorado, Jared Polis, said the restaurant posed a public-health hazard to everyone: “I love my mom far too much to put her at risk by visiting a busy restaurant operating illegally, just to take a selfie with omelets and a mimosa,” he said Monday. “Colorado, America, we are better than that.” Okay, so . . . don’t send your mom to a busy restaurant. If your mom stays home, her life won’t be much altered by the fact that others are going to restaurants. As is often the case with people making these arguments, the heretofore natural and understandable desire of people not to live under house arrest is framed as a horrendous and aberrant act of selfishness, a desire to “take a selfie with omelets and a mimosa.” The even more understandable and natural desire of small-business owners to stay in business is ignored. How long can those who are afraid to be in the company of other people stop those who are unafraid from going out? There probably won’t be a vaccine this year. There may not be a vaccine next year. There may never be a vaccine. Is everyone supposed to cower at home indefinitely? Or will we have to recognize that some people are okay with crowded restaurants and others aren’t? If you don’t want the economy to open up, stay home in a hazmat suit and surgical mask until a vaccine is found.  

Some movie theaters are preparing to cautiously reopen, which seems like it can be done safely if people are properly spaced, although I’m not sure how I’m supposed to wear a mask and eat jujubes at the same time. But the movie business is facing lots of problems besides its theaters being closed. One is that there are basically no new movies to show. The major studios stopped releasing new movies in March because there were so few theaters operating.  A minor-looking Russell Crowe film called Unhinged, which was going to be released theatrically by a brand-new indie player called Solstice Studios in September, has been moved up to a July 1 release. That is set to be the first nationwide movie launch since the lockdown. The new Christoper Nolan $200 million “Quantum Cold War movie” Tenet is still set to launch July 17, eagerly backed by its director, who thinks it’s important to get people back to the movies, but Warner Bros. has to be very, very nervous about the likely effect on the box office numbers due to audience fears about getting infected. On the other hand, Tenet will, if it is indeed released on July 17, pretty much have the nation’s movie theaters to itself. What if all twelve theaters at the multiplex are showing it? People could have lots of empty seats around them. In the meantime, theater owners looking for products are proposing to raid the libraries of film classics. They think Americans will come back to the movies to see features like Jaws, Psycho, the Hunger Games movies, and the Harry Potter series. Personally, I’d love to have one more crack at seeing David Lean’s epics on the big screen. I’ve seen Lawrence of Arabia in a theater twice, and Doctor Zhivago once. Tickets might be sold for as little as $2 to $5.  The other retro development is drive-in theaters, the original socially distant movie-going option. New York governor Andrew Cuomo gave the okay for drive-ins to reopen in the Empire State starting Friday, which raises the question: Are there still drive-in movie theaters in New York? Yes, 28 of them, according to this site — more than any other state. There are 300 or so in the country. The closest one to New York City appears to be the one in Warwick, one hour north of the metropolis, which is already selling tickets to its weekend offerings: Bad Boys for Life, The Invisible Man, Trolls World Tour, etc.  

Kudos to North Dakota governor Doug Burgum for announcing normal, in-classroom summer school will start on schedule on June 1. North Dakota joins Idaho and Montana as the first back-to-school states — which is a huge relief to children and to parents trying to get back to work. Contrary to distorted media coverage, Dr. Anthony Fauci didn’t tell the Senate Health Committee yesterday that schools shouldn’t be reopened in the fall.  Senator Lamar Alexander asked Fauci about school starting in August, saying: “Let’s start with treatments and vaccines first.” Fauci replied to that by noting that “having treatments available, or a vaccine, to facilitate the reentry of students into the fall term would be something that would be something of a bit of a bridge too far.” He continued: “What they really want is to know if they are safe. That’s the question that’ll have to be due with what we discussed earlier about testing.”  A feeling of safety is important, and certainly the ability of point-of-care tests available to anyone who is worried about being infected will help. But given that 20 million Americans attend colleges and 50 million go to K–12 public schools, we should not wait until they have all been tested, because most are at exceptionally low risk themselves and of passing the virus on to others. Students in France, Switzerland, Norway, and the Netherlands are all back in class and will be joined by Germany and other countries later this month.  Denmark reopened schools a month ago, and there is no evidence of any school outbreaks. Iceland, which never closed its schools, ranks on a per-capita basis at the very top of testing for the virus. Kai Stefansson, an advisor to Iceland’s health ministry, reports that tests show children are extremely unlikely to be infected or transmit the virus to others. “We have not found a single instance of a child infecting parents,” he said.  

Some states engaged in reopening their economies have not yet seen coronavirus outbreaks feared by health officials. In particular, Georgia and Florida, which were projected to see a sharp rise in new cases, have not experienced major new outbreaks in the past week. The average number of new daily cases in Florida declined by 14 percent over the past week, and Georgia’s average new daily cases dropped by 12 percent during the same time period, according to an analysis by Axios.  The data on new cases is imperfect because of variations between states in the amount and frequency of coronavirus testing. As of Wednesday, Florida has confirmed almost 42,000 coronavirus cases, while Georgia has confirmed 35,000 cases. “Cases [in the U.S.] still continue to expand, and some of that is [due to] the fact that we’re testing more,” former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said Wednesday on NBC’s The Today Show. Gottlieb cautioned that “this is an epidemic that hasn’t run its course nationally, and hasn’t really started to show sustained declines outside of the New York region.” Florida governor Ron Desantis has stated that fears of an impending disaster in his state were overblown.   “There’s been a lot that’s been done to try to promote fear, to promote worst-case scenarios, to drive hysteria,” DeSantis said in late April. “People should know that worst-case scenario thinking — that has not proven to be true [in Florida].” The state is currently in its second week of a phased reopening. Businesses including nail salons, hair salons, and barbershops were allowed to open on Monday, and beaches across much of the state were opened over the weekend. Georgia has allowed businesses such as restaurants and gyms to reopen with heavy restrictions, including limiting restaurants to 10 patrons per 300 square meters.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In the coming weeks, we will see a genuine struggle in the American media to determine whether the dominant narrative of the early months of the pandemic is . . . Wise blue state governors enacted sweeping lockdowns in their states and saved lives, while irresponsible, reckless red state governors opened up beaches and businesses too early, dooming their citizens to needless deaths… . . . or . . . While each governor responded differently, the worst effects of this pandemic came in nursing homes, and several states enacted policies that increased the risk to those within those homes. New York, New Jersey and California required nursing homes to accept still-contagious recovering patients, Michigan permitted returning those patients to homes, Massachusetts eventually boosted Medicaid payments for homes accepting those patients, and Pennsylvania failed to follow its plan for handling outbreaks in nursing homes. This morning, the Harrisburg ABC affiliate reports: While [State Health Secretary Dr. Rachel] Levine beefs up rules and oversight at nursing homes and long-term care facilities, ABC27 learned the health secretary’s mother recently vacated a personal care home in the Midstate. “My mother requested, and my sister and I as her children complied to move her to another location during the Covid-19 outbreak,” Levine said. “My mother is 95 years old. She is very intelligent and more than competent to make her own decisions.” Many in Harrisburg wondered what kind of message it sends — when a close relative of the person tasked with overseeing those types of facilities doesn’t choose to stay in one. Levine countered that she is working to protect the health of all Pennsylvanians. Oh.  Are Pennsylvania’s nursing and long-term care homes safe? Safe enough for some people, apparently, but not safe enough for the state health director’s mother. 

In my piece this morning, I argue that Congress should provide some aid to states as their tax revenues tank from the coronavirus shutdown, but that that aid should be conditioned in such a way as to prevent its being diverted to the treatment of what we might call “preexisting conditions,” meaning the states’ unfunded pension liabilities — a very big problem that has nothing to do with the epidemic and was created entirely by political decisions that were bad and irresponsible and known to be bad and irresponsible by the people who made them.  How might that work? One idea I have kicked around is structuring state aid as a special lending facility, e.g. as a 20-year loan that is forgivable in annual installments on the condition that the beneficiaries make their actuarially required contributions to their pension systems — miss a year and the loan gets called in. That has two problems: One, it doesn’t do anything about the existing unfunded liabilities, which are going to require states and beneficiaries to renegotiate the terms of pension plans, which is true even in those situations in which the law forbids the reduction of benefits — the law can say whatever the lawmakers want it to, but the money isn’t there. Two, some of my more legally minded colleagues think that this sort of arrangement might run into a problem under the anti-coercion doctrine spelled out in NFIB v. Sibelius. I’d be interested to hear what everybody else thinks about that. Leaving the states to deal with the coronavirus fallout on their own is probably not the best policy. But money is fungible, and using the epidemic as political camouflage to bail out poorly run states (and these are not exclusively Democrat-leaning states) from the result of decades of knowingly irresponsible decision-making is bad policy, too. This is a matter of looking for the best bad option.  

On the menu today: why our response to the virus has always been hobbled by our individual and collective difficulty accepting hard truths; why we shouldn’t be surprised that doctors and politicians disagree because of their different incentives; a tough question of matching the most vulnerable workers to the work that needs to be done before the pandemic can come to an end; and all kinds of helpful advice to parents from all of those wise sages on Twitter.  Americans Struggle to Deal with Hard Truths Think back to March 9, when Utah Jazz center Rudy Gobert touched all the microphones of the assembled reporters. The National Basketball Association, growing worried about the potential spread of the coronavirus, had barred reporters from the locker rooms and instead had players appear for post-game press conferences in a separate room. Gobert apparently thought the precautions were ridiculous and that the league was being paranoid. Two nights later, Gobert tested positive for coronavirus, prompting the NBA to suspend the season. Rudy Gobert is not a bad person. He was shocked and remorseful about what he had done and he subsequently donated $500,000 to an employee relief fund and local charities. There is no indication that he’s the kind of person who would deliberately put someone else at risk of contracting a dangerous virus. So why did Gobert touch all the microphones? Because the idea that he could be putting people at risk just by standing close to them, or merely touching an object they would later touch, was just unthinkable to him. It was a truth he was not ready or willing to accept.  We’ve all been forced to accept and adapt to some hard truths — maybe even once unthinkable ones. As of this writing, the American death toll is above 83,000 and we’re approaching 300,000 deaths worldwide. Our official figures are probably undercounting the true toll, as the overall mortality rate since mid-March is significantly higher than the official number of coronavirus deaths. (Some of these were probably people with non-coronavirus health issues such as strokes and heart attacks, who didn’t go to a hospital in time.) The unemployment rate is at Great Depression levels. Certain industries such as airlines and tourism have collapsed and are unlikely to recover for at least a year, maybe significantly longer than that. Our food supply chain is scrambling to cope with disruptions, shut-down restaurants, and meat-packing plant closures. Almost every school in America is closed and our “nonessential” businesses are only now starting to reopen after about two months.  For a long time in American life, most people could look at the news most days, shrug, and say “Eh, this is much ado about nothing, things will turn out okay.”  Even our worst natural disasters — such as Hurricane Katrina — only affected one region of the country at once. The 9/11 attacks were absolutely horrific and terrifying, but most of America outside of New York and Washington managed to return to something resembling “normal” daily routines pretty quickly. The Great Recession was painful and slow, but even at its worst, about 90 percent of the workforce kept going to work, the schools remained open, and food was on the shelves. Things that seem like a big deal to those of us who follow the news closely — the massive hack of the Office of Personnel Management, Healthcare.gov, unprofessional behavior in the U.S. Secret Service, Fast and Furious, IRS abuses — were no big deal to millions upon millions of Americans. Many probably never even heard much about them. Whether or not we think people should ignore these developments, it is undeniable that most of the general public chose to ignore them and suffered no real consequence for tuning it out. Most Americans got used to being able to tune out the news and the problems of the rest of the world and preferred to think about happier topics such as reality TV or sports or video games or whatever. No matter how excited the people on the television seemed to be screaming about Lehman Brothers or Ebola or Russia or the Deep State, things always seemed to turn out okay. But now . . . things are not turning out okay.   The coronavirus pandemic is the first problem in American life in a long time that has affected the life of just about everyone. It is the first crisis in a long time that people from coast to coast cannot choose to ignore. Your local hospital canceled your nonessential visit. Your employer laid you off or furloughed you. You cannot visit your elderly relative in a nursing home. Businesses around you are closed — other than your supermarket and pharmacy. The shelves in your store may not have had toilet paper a few weeks ago — or meat now. Your local restaurants are either now only take-out and delivery or have shut down entirely. Your locality may be requiring you to wear a mask, and you’re not allowed to gather in groups. Every major event and gathering is canceled. Your children’s school is closed.  What’s more, no one in any position of authority seems to know when things will go “back to normal.” I suspect that’s what’s really frightening Americans. We can endure a lot, as long as we know there’s an end date, a light at the end of the tunnel.  We thought South Korea was showing us the better way and were ahead of us — but they just had a new spike in cases. France and Germany saw sudden rises, just as they were getting ready to loosen restrictions. Spain’s daily death toll is remaining stubbornly high. Forget worries about a second wave; no one is sure we’re done with the first one yet. Doctors and Politicians Do Not Have the Same Incentives Yesterday’s Senate hearing featuring Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, had a much-discussed exchange between Fauci and Senator Rand Paul. Unsurprisingly, quite a few people are choosing to see the exchange as yet another familiar battle between “wise doctor and foolish Republican senator” — who, oh, by the way, is a doctor himself and who already was diagnosed with and beat SARS-CoV-2. Fauci’s job is to tell us the truth, as best he can determine, in his medical judgment. His job isn’t to sugarcoat it or make the truth easier to hear or bear. Fauci’s job is not to be popular. He’s not up for reelection. While he would probably prefer to not leave the American public with a sense of despair, he’s not obligated to try to make us feel better about what the truth is. To paraphrase a wise not-so-old philosopher, his facts don’t care about our feelings.  Politicians, however, do care a great deal about what the public wants to hear. And year by year, decade by decade, our electorate has shown very little patience for any lawmaker that tells the public hard truths that it would rather not hear. We don’t like hearing that we’re spending more money that we’re taking in, and that interest payments on our debt will grow larger and larger in the future. We don’t like to hear that 60 percent of federal spending is Social Security, Medicaid, and Medicare, and that reducing the deficit would require more than just cutting less popular programs such as foreign aid. (Polling indicates many Americans think foreign aid is about 25 percent of the federal budget; it makes up less than 1 percent.) The Fauci approach — “tell the truth, whether or not people want to hear it” — is only half the challenge. The other half is getting people to act upon truths they did not want to hear. We don’t like hearing that we need to eat healthier and exercise more. We don’t like hearing that we have to save more and spend less. We don’t like being reminded that we should be prepared for disasters — either natural or manmade. Those who like public transportation as a tool against climate change do not like hearing that public transportation could be a particularly dangerous vector for infectious diseases. The biggest story of this pandemic is how quickly we can come to terms with some very hard truths. Among them: The challenge before us is to figure out a way to live with these hard truths. “Everyone stay in your homes until further notice” is not really living. How Do We Match Vulnerable Workers with Work That Needs to Be Done?  When you read “the Avik Roy plan,” it stinks. But the plan has the advantage of being realistic; it does not assume that any of our problems magically get better in the coming year. If your risk categories include being 40 and over, or having diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease, asthma, smoker, kidney dialysis, any kind of cancer treatment or recovery, or being overweight . . . that’s a lot of Americans who need to consistently practice strict social distancing “until further notice.” A wiser and sharper group of leaders would already be brainstorming how to match these demographics — who still need to make a living — with work that needs to be done to alleviate the pandemic and can be done while social distancing. ADDENDUM: I’m so glad that the world has so many non-parents to tell parents how easy this summer will be on kids, without any summer camps, summer schools, summer jobs programs, sports leagues, public pools, large gatherings of any kind, and minimizing time with grandparents. You see, back when these folks were young, they did all kinds of things and these darn kids today are just too spoiled and it’s all the fault of overprotective helicopter parents! By no stretch of the imagination could the coming summer be a difficult one for children across the country and around the world! I’m so glad that Twitter gives all of these people a venue to share this wisdom to the rest of us. Yesterday I also learned, any expression of concern about the state of the nation’s children experiencing several months of isolating social distancing means that you don’t care about the elderly or unemployed, in the eyes of a total #*$#ing moron.  

Texas attorney general Ken Paxton warned officials in Austin, Dallas, and San Antonio, that the cities could face lawsuits if they do not relax coronavirus measures that go further than state law allows. Paxton said the cities may not require citizens to stay at home and wear masks, calling the local emergency orders “unlawful.”  “We trust you will act quickly to correct these mistakes to avoid further confusion and litigation challenging these unconstitutional and unlawful restrictions,” Paxton wrote in letters to the mayors of Austin and San Antonio and three county judges in Travis, Bexar, and Dallas Counties. Governor Greg Abbott allowed his stay at home order to expire at the beginning of this month, saying he will allow the state’s economy to reopen in phases and encouraging Texans to continue “safe distancing practices” as the state continues efforts to eradicate the virus. The first businesses that were allowed to reopen this month are restaurants as well as retail stores, malls, theaters, libraries, and museums. Businesses that engage in close contact between people, such as hair salons and gyms, are not allowed to reopen yet, Abbott said, adding that he wants them to open “as soon as possible” and expects that to be in mid-May.  The governor said his statewide order overrides efforts by localities to enforce stricter social distancing measures. A judge in Dallas County said law offices must remain closed, while in San Antonio, essential businesses were ordered to provide masks for their employees. Dallas, San Antonio, and Austin also all issued directives to residents to cover their faces in public. The attorney general also said stay at home orders are “unenforceable” at this point.  “Your orders purport to strip Texans of their agency,” Paxton’s letter read. “Although your orders ‘require’ individuals to wear masks when they leave their home, they are free to choose whether to wear one or not.” The letter also pushes back against local restrictions on religious services after Governor Abbot said places of worship could open as long as their follow safety measures.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Trump administration has collected evidence that Chinese and Iranian hackers are targeting American healthcare firms and universities, hindering coronavirus vaccine research in the process, the Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday. The hackers have the capability to “irreversibly harm” American healthcare facilities, according to U.S. officials. Cyber attacks by Chinese and Iranian hackers have already damaged coronavirus vaccine research, although officials are still trying to assess whether the damage was intentional or collateral.  “It is difficult, and sometimes impossible, to know what motivates such malfeasance, but any such activity carries with it the risk of triggering accidental, disruptive effects,” a senior administration official told the Journal. Some within the Trump administration may come to view such cyber attacks as acts of war, a major change in the perception of cyber attacks. The U.S. on Wednesday will release a public warning that China is attempting to hack into American coronavirus vaccine research. A draft of the warning accuses China of seeking “valuable intellectual property and public health data through illicit means related to vaccines, treatments and testing.” The coronavirus has infected over 4 million people worldwide since the start of the pandemic, and nations are racing to find potential treatments and vaccines. Nations that develop and produce a vaccine will have enormous geopolitical leverage, as the pathogen has shuttered much of the world economy.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				hen Congress was deliberating about a massive coronavirus stimulus package in late March, the Democrats decided that they wanted to attach some strings to the money they were handing out. For example, Senator Chuck Schumer (D., N.Y.) fought for a provision prohibiting share buybacks by any company that took a stimulus loan — including for a period of time after the loan had been repaid.  Share buybacks are an especial hate object for Democrats. They shouldn’t be. The big stink on corporate management in the United States is the agent-principal problem — corporate executives are supposed to be looking after the interest of shareholders, but the executives’ own interests and those of the shareholders are not precisely aligned. One of the things that management can do for shareholders is give them what it is that got them into investing in the first place: money. Dividends are one way to pay shareholders, and share buybacks are another. Buybacks are not always the right thing to do — to everything there is a season — but there isn’t anything inherently objectionable about them. Like derivatives and business tax deductions, share buybacks are most energetically denounced by the people who least understand what they are and how they work. But, for Democrats, the string’s the thing. Elizabeth Warren’s proposal to partly nationalize all major American businesses by having the federal government dictate to them the composition of their boards, compensation practices, etc., is not designed to make life better for median-wage line workers. Giving politicians a whip hand over multi-billion-dollar enterprises is its own reward. And it leads to other rewards: There is a reason why the ladies and gentlemen at finance-connected law firms such as Brown Rudnick and Berger & Montague open up their wallets for Senator Warren. The power to dictate the terms of business is the power to destroy a business — or an industry.  Republicans have an interest in the finer points of string-attachment right at the moment. The Democrats are pushing for another multi-trillion-dollar bailout bill, this one aimed at state and local governments and almost certain to disproportionately benefit Democrat-run states and cities that have been less than entirely sober in the management of their fiscal affairs. Republicans are not of one mind in this: Senator Mitt Romney, among others, has emphasized that it is not only Democratic states that are in trouble but some Republicans ones, too, Kansas and Kentucky among them. Other Republicans, such as Florida’s governor Ron DeSantis, argue that the coronavirus emergency shouldn’t be used as political cover to bail out states that were basket cases long before the plague from Wuhan reached Albany, Sacramento, and Springfield. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.), the guy who actually runs things in Washington, has been uneven in his public statements on this. He has at times suggested a very destructive course of action — rewriting U.S. bankruptcy law to extend bankruptcy protections and processes to the states, which would upend centuries of bankruptcy law and turn the Constitution on its head by putting federal judges or other federal overseers in charge of states’ finances. Senator McConnell also has suggested that other courses of action might be preferred.   Most of this could be solved in a relatively straightforward way by putting the right strings on the aid. 
 The main issue here is the unfunded liabilities of the state and local pension systems, particularly in Democrat-run jurisdictions such as the state of Illinois and the city of Dallas. What happens is this: Government employees are a powerful political constituency, and they want what all such powerful political constituencies want: more. But corporate executives are not alone in suffering from the agent-principal problem, and in the states and cities the leaders are for the most part political cowards who, unlike the bigs in Washington, cannot borrow money for ordinary operating expenses such as payroll; and so rather than satisfying their constituents’ demands with higher salaries, they offer them more generous pensions and benefits in retirement — and then, in 99 cases out of 100, decline to set aside the money necessary to pay for those promises. The difference between what a pension system has invested and what it needs to make good on its promises is its “unfunded liability,” and in states such as Illinois these liabilities can run into the hundreds of billions of dollars. For Illinois to make up the difference between what it has promised and what it has funded would require it to spend 100 percent of its tax revenues for about seven years on nothing else — and that was before revenues nosedived thanks to the lockdown. There is a good case for providing some short-term aid to states and cities whose revenue streams are currently smoking ruins in the wake of a global crisis over which they had no control. But that is not the question. The question is whether Washington should bail them out of troubles that are only tangentially related to the epidemic. The answer to that is, No.    It would be entirely appropriate to encumber aid in such a way as to prevent its being used for any other than a relatively narrow range of specified purposes. But, because money is fungible, that sort of legislative guardrail might not be enough. A better approach would be to condition aid on distressed states’ and cities’ actually addressing their unfunded liabilities, which are the root of the problem here. To that end, Congress could require that states adopt reasonably responsible pension practices in order to participate in ongoing assistance programs; “reasonably responsible” here would mean renegotiating programs with beneficiaries in order to begin to align the promises that have been made with the resources needed to make good on them and seeing to it that states start making actuarially required contributions to pension plans going forward. Of course that assumes a level of credibility and discipline not obviously in evidence in Washington (or in Austin, or in Frankfort, or in Olympia), but so does every alternative. Mitch McConnell could get some juice from being Senator No. In this case, he might be better off a Senator Yes, But. 

The CIA reportedly believes that China attempted to prevent the World Health Organization from declaring a global health emergency during the beginning stages of the coronavirus pandemic in January. In a report titled “U.N.-China: WHO Mindful But Not Beholden to China,” the CIA detailed that China threatened to cease cooperating with the WHO’s coronavirus investigation if the agency declared a global health emergency, Newsweek reported on Tuesday. The threats came at the same time that China reportedly “intentionally concealed the severity” of the outbreak in order to hoard medical supplies.  U.S. officials told Newsweek that they could not say whether Chinese premier Xi Jinping was personally involved in the effort to pressure the WHO. A German intelligence report published by Der Spiegel last week concluded that Xi was indeed involved in the effort. The WHO declared a global health emergency on January 30, about one month after China confirmed the emergence of the then-unidentified pathogen in the city of Wuhan. “Let me be clear: This declaration is not a vote of no confidence in China. On the contrary, WHO continues to have confidence in China’s capacity to control the outbreak,” WHO Director-General Tedros Anhanom told reporters at the time. The coronavirus outbreak has since become a pandemic, causing over 4,000,000 confirmed infections and killing almost 300,000 worldwide as of Tuesday.  Accusing the WHO of mishandling the crisis and kowtowing to China, President Trump in April announced he would suspend U.S. funding for the organization.  “I’m instructing my administration to halt funding of the WHO while a review is conducted to assess the WHO’s role in severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus,” Trump said at a White House press conference. “The WHO failed in this basic duty and must be held accountable.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Like it or not, this is a time when borrowing money makes sense. We are facing a severe but temporary economic disaster, and we can smooth out the damage by having the federal government offset the losses of businesses, workers, and even lower levels of government (which don’t have the feds’ capacity to take on debt and usually can’t do so legally anyway). Especially with interest rates so low, it will be less painful to pay off the debt in future years than it would be to absorb the losses all at once.  But once the feeding trough is open, everyone lines up, and Congress has to choose who gets what. Here are three of the big questions that the Republican-led Senate faces as it considers adding another round of funding to the trillions of dollars we’ve already spent. Democrats in the House, you may have heard, have already picked their $3 trillions’ worth of winners. 1. How much money should the states get?  This is the big one. COVID-19 has torpedoed tax revenues and increased reliance on safety-net programs, wreaking havoc on state finances. “Rainy day” funds are running dry, and previous relief bills didn’t give much to states. It doesn’t help that so many states dug themselves into a hole long before the virus attacked by mismanaging their pension funds. The tensions over whether and how to help states are entirely predictable. The states most desperately in need of aid are dense blue ones, which were hit hardest by the virus but also did the worst job managing their pensions. Even if you start with the assumption that a bailout of some kind is justified, there’s no great way to dole it out. Does it go to the states with the most financial need? The most COVID-19 deaths? Or what?  
 The answer will affect what coalition you can put together to pass a bill, and it will change whether the aid heads disproportionately to GOP or Democratic strongholds. Some ways of structuring this aid could also discourage states from reopening by promising federal aid to offset the damage of extended lockdowns. Illustrating the difficulty of settling on a fair approach, the House Democrats’ bill divides the states’ money into numerous bins, each of which relies on a different formula, including giving the money out to all states and D.C. equally, in proportion to population, in proportion to documented COVID-19 cases, and in proportion to unemployment increases.  With many Republicans, including the president, expressing reticence to bail out blue states, with some blue states on the brink of fiscal disaster, and with plenty of red states not doing so great either, this will be cringe-inducing to watch.  2. What the heck do we do with the Postal Service? Like the urban blue states, USPS faced a dire situation even before COVID-19 struck and then suffered a severe blow from the virus itself. It’s reporting a one-third decline in mail volume (though there are some questions about the exact revenue impact) and warning it could go broke before the end of the year without help. USPS, which of course trafficks heavily in paper communications, saw a lot of revenue disappear with the arrival of the Internet — and this loss reverberated. For example, its retirement health benefits long worked on a ‘pay-as-you-go’ basis, meaning that former workers’ benefits were paid for out of current revenues. This doesn’t work when revenues are evaporating and retiree health costs are rising, so in 2006 Congress required it to quickly transition to pre-funding the benefits, which added to the strain. Meanwhile, the agency still suffers under laws that dictate what services it provides and how much it charges, and it seems to enjoy giving generous concessions to its unions.  My own take: We’re using a lot of federal money to help entities, public and private alike, that have been directly affected by the pandemic, and there’s no obvious reason that USPS should be shut out entirely. But, if we’re going to bail the agency out beyond just offsetting its COVID-19 losses, that needs to go hand-in-hand with deeper reforms. I’d just privatize it and be done with it, but more realistically, this will involve tweaks such as rate increases, service cuts, greater use of non-union contractors, etc. 3. What should the safety net look like while we reopen?   Earlier this year, Congress passed very generous unemployment benefits for people who are thrown out of work by COVID-19. Indeed, these benefits are sometimes higher than what recipients made while working. It’s one thing to do that when you want to discourage people from working, but it’s another to keep doing it while much of the country reopens. The current provision doesn’t expire until the end of July, and there are numerous proposals to counteract its effects, extend it, or beef up other parts of the safety net. These include giving “hazard pay” to people who still go to work, capping benefits at previous wages, tying the unemployment boost to economic “triggers,” sending another round of checks to everyone, and hiking food stamps. My guess is that congressional Republicans will resist further safety-net expansions until we see how reopening goes, while Democrats will stop any attempt to mess with the expanded unemployment benefits before they expire. But I’ve never claimed to be great at reading the political winds. Whatever happens, none of this will be pretty. 

Senator Rand Paul said Tuesday that the response to the coronavirus pandemic has been hampered by “wrong prediction after wrong prediction” as he advocated for schools to reopen in the fall. “The history of this when we look back will be of wrong prediction after wrong prediction after wrong prediction,” Paul said during a Senate hearing Tuesday at which Dr. Anthony Fauci, the chief medical adviser to the Trump administration’s coronavirus task force, testified.  “I think we ought to have a little bit of humility in our belief that we know what’s best for the economy,” the Kentucky Republican said. “As much as I respect you, Dr. Fauci, I don’t think you’re the end all. I don’t think you’re the one person who gets to make a decision,” Paul said he believes it would be a “huge mistake” not to open schools in the fall and noted that the mortality rate from the coronavirus for children “approaches zero.” Keeping children out of school would have a disproportionate effect on “poor and underprivileged kids” who do not have a parent who is able to homeschool them and will end up not learning for a full year, the senator said.  “In rural states we never really reached any sort of pandemic level,” Paul continued. “It’s not to say this isn’t deadly, but really, outside of New England we’ve had a relatively benign course for this virus nationwide.”  Fauci said he agreed with Paul that the coronavirus has not proven as deadly to children as to others, but argued that the virus is still relatively mysterious and noted that some children with the virus developed a “very strange inflammatory syndrome.” Paul himself tested positive for the coronavirus in March. As of Tuesday afternoon, the U.S. has seen more than 1.3 million cases of the virus and 80,000 people have died from it.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

When the Bureau of Labor Statistics released the April employment figures last Friday, they showed the worst downturn in employment since the Great Depression. The end-line numbers of 14.7 percent unemployment and 23.1 million out of work have received a lot of attention. But the media has largely ignored the even-higher unemployment rate (16.5 percent) for immigrants and the even more dramatic proportional increase in their number unemployed. With millions of immigrants out of work, to say nothing of the unemployed native-born, it simply makes no sense to continue to bring in more foreign workers. The president took a few tentative steps to take the immigration system off autopilot by issuing a proclamation on April 22. That proclamation slightly reduced the flow of foreign workers into the country. But he can do a great deal more. Americans think that immigration should be designed to benefit the American people. If that is to be the guiding principle, the numbers allowed into the country during the current economic crisis should be curtailed.  Our immigration system consists of permanent immigration (green cards) and temporary immigration, both long-term and short-term. The permanent system brings in about 1 million annually, mostly sponsored by their relatives in this country, or workers sponsored by employers. We also give out green cards based on a lottery, and there are refugees and asylum seekers. All of these 1 million green cards each year come with lifetime work authorization. Long-term temporary immigration, in contrast to tourists, is primarily composed of guest workers, all of whom can work, and foreign students, who also often are allowed to work.  Economic theory predicts that by increasing the supply of workers, immigration will have a negative impact on the wages and employment of some American workers. There is research showing that, in normal times, immigration reduces the wages and employment of some native-born workers and earlier waves of immigrants, though a debate remains among academics about the size of that impact. But it is not clear that any of that research is even relevant now. The unemployment rate for April was the highest since monthly data collection began in 1948. May’s numbers will surely be even worse, because the “household” survey on which they are based reflects conditions in the earlier part of each month, and job losses mounted throughout all of April. It is simply unreasonable to argue that we need to admit more foreign workers given how many people are now unemployed. The primary argument for employment-based permanent immigration and guest workers has been that there is a shortage of workers. Of course, it was never clear that workers were actually in short supply. Many studies, including by the Pew Research Center and the Economic Policy Institute, have shown that real wages (inflation-adjusted) have grown little or not at all in the last few decades for the vast majority of workers. If there really were a worker shortage, compensation should have been rising rapidly as desperate employers bid up wages. It is very likely that high levels of immigration is one of the reasons wages have stagnated. Furthermore, the share of adults under age 65 who are in the labor force — working or looking for work — has been declining for decades.  Now, with 23 million unemployed, the extremely weak argument for most employment-based green cards and guest-worker programs has entirely evaporated. Among those 25 and older, almost three-fourths of the unemployed do not have a college degree. Unemployment is now at 21.2 percent for adults who did not graduate high school, 17.3 percent for those with only a high- school education, and 31.9 percent for teenagers, So why should we allow in any less-educated immigrants? In fact, even among those with a college degree 25 and older, the unemployment rate jumped from 2.5 percent in March to 8.4 percent in April.  
 In addition to the 1 million green cards given out each year, before the COVID-19 shutdown the State Department issued roughly 900,000 temporary work visas annually. This includes, E, H1b, H2b, L, O, T, Q, R, TN and most J visas. About 1.88 million work permits in the United States went to foreign students who have finished their degrees, asylum seekers, unapproved green-card applicants, and others. The president could stop issuing many of these visas and work authorizations and encourage groups, such as foreign students who have finished their degrees, to return to their home countries.  Given the employment picture for the less educated, any program that brings in unskilled workers is particularly nonsensical. The president should, for example, immediately suspend the H-2B program that brings in unskilled workers for nonagricultural jobs. He should also suspend those parts of the J-1 program that bring in lower-cost workers who are tied to the employer, which is the primary reason so many businesses like these programs. The American people understand what needs to be done in this crisis. A recent Washington Post–University of Maryland poll found that two-thirds of Americans support “stopping nearly all immigration into the United States” right now. If, after the economy recovers, we wish to allow in more immigrants — temporary or permanent — then we can have that debate at that time. The United States has never had a problem with attracting people from foreign lands. All the evidence indicates that it is easy to encourage immigration. But for now, common sense and all of the recent employment data show that we need to significantly reduce the number of foreign job-seekers entering the country, as well as the number already authorized to work within the United States. 

What are the constitutional limits of the state’s power to restrict fundamental rights during a pandemic? The Supreme Court has never said, at least not in a neat and tidy way, and the U.S. Constitution is silent on the matter. What the Court has done is created the doctrine of strict scrutiny for the judicial review of various laws or executive actions that burden the exercise of fundamental constitutional rights, such as the right to the free exercise of religion, the right to peaceably assemble, and the right to travel. For these cases, the Court has said that the government must show it has a narrowly tailored policy that furthers a compelling interest in a way that is least restrictive of the constitutional right in question.   In some of the cases going forward now, the strict-scrutiny standard will be hard to satisfy. Take, for example, the case of Gish v. Newsom, a suit brought by a group of citizens in California challenging the Riverside County stay-at-home order, which specifically includes church services among its list of non-essential activities for which citizens are forbidden from gathering. The folks bringing this case against Riverside County note that numerous other activities and industries are exempt from the order. People may go to Walmart, liquor stores, and marijuana dispensaries, but there can be no gatherings specifically at church, even if parishioners abide by other public-health and social-distancing guidelines. In the important case of Oregon v. Smith (1990), the Supreme Court held that laws of general applicability that are neutral with respect to religion can be enforced against religious dissenters just like everyone else. If you can’t gather, then you can’t gather for religious reasons, either. But one might ask whether government policy is really neutral with respect to religion when it specifically prevents church gatherings even as it allows all sorts of other gatherings and activities.  If that is the case, then courts might ask the government to show a compelling interest in restricting the free exercise of religion and then demonstrate that there is no other way to achieve the same public purpose while putting fewer restrictions on the exercise of this fundamental constitutional right.  This is exactly what the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals did in an opinion handed down on May 9, holding that “restrictions inexplicably applied to one group and exempted from another do little to further these [legitimate state public health] goals and do much to burden religious freedom.” The U.S. District Court handling the Riverside County case went in a different direction, however, upholding the contested parts of the county’s stay-at-home order on the grounds that “during an emergency, traditional constitutional analysis does not apply.” For this assertion, the district court relied on Jacobson v. Massachusetts, a 1905 case about mandatory vaccination that predates the modern Court’s creation of strict scrutiny.  Those who now urge maximum deference to the executive branch during times of crisis should recall that history is replete with examples of executive power abused. James Madison’s observation that enlightened statesmen will not always be at the helm seems, in hindsight, to have been something of an understatement.  Consider as a relevant cautionary tale the case of Buck v. Bell (1927), which upheld the authority of state departments of health to forcibly sterilize people deemed by experts to be unfit for reproduction. With only one dissenting vote, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote in his majority opinion that the “principle that sustains compulsory vaccination is broad enough to cover cutting the Fallopian tubes,” before citing Jacobson v. Massachusetts as the sole sustaining precedent. Courts are now returning to Jacobson for guidance in our current public-health crisis, bringing into focus our constitutional challenge: There must be some circumstances in which it is reasonable to restrict constitutional rights for the sake of the common good, but allowing for such restrictions requires that we draw and maintain limits on the exercise of that power. Deciding when the government may burden rights comes with a prudential calculation about how that power will be used, not just now but also in the future.  When we peel away the judicial glosses and doctrinal formulas designed to address this problem, the question, at the end of the day, is this: Is this government policy and its particular application, as a response to this pandemic, justified? Is it reasonable? There is, of course, a second, related question: Who gets to decide? The answer in our political system is that we decide, through a back and forth conversation among citizens, legislators, executives, and finally judges, who will consider these policies in light of a contested jurisprudential framework for constitutional rights built over the last century and a half. 

Right now, just about every school in America is closed for the rest of the school year. Across the country, “thousands of day-care facilities have shut down, either by decree or because demand has cratered . . . As of early April, nearly half of child-care facilities nationwide had closed completely, and 17 percent remained open only for the children of essential workers, according to a survey of 5,000 child-care providers conducted by the National Association for the Education of Young Children.”  Public school districts have already decided that summer school will be distance-learning only or canceled entirely in Ames, Iowa; Tempe, Ariz.; all over Indiana; Houston, Texas; Columbia, Missouri . . . and probably communities near you. County and city-run summer camps are canceled in Montgomery County, Md.; Palm Beach County, Fla.; Denver, Colo.; Evansville, Ind.; Piscataway, N.J.; and probably communities near you, too. Private summer camps are being canceled in the San Francisco Bay area; Atlanta, Ga.; Austin, Texas; Marion County, Fla; various places in Maine . . . you get the gist. Camps are at least partially canceled in Raleigh, N.C.; Chicago, Ill.; Charleston, S.C.; and more. New York City’s public pools are closed for the summer, as is the summer youth-employment program, and the city is still deciding on city-run camps. Swimming pools are expected “to be one of the last places to reopen.”   Apparently, the plan is to just reopen up the economy without working parents. In normal circumstances, grandparents and other relatives would be the most natural choice to watch over the children when their parents return to work . . . but we’re trying to minimize the amount of contact that the elderly have with other people. No summer school, few camps, no public pools . . . just what the heck are kids supposed to do this summer? While we’re on the subject, most of the country’s children haven’t seen any of their non-sibling peers in person since March, a level of isolation that cannot be psychologically healthy. Kids may be the least at risk of contracting coronavirus, but they may be paying one of the steepest prices, nonetheless.  

The National Association of Black Journalists (NABJ) has canceled a panel discussion on coronavirus misinformation that was to be sponsored by Chinese tech giant Huawei. The panel would have included CNN’s Van Jones and Black Eyed Peas member will.i.am. “I accepted invite to participate in NABJ webinar, warning black community about COVID misinformation. I said ‘yes’ without knowing sponsor,” Jones wrote on Twitter on Tuesday. “Glad NABJ canceled; I wouldn’t have participated. I’ll keep raising alarm about pandemic’s impact on vulnerable people.”  The NABJ put out a statement saying the panel discussion had become a “distraction from other priorities.” “[The panel] had come under attack because controversial technology giant Huawei was planning to sponsor the webinar though it had no editorial control. NABJ always retains editorial control over all such content along with final say over moderators and panelists,” the statement read. “There is no signed contract and NABJ has not accepted funding from Huawei. NABJ will continue its COVID-19 dialogue with the greater community-at-large.”  Huawei, the leading developer of 5G networks and infrastructure in the world, is widely considered to have ties to the Chinese government. U.S. politicians on both sides of the aisle have warned that China can spy on foreign nations through Huawei-built networks. The coronavirus pandemic, which began in Wuhan, China, has infected over 4,200,000 worldwide as of Tuesday. U.S. intelligence agencies have concluded that China concealed the magnitude of the outbreak in its initial stages, in part to hoard medical supplies needed to contain the pathogen. The U.S. has also warned that China is attempting to steal American research data on possible coronavirus vaccines.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) on Tuesday unveiled a $3 trillion economic relief bill that will almost certainly not be approved by the Republican-controlled Senate. House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D., Md.) said that the bill includes funding for state and local governments and additional direct payments to individual Americans. The bill will also provide for expanded coronavirus testing and contact tracing, student loan relief, and additional funding for the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.  Other provisions in the bill are unrelated to the coronavirus. One provision would require federal banking regulators to report to Congress annually on “the availability of access to financial services for minority-owned and women-owned cannabis-related legitimate businesses.” Senator John Barrasso (R., Wy.) said the bill had no chance of success in the Senate. “That will not pass. It’s not going to be supported,” John Barrasso told CNN. Hoyer said Democrats would press ahead with the new bill even without Republican support.  Congress already passed a massive $2 trillion relief bill in March and arranged for another $500 billion funding injection for small business loans and hospitals struggling during the coronavirus pandemic. Republicans including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Kent.) have made clear their opposition to further rounds of spending without congressional debate. “You’ve seen the talk from both sides about acting, but my goal from the beginning of this, given the extraordinary numbers that we’re racking up to the national debt, is that we need to be as cautious as we can be,” McConnell told Politico in April.  While negotiating the March $2 trillion relief bill, Republicans slammed Democrats for inserting legislation unrelated to the pandemic, with Senator Tom Cotton (R., Ark.) referring to the additions as an “ideological wish-list.” The additions were added following House Majority Whip James Clyburn’s (D., S.C.) comments that the relief bill represented “a tremendous opportunity to restructure things to fit our vision.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

An Australian MP said China’s ban on Australian beef exports is punishment for the Australian prime minister’s proposed international inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus. “It’s a bastard act,’’ Liberal-Nationals MP George Christensen said. “It’s just wrong. China has just gone into full, bullying, threatening, coercion mode. That’s what I think.”  Australia is set to submit a proposal this month to the World Health Organization asking that an international investigation be launched into the origins of the coronavirus, which first broke out in the Chinese city of Wuhan. The inquiry, supported by the U.S. and Britain, could send international inspectors to Wuhan. China has vehemently rejected the proposal, saying it is an attempt by the Trump administration to blame China for the pandemic and shift attention away from its own mistakes. China, Australia’s largest trading partner, suspended beef imports from the country this week and last month threatened the country with severe tariffs up to 75 per cent on barley if Australia continues to pursue the investigation. China’s foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Tuesday that the decision to impose the Australian beef ban was in response to violations of inspection and quarantine requirements, and was unrelated to other “political” concerns.  “Chinese customs has continuously found that multiple batches of beef products exported to China by individual Australian companies have violated the inspection and quarantine requirements,’’ Lijian said before warning that Australia could face consequences if it moves forward with its request for an investigation.  Asked whether he was suggesting the beef ban was linked to Australia’s request for a coronavirus probe, the foreign ministry spokesman punted. “I just made it very clear,” he responded. “They are two different things, you’re making a political interpretation.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Chinese authorities will test all 11 million residents of Wuhan for coronavirus by the end of the week after claiming the city has seen just six new cases after a 35-day streak of no reported infections. “It is important to realize that a decisive result does not equal a decisive victory, lowering the emergency response level does not equal lowering defenses,” Wang Zhonglin, a top official in the Communist Party in Wuhan, told the state-run outlet Changjiang Daily on Monday.  In a teleconference with officials, he warned that “we must not be careless or lax.” Zhonglin said in March that the city’s residents should undergo “gratitude education” to learn how to “thank the communist party, listen to the party’s words, follow the party’s way, and create strong positive energy.” U.S. intelligence believes that mid-level bureaucrats in Wuhan have been lying about the number of cases, with some experts estimating that the total caseload in China could be close to three million, way above the official count of over 82,000 officially confirmed cases. On Sunday, the city said it had discovered five new cases in the same residential complex that were all linked to elderly man who tested positive on Saturday. Wu Zunyou, chief epidemiologist at the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, said the developments would not result in “a new minor peak.”  “We have had the epidemic under control after more than three months of efforts and accumulated considerable experience in both diagnosis and notification,” he stated. “Therefore, we will not allow scattered cases to develop into massive outbreaks.”  Wuhan lifted its lockdown last month, despite city doctors warning that tens of thousands of asymptomatic cases could exist, in comments that were subsequently removed from publication by the government. The Chinese Communist Party then revised its reported death count in Wuhan by exactly 50 percent, an attempt to improve the “credibility of the government.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A Yale University professor said the Trump administration’s mishandling of the coronavirus resembled “genocide” and questioned whether officials could be held responsible under international law. “What else do you call mass death by public policy?” Dr. Gregg Gonsalves, a professor of law and epidemiology at Yale, asked in a tweet last week.  “So, what does it mean to let thousands die by negligence, omission, failure to act, in a legal sense under international law?” Gonsalves continued. “And I am being serious here. What is happening in the U.S. is purposeful, considered negligence, omission, failure to act by our leaders. Can they be held responsible under international law?” In a separate thread, Gonsalves queried how many people will die from the virus over the summer and before Election Day and wondered how many of the deaths will be minorities. How many people will die this summer, before Election Day? What proportion of the deaths will be among African-Americans, Latinos, other people of color? This is getting awfully close to genocide by default. What else do you call mass death by public policy? #COVID19 #coronavirus — Gregg Gonsalves (@gregggonsalves) May 6, 2020     The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said minorities have been particularly hard hit by the pandemic due to economic and social conditions combind with their overrepresentation in service industry jobs that cannot be performed from home. “The effects of COVID-19 on the health of racial and ethnic minority groups is still emerging,” the CDC said. “However, current data suggest a disproportionate burden of illness and death among racial and ethnic minority groups.”  A Rutgers University professor last month accused the Trump administration of deliberately killing minorities. Brittney Cooper, a Women’s, Gender and Sexuality Studies associate professor at Rutgers said the coronavirus outbreak is “all about a gross necropolitical calculation that it is Black people who are dying disproportionately from COVID.”  The Trump administration’s early attempts at widespread testing were plagued by logistical difficulties as medical testing companies admitted they became overwhelmed with a backlog of tests to analyze, forcing patients and doctors to wait to obtain a test. Early rounds of test kits distributed by the CDC were defective, causing further delays in testing capacity that continued until the virus was already widespread around the country.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A large portion of Washington media have decided the big story of the day is President Trump telling CBS White House correspondent Weijia Jiang “Ask China,” after she asked, “Why does [the rate of U.S. testing to other countries] matter? Why is this a global competition to you if every day Americans are still losing their lives and we’re still seeing more cases every day?” The general argument is that Trump’s response to Jiang was racist.  Rather than the ten-millionth “can you believe President Trump said that?” story, let’s take a look at what’s actually going on in China. Despite Their Claims, China Has Not Beaten the Coronavirus There is widespread consensus outside of China that whatever the actual tally of coronavirus deaths in that country was, the sum was significantly higher than the officially released numbers. The Washington Post felt sufficient confidence to write on April 3 that evidence such as the number of hours that crematoriums were working and the number of urns returned by funeral homes added up to a death toll around 42,000 to 47,000. Back in mid-April, Wuhan health officials revised their local death toll from 2,579 to 3,869. One-half of the previous total is 1,289.5; the increase was 1,290 — almost as if someone arbitrarily decided to raise the existing death toll by fifty percent.   (If you’re wondering about those 21 million cell phone subscriptions that disappeared, Chinese cell phone companies stated that they were cancelations driven by economic and lifestyle changes during the outbreak. While I think the Chinese government’s capacity for dishonestly, coverups, and propaganda is considerable, hiding 21 million deaths would be a real logistical challenge.) China also contends that it has had only a handful of new cases in a country of more than a billion people in March, April, and so far in May, and only one death since April 17. As far as the Chinese government is telling the world, they have the coronavirus beaten once and for all. Or maybe not: “Authorities in the central Chinese city of Wuhan, where the pandemic coronavirus was first detected, have ordered fresh Covid-19 tests for all of its 14 million residents after a cluster of new community cases. The unprecedented move came after reports on the weekend of six new coronavirus cases from the same residential compound, known as Sanmin.”  And it’s not just Wuhan again: “On Sunday, Chinese authorities reclassified Shulan, a city near the Russian and North Korean borders, as high risk, after a cluster of cases connected to a woman with no known history of travel or exposure to the virus.”  We know the Chinese national and Wuhan local authorities never like admitting bad news unless they have to, and when they do admit bad news, it is likely drastically understated. For a long time in the Soviet Union, understanding what was really going on required “reading between the lines” — noticing changes in standard phrases, the absence of certain expected points, or other ways to hint at or allude to arguments that ran counter to the official Communist Party line. Notice this article that originally appeared in the Chinese business publication Caixin: As of Friday, the national drug regulator approved 30 testing kits for the virus, including 19 nucleic acid tests and 11 antibody tests. The combined manufacturing capacity of testing kits surpassed 9 million a day, according to the National Medical Products Administration. Statistics from Dongxing Securities showed that in normal operation, medical institutions in China could test a total of 1.66 million people a day, matching the basic needs of massive testing as social activities resume. But access to testing has been uneven. While big cities including Beijing, Guangdong and the epicenter Wuhan have greatly expanded capacity and allowed residents to take tests as they wish, people in remote areas such as Heilongjiang still face difficulties. There is “no chance” that the coronavirus pandemic will end soon, and countries must prepare for a “new normal” amid plans to reopen, said Zhang Wenhong, head of the infectious diseases department of Huashan Hospital of Fudan University in Shanghai and director of the city’s COVID-19 clinical expert team. Does this sound like a country that has had only a handful of cases in the past ten weeks?  Chinese movie theaters briefly reopened in March, then suddenly closed again. They remain closed indefinitely. Nobody Wants to Be Dependent upon Chinese Imports Anymore Meanwhile, the United States isn’t the only country that suddenly finds the thought of being dependent upon Chinese exports of medical equipment and supplies unacceptable: Japan’s cabinet in April earmarked 248.6 billion yen ($2.33 billion) for subsidies to businesses that move production back to Japan, covering up to two-thirds of relocation costs. Though the amount made up less than 1% of the 108 trillion yen coronavirus stimulus package, it clearly put China on guard. Beijing not only pressed Japanese authorities to explain the meaning of the measure, but also polled Japanese businesses in China on whether they planned to leave. Yet, the argument gained new life again when Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga, in an interview with Nikkei, stressed the need for greater self-reliance. “Looking at masks, for example, 70% to 80% are produced in China,” he said. “We must avoid depending excessively on particular countries for products or materials and bring home production facilities for goods needed for daily life.” Suga has been Abe’s right-hand man and a key player in his government since Abe returned as prime minister in 2012. Suga’s remarks reflect something much broader than a temporary policy response to the current crisis. Does the Chinese government look and sound like a group of leaders that are confident that they are winning the battle of world opinion? They’re banning Australian beef imports after Australia called for an inquiry into the origin of the outbreak. A Chinese coast-guard ship intentionally rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing vessel last month. Chinese coast-guard ships are straying into Japanese territorial waters. Chinese and Indian soldiers are throwing rocks at each other and getting into fistfights at their border. The Chinese economy is probably in for the same long, painful climb out of recession that we and the rest of the world are likely to experience in the coming year.   Does this county look stable to you? Or does China look like a powder keg, with a lot of angry people who have a whole lot of good reasons to be angry? And does the government in Beijing look like a bunch of strategic masterminds, or do they look like they have only one play in their playbook: attempting to steer public anger into angry nationalism, over and over and over again? Trust Only Those Who Get Arrested  Finally, elsewhere in China, a new study out of the Shandong First Medical University concludes, “Our paper shows very clearly that these events occur naturally in wildlife. This provides strong evidence against SARS-CoV-2 being a laboratory escape.” Notice that the Chinese authorities want to blur the line between “occurred naturally in wildlife” and “laboratory escape.” You can take naturally occurring viruses into a lab, either as part of a sample or as part of a research animal, and then that virus can get out of that lab — either through the accidental infection of a lab worker, or through the improper disposal of biological material. This literally happened twice separately with SARS in a laboratory in Beijing in 2004. I can understand why a Chinese scientist would insist a laboratory mistake is impossible. Zhang Xuezhong, a prominent Chinese legal scholar, argued on social media that restrictions on freedom of expression had made it more difficult for the country to contain the outbreak, and criticized the Chinese government’s arrest and suppression of Wuhan doctor Li Wenliang. He promptly got detained by police for a day and later released. With consequences as fast and dire as that, do you think any Chinese scientist is going to admit, “yes, mistakes happen, and this virus could have been one of ours”? My guess is that unless you’re making a deliberate effort to keep up with news out of China, you haven’t heard much about any of these developments. You’ve probably heard about that restaurant in Colorado that was open and crowded on Mother’s Day. You’ve probably heard about the president and vice president not wearing masks. You may have heard about Twitter establishing new rules to fight disinformation about the coronavirus — but you probably haven’t heard that those rules won’t apply to the January World Health Organization tweets declaring that the virus could not be spread from one human to another. We have a national media — news pages, editorial pages, radio, television, web, and cable news — that is just clogged with people who know how to tell one story and who only want to tell one story: “Democrats are the good guys, Republicans are the bad guys.” Even if you agreed with that — I obviously don’t — the world is way more complicated than that. When a story like this virus and China come along, they can only perceive the events through that preexisting lens. ADDENDUM: Because you’re probably looking for things to look forward to: Baseball will probably be back sometime around July 4; the film version of Hamilton is coming to Disney+ this July 3; Disney still intends to release the live-action “Mulan” in theaters in July; and the second season of “The Mandalorian” will arrive as scheduled in October.  

Back in mid April, Instagram founders Kevin Systrom and Mike Krieger built Rt.live, a site that aimed to calculate how fast the coronavirus is spreading in each state. They took data from the Covid Tracking Project, and used formulas for incubation time, onset of symptoms, and asymptomatic carriers. They’ve also adjusted the formula to account for the slowly but surely increasing rate of testing.  The Rt rate is the average number of people who become infected by an infectious person; the higher the rate, the faster the virus spreads. If the Rt rate drops below one, the spread slows down. In fact, the site declares that “when Rt is below 1.0, the virus will stop spreading.” The current data on Rt.live offers some really encouraging news: 46 states have a Rt rate below one. The lowest is Montana at .64; the highest is Minnesota at 1.05. Four weeks ago, 26 states had an Rt rate above one. Some people will look at this and conclude, “See? We should reopen our society and economy, the number of infected is slowing down!” Other people will look at this and conclude, “No, opening up is the worst thing we could do right now! We’re beating this virus, and people interacting with each other will increase the spread again!”  The decision on how much to reopen society and how quickly is going to be complicated and will probably leave a lot of people frustrated. Many states closed their schools on March 16 or 17, although some localities closed them days earlier. State stay-at-home orders went into effect in the stretch from March 21 to April 7. For most Americans, this is week nine of quarantines, lockdowns, social-distancing and other various restrictions on daily life. The unemployment rate is nearly 15 percent and could hit 20 percent or more next month, and 33 million Americans have filed for unemployment benefits. The data at Rt.live suggests that we have successfully slowed the spread almost everywhere in the country. If the number of infections increases rapidly after the current ongoing phased reopening, we can put these restrictions back in place. Just about everywhere in the country, we have the hospital capacity now. What we don’t have is the cash flow to keep these hospitals open!  

New Jersey recently became one of the seven states (plus the District of Columbia) to legalize assisted suicide by statute. In effect, New Jersey sanctions suicide for some residents through its public policy. Now, with COVID-19, New Jersey officials are worried about a spike in suicide caused by the shutdown, so for them, suicide is bad.  From the NJ.Com story:  On top of the more than 78,000 Americans who have already died from the fast-spreading virus, a new study from the Well Being Trust found conditions from the pandemic — including lost jobs, isolation, and fear over the future — could lead to 75,000 deaths in the nation from drug or alcohol abuse and suicide over the next decade. This comes as a number of critics say they’re worried lockdowns designed to save lives from COVID-19 could have an even greater toll due to economic and mental despair. [NJ Gov.] Murphy was asked Saturday during his daily coronavirus briefing in Trenton if the state will track suicides and consider this when determining how to reopen the state. “I don’t know specifics in terms of tracking suicides, but we have said this: The combination of isolation and now other factors like job losses are having big impacts on folks, there’s no question about it,” the governor said. So, let me get this straight. If someone is in despair because they lost everything when their business collapsed or had a loved one die from COVID-19, they shouldn’t be able to commit facilitated suicide. But if they are in despair because they have been diagnosed as terminally ill with COVID-19, they should not only be able to self-terminate, but also, have their suicide facilitated by a doctor under a law signed by Governor Murphy. No! That’s nonsensical. Governor Murphy should be concerned about preventing all suicides, not just some.  Suicidal ideation is suicidal ideation — regardless of the reason for wanting to die. Everyone who becomes suicidal because of a COVID-19 impact — or for any other reason — should receive prevention services. Everyone. It is illogical and destructive to the value of human life for New Jersey (and other pro–assisted suicide states) to have such a lethally dichotomous public policy.  

 Dr. Jay Bhattacharaya from Stanford Medicine makes his third appearance on Uncommon Knowledge in eight weeks, this time to discuss a new COVID-19 survey of Major League Baseball employees he co-authored. The survey tested more than 5,600 employees across all 26 Major League Baseball clubs across the country. The results are yet another data set showing how COVID-19 spreads across geographical and economic lines. Dr. Bhattacharya also discusses the very real health risks associated with a prolonged lockdown and answers some of the questions raised by his last survey of Santa Clara County.  Recorded on May 8, 2020  

Tesla CEO Elon Musk announced Monday that the company’s only U.S. auto factory will resume production in California in violation of Alameda County’s stay at home measures and asked that he be the only one who is arrested if necessary. Musk he will join workers on the assembly line at the factory as production starts up again.  “If anyone is arrested, I ask that it only be me,” he wrote in a tweet. “We’re happy to get back to work and have implemented very detailed plans to help you keep safe as you return,” Tesla said in an email that cited California governor’s guidance on manufacturers reopening and said the automaker’s employees are no longer on furlough. Health officials in Alameda County said Monday that the county is negotiating a plan with Tesla for reopening the facility, adding that they are aware the company has already reopened beyond the allowed basic operations. Officials said they were expecting a plan from Tesla on Monday and “hope Tesla will likewise comply without further enforcement measures.”  “We continue to move closer to an agreed upon safety plan for reopening beyond Minimum Basic Operations by working through steps that Tesla has agreed to adopt,” read a statement from the Alameda County Public Health Department. “These steps include improving employee health screening procedures and engaging front-line staff on their concerns and feedback regarding safety protocols.” The county’s stay at home measures implemented to combat the coronavirus pandemic carry a penalty of a fine or imprisonment for violators.  Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin on Monday said he supports Tesla reopening, noting that Musk is “one of the biggest employers and manufacturers in California, and California should prioritize doing whatever they need to do to solve those health issues so that he can open quickly and safely.” California Governor Gavin Newsom said Monday he has spoken to Musk in recent days and has “great reverence” for Tesla. He added that he has also had “very constructive conversations” with the county and Tesla representatives and is hoping the Tesla plant can reopen “as early as next week.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he Conservatives were elected to office in the United Kingdom ten years ago on the promise to eliminate the deficit through an “austerity” program of spending cuts and tax rises. Prime Minister Boris Johnson and the Conservatives are now running their own deficit in response to the coronavirus crisis. Long before the 2008 financial crisis, public spending had been ramping up under the previous Labour government, increasing the deficit to a staggering 10 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) in fiscal year 2009–10. While falling short of eliminating the deficit entirely, the Conservatives managed to get borrowing back under control, at 1.8 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2018–19. Although this has given Britain reserves of fiscal firepower to use against the coronavirus pandemic, it has left the mainstream parties and the public exhausted with spending restraint.  In the early months of her time in office, Prime Minister Theresa May outlined a vision of economic reform to help the Conservatives move beyond “austerity” and address the socioeconomic divisions exposed by Brexit. This led to a communitarian platform promising to establish an industrial strategy, invest in skills, put workers on company boards, and intervene in uncompetitive markets. Despite the failure to win a majority in the 2017 general election, May left her mark on the Conservatives by launching the party’s transition away from “austerity.” After assuming the Conservative leadership, Boris Johnson unveiled his own more populist brand of economics, sometimes referred to as “boosterism.” In the months leading to the general election last December, Johnson promised to recruit more police, invest billions more into the National Health Service, raise funding for schools, increase resources for research and development, and build more railways, roads, and broadband.  With this year’s budget, the Conservatives were already planning to turn the spending taps on in an effort to help left-behind communities after a decade of public-spending restraint and to start a decade of renewal. By fiscal year 2024–25, £640 billion of public money will be invested in rebuilding the nation’s infrastructure and public services. This loosening of fiscal policy is intended to rebalance economic growth for the benefit of deindustrialized regions that have not reaped the rewards of globalization.  
 The Conservatives’ fatigue with spending restraint has made them ready for the stimulus spending required to tackle the economic consequences of the coronavirus pandemic. Like many other nations around the world, Britain is in lockdown. Offices are shut as people work from home. Exercise outside is limited. Pubs, restaurants, and shops are closed. The economic shock of these measures has been deep and far reaching. The Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), Britain’s official fiscal forecaster, predicts that there will be an extraordinary 35 percent fall in GDP and up to 10 million people unemployed in the second quarter of 2020. A rapid rebound is still expected, but the consequences of this recession will be devastating for ordinary businesses and workers across the country.  Boris Johnson’s government has been quick to act in its economic response. The party of Thatcher, balanced budgets, and small government is now borrowing billions in order to keep the economy from falling into a depression. In a series of announcements, starting with this year’s budget, Chancellor Rishi Sunak, responsible for the Treasury, has unveiled a range of schemes. The government is now covering the costs of sick pay for businesses, increasing benefits for the unemployed, making interest-free loans available to businesses, deferring tax payments, and providing relief for homeowners and renters.  The linchpin of this program is the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme (CJRS), which pays businesses 80 percent of their employees’ wages, with a cap of £2,500 per month, while they are furloughed. To put this scheme into perspective: 6.3 million people have been placed on furlough, costing £8 billion for the first month of the CJRS. More than 1 million people have applied for Universal Credit, the main welfare benefit for people out of work or on low pay. This has contributed to the result that over 27 million people, about 53 percent of the adult population, now receive funding from the government.  These schemes could cause borrowing to shoot up to £273 billion and the national debt to grow to 95 percent of GDP this fiscal year under the OBR’s current forecast. This is far worse than the fiscal situation inherited by the Conservatives ten years ago, but there is no real appetite among Conservatives for another extended period of spending cuts. Global interest rates are also at record lows, so there is no hurry to cut borrowing. As the economy gradually reopens and government support is slowly withdrawn, public spending will fall again, but it is unlikely that there will be a return to “austerity.” Boris Johnson will stick with his doctrine of “boosterism” to power the recovery from the coronavirus and reshape the economy for the benefit of all the regions. Conservatives in the United States could also learn to tolerate deficit spending in order to achieve policy goals that could restore the unity and health of the republic. 

New York is the greatest city in the world. It also is uniquely suited to the spread of the coronavirus. As the national debate over reopening continues and the political blame game intensifies, it’s worth considering the scale of New York’s outbreak. There is nothing like it anywhere else in the country and almost nothing like it in the rest of the world.  The story of coronavirus in America is overwhelmingly the story of coronavirus in New York City and its surrounding suburbs. Any account of how we got to this place, with deaths nationally headed toward 100,000, must center on New York City, which was seeded with the virus early and then seeded much of the rest of the country. Nearly 20,000 people have died in New York City, or 0.25 percent of the population. If the city were a country, it would rank sixth in the world in total deaths, behind France and ahead of Brazil. In New York City, according to a New York Times report, deaths have been more than 300 percent above normal. In New Jersey, intimately connected to New York, deaths have been 90 percent above normal. Otherwise, no other state is close. In the rest of New York State, deaths have been 9 percent above normal.  
 The next worst hit state is Massachusetts, with deaths running nearly 25 percent above normal. There are four other states in the teens, and the rest are at 10 percent or below, with 14 states below normal.  A Financial Times analysis of hard-hit places has only Bergamo, Italy, and Guayas, Ecuador, running ahead of New York in percentage of excess deaths — not Madrid, London, or Île-de-France. The epidemic started early in New York. According to one model, the city had its first ten cases at the end of January or by the middle of February. By the time it had its first confirmed case on March 1, there may have been as many as 10,000 undetected cases. The city was getting seeded constantly from abroad. A study published by medrxiv.org concluded that “introductions from Europe account for the majority of cases found in NYC in the first weeks of March 2020.” It found “isolates from Italy, Finland, Spain, France, the U.K., and other European countries from late February.”  Then, people coming from or through New York spread the disease elsewhere in the United States. A New York Times analysis found that the number of cases around the country correlated with how many travelers arrived from New York in early March.  New York’s connection to the world, especially Europe, its density, and its mass-transit system all made it a potent vector. So the question of how we could have kept the U.S. from getting so hard hit is really how we could have kept New York from getting so hard hit. Every day counted, and better leadership at the federal, state, and local levels would have made a difference, but we shouldn’t underestimate the difficulties. Trump’s early travel restrictions on China would have had to be imposed on Europe as well, when no one was contemplating that. New York’s leaders would have had to warn people off the subways, shut the schools, and torch the Big Apple’s economy before any plainly visible metrics justified it. This is why the simplistic shots at President Trump, who indeed should have taken the virus more seriously at the outset, don’t work. He’s the president of New York, but also of other large, international cities such as Los Angeles and Miami that have escaped New York’s fate. Has his leadership been better in those places, or do divergent conditions and local decisions account for the better outcomes?  None of this, of course, is to disparage New Yorkers. They have absorbed a gut punch over the past two months with characteristic grit and bravery. Yet, without New York’s distinctive vulnerability, the course of the epidemic would look completely different. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate     

“I was born one morning when the sun didn’t shine. I picked up my shovel and I walked to the mine.” So sang Tennessee Ernie Ford in his recording of Merle Travis’s “Sixteen Tons,” a surprise hit in 1955. That song is an interesting mess of elements that shouldn’t work together: Travis’s semi-autobiographic miner’s lament delivered in Ford’s smooth, classically trained baritone, the singer’s tough-guy posturing complemented by a pretty bad-ass riff played on the . . . clarinet. Merle Travis came from coal-mining people in Kentucky; Ernest Jennings Ford was a man of the middle classes, a former radio announcer who studied singing at the Cincinnati Conservatory of Music. The arc of his life is a familiar one: He went away to war and came home to seek — and find — his fortune in California. “Tennessee Ernie” was one of his radio personae, a stereotypical hillbilly. (The cheerful contrivance of these personalities was part of the charm: Louis Marshall Jones became “Grandpa Jones” when he was in his twenties.) Ford lived the American Dream: If you have a decent off-road vehicle and a few jerry cans of gasoline, you can camp out at his former retreat in the Nevada wilderness, well past where the blacktop ends. He died of liver failure after a state dinner with President George H. W. Bush. The working-man hero of “Sixteen Tons” was and is a staple of American popular culture. From Merle Haggard’s “Working Man Blues” to the Dropkick Murphys’ “Boys on the Docks,” the poets of the American scene have long sung of the heroic virtues of work, perseverance, and endurance. Merle Haggard’s working man liked to “drink a little beer in the tavern,” while the Dropkick Murphys’ battered hero finds peace in sobriety — and more work, summing up his program in “Paying My Way”: “Wake and pray, work all day.” Work is the original curse — “the curse of the drinking classes,” Oscar Wilde called it, inverting the proverb. That tradition is very old: “In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread,” an unhappy Adam is informed on his way out of Paradise. The workers of the world, Karl Marx informs us, are in chains. Or maybe work is the original blessing. When asked about the secret of his success, there is a chance of about 94.6 percent that any celebrity will answer: hard work. They will forswear possession of any special talent and insist, with a great deal of pride, that they simply outwork the competition. Will Smith: “Where I excel is ridiculous, sickening work ethic. You know, while the other guy’s sleeping? I’m working.” Louis C. K.: “I’ve learned from experience that if you work harder at it, and apply more energy and time to it, and more consistency, you get a better result. It comes from the work.” Lucille Ball and a thousand thousand other entertainers have said much the same thing. Entrepreneurs, too. Ray Kroc: “Luck is a dividend of sweat. The more you sweat, the luckier you get.” Thomas Edison (perhaps): “The reason a lot of people do not recognize opportunity is because it usually goes around wearing overalls looking like hard work.” And politicians, e.g. Margaret Thatcher: “I’ve got a woman’s ability to stick to a job and get on with it when everyone else walks off and leaves it.” You hear less of that happy talk from coal miners. Merle Travis’s narrator in “Sixteen Tons” won nothing for his labors: “You load sixteen tons, and what do you get? Another day older and deeper in debt.” Noel Coward insisted that “work is much more fun than fun,” but he belonged to that class of people who, in P. J. O’Rourke’s memorable formulation, are seldom seen to “lift anything heavier than money.” And lifting 16 tons of that is a labor of love. “The lot of man is ceaseless labor,” T. S. Eliot wrote. “Or ceaseless idleness, which is still harder.” Idleness can be very enjoyable, provided three things: (1) It is voluntary; (2); it is temporary; (3) you have all the money you want. My sometime National Review colleague Kevin Hassett, currently serving as White House economic adviser, tells Face the Nation that he expects unemployment to hit something “north of 20 percent.” This is the result of — what do we call it? Is the coronavirus epidemic a “natural disaster,” or is it a public-health crisis made far worse than it had to be by the incompetence and corruption of the government in Beijing and by imperfect policy choices in capitals from Washington to London to Stockholm? The idleness enforced by the coronavirus shutdown is not voluntary, and most of those affected need income. It will be temporary — but how temporary? In mid March, I suggested that the federal government adopt a policy of directly subsidizing the wages of lower-income workers for the duration of the shutdown. This appealed to me as an emergency measure for several reasons: For one, having idled workers able to rely on their regular paycheck (or something close to it) for the duration of the epidemic seemed likely to be more effective than sending “stimulus” checks willy-nilly; maintaining the relationship between employer and employee would make it easier to return to normal when — if — such a thing became possible; recognizing that this mass unemployment is the result of necessary government action rather than organic economic changes and addressing that situation in a full and forthright way would help to achieve popular buy-in for what was always bound to be a controversial set of policies; and, finally, the most likely alternative is spending the same money or more in the form of unemployment benefits, which are paid to people who become unemployed — the very thing we are trying to minimize. Should we be trying to minimize that? Many progressives have held up Denmark as a counterexample. (Denmark is a very popular counterexample for progressives: It is a happy, healthy, well-governed country with high taxes and a relatively large welfare state, a useful if limited datum to bring into conversation with conservatives who sometimes talk as though it were impossible for such a thing to exist.) Denmark’s strategy was to put its economy into a kind of hibernation for the duration of quarantine measures, with the national government subsidizing up to 90 percent of the wages of workers who might otherwise have been laid off, while offering struggling firms direct assistance to meet other costs while their usual revenue streams are dammed up by artificial but necessary barriers to doing business. The United States has spent trillions on stimulus and other measures, and the unemployment rate still is expected to hit Great Depression levels. Denmark’s unemployment rate at last measure was about one-third the U.S. rate. Denmark, too, has spent a ton of money, but if unemployment is our metric, then there is a lot to say for the Danish model, at least with the evidence that we have at hand right now. The usual caveats — the United States is not much like Denmark — apply here. There are two ways of looking at this. One would be to embrace the Schumpeterian “creative destruction” with which we are faced: There is a new reality, no amount of wishful thinking will change that, and the genuinely humanitarian approach would be to let businesses and industries adjust — through failure — as quickly as they can to this new reality, while providing support for the unemployed and newly incomeless through the ordinary instruments of social welfare, from unemployment benefits to food stamps. A second view would be that we have adopted an unprecedented set of emergency measures in the face of a genuine national and worldwide crisis, that there is a big difference between businesses that have been shut down by government order and buggy-whip makers on the eve of the automotive revolution, and that what our economy is faced with is not “creative destruction” but destruction pure and simple. There are millions of Americans who want and need to work but cannot find it. We need them to work, too, not because of some abstraction called “the economy” but because of the millions and millions of real-world daily tasks and exchanges that we talk about when we talk about “the economy.” It is important that people get paychecks, but it also is important that the work be done — jobs are a means, not an end. The point of hauling up those 16 tons of coal wasn’t to produce a paycheck for miners — it was to produce energy from coal, for heat and power and for all the things that come from heat and power. Unemployment north of 20 percent is going to be very hard on the unemployed. But it is going to be hard on everybody else, too. That’s the paradox of capitalism, the vicious cutthroat arrangement by which we learn how best to serve one another, in which we talk about competition as though we were hyenas fighting over the last scraps of a wildebeest but act like people who are working together to provide for ourselves and one another. Adam Smith did not write a book about marketing, management, or entrepreneurship — he wrote A Theory of Moral Sentiments. A correspondent asks: Why isn’t there an adjective form of integrity, in the word’s sense meaning good character? There are two common adjectives related to integrity: One is integral and the other is integrated. Neither of these is normally used to describe someone having a good character, though integrated is sometimes used to describe a positive aspect of someone’s character or personality. Carl Jung wrote of the desirability of having an integrated personality, and in the Catholic world one sometimes hears about priests or seminarians having an integrated vocation or, alas, a poorly integrated vocation, commonly in respect to celibacy. Integral touches on the edges here, too: Certain New Age cranks used to speak of integral psychology and still speak of integral theory and integral yoga. Integral is attractive to cranks because it sounds science-y, like macrobiotic or homeopathic, two great big flashing neon signs advertising quackery. Larry Niven wrote a science-fiction novel called The Integral Trees, which, if I remember correctly, was about a race of aliens who lived in gigantic trees floating in space rather than on a planet as such. What we have here is a noun that has evolved from its literal sense of intact or whole when applied to physical characteristics into a metaphorical sense of upright or correct when applied to someone’s character. The word has in fact shifted back and forth over the years, and not only in English. The Latin in tangere, meaning untouched, is the root, and the Latin adjective integer meant both whole in the physical sense and upright in the moral sense. So, we do have an adjective, just not in English. The melding of the physical and the moral senses of similar words remains pretty common in English, as in the dusty (and maybe even now offensive in many circles) characterization of a young woman “with her virtue intact.” Another correspondent asks: In what way is a preexisting condition different from an existing condition, or a pre-order from an order? Preexisting, I’ll grant you. And it is related to one of the great nonsense phrases of our time: “insuring against preexisting conditions,” which is like placing a bet on last year’s World Series. Preorder may be a little irritating, but I think it serves a legitimate function, describing a situation in which you can order something before it is available for delivery (see below!) or ordering something in a way that is otherwise out of turn, for example preordering a dessert soufflé in a restaurant that needs extra time to prepare it, as diners sometimes are asked to do, or preordering an airplane meal rather than ordering from the . . . dare I write stewardess? . . . on the plane. I think the pre does some useful work there. Send your language questions to TheTuesday@nationalreview.com. Speaking of (pre?)orders: You can buy my forthcoming book, Big White Ghetto: Dead Broke, Stone-Cold Stupid, and High on Rage in the Dank Woolly Wilds of the “Real America,” at Amazon and other retailers. My National Review archive can be found here. Listen to “Mad Dogs & Englishmen” here. My New York Post archive can be found here. My Amazon page is here. To subscribe to National Review, which you really should do, go here. To support National Review Institute, go here. Wednesday is the feast day of Our Lady of Fatima. As Franciscan Media puts it, during that famous visitation “Mary asked the children to pray the rosary for world peace, for the end of World War I, for sinners, and for the conversion of Russia.” I think it is almost safe to say that World War I has come to an end. Maybe not. If it is the case, as some historians say, that the two world wars were in effect one big war with a long intermission, if the Cold War was in effect a continuation of World War II with the victors fighting for postwar dominance, if, as David Frum argues, the Cold War never really ended . . . . History is very short, looked at the right way, and the work of prayer is never done. To subscribe to “The Tuesday,” follow this link.  

A study of nearly 6,000 Major League Baseball employees found that just 0.7 percent tested positive for antibodies present in individuals who have recovered from coronavirus infections. Important news up front for baseball fans: The study doesn’t really have any bearing on MLB plans to play ball for a partial season beginning later in the summer. On Monday, Major League Baseball owners sent a plan to the MLB players’ union to start a season in July without fans. The ability to pull that off will largely depend on several factors, including mass-testing of players and the players willingness to agree to the plan.  What this study, along with others, does tell us is that most people in the United States remain susceptible to being infected by SARS-Cov-2, the virus that causes the disease COVID-19. In other words, the country isn’t anywhere close to reaching herd immunity. “In a sense, the epidemic has quite a bit to go. It’s only sort of started in this population,” Dr. Jay Bhattacharya, a professor of medicine at Stanford University, who helped conduct the study, told National Review on Monday. Though the study was conducted of employees in just one industry — including front-office workers, players, concession workers, and others — the survey of 26 MLB teams “provides a peek into the epidemic nationwide,” says Bhattacharya. When accounting for errors in the test, the true percentage of MLB employees with antibodies could range from 0.28 percent to 1.15 percent. Only a few coronavirus antibody studies have been conducted across the country so far, but each had shown a higher prevalence of earlier coronavirus infections. A University of Miami study found that 6 percent of Miami-Dade County residents had antibodies. About 20 percent of New York City residents have tested positive for antibodies.   In April, Bhattacharya helped conduct a coronavirus-antibody study of Santa Clara County in California that concluded anywhere from 2.5 percent to 4 percent of the county’s residents had recovered from the infection. He said at the time that that number was “nowhere near” the threshold for herd immunity, although he cautions that when discussing herd immunity it is important to note that we don’t even know how long immunity lasts for those who have coronavirus antibodies. 
 If herd immunity to the SARS-Cov-2 virus is possible, at what point would it be achieved? “Let’s say there’s a component of folks who are sort of naturally immune for whatever reason that we don’t understand. Well, then herd immunity would be a lower number,” Bhattacharya said last month. “If that’s not true, you need, you know, 70 to 80 percent [of the population infected]. That could happen.” Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch recently told National Review the herd-immunity threshold for the new coronavirus could be anywhere from 35 percent to 75 percent of the population. Other coronavirus antibody studies have been used to get a better understanding of what the infection-fatality rate is for the coronavirus. As Bloomberg columnist Justin Fox wrote in an April column, the initial round of studies indicate the death rate could be anywhere from 0.12 percent to 1.08 percent. The study of Major League Baseball doesn’t really shed any light on the fatality rate because only 60 people in the study tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, and no MLB employee is believed to have died of COVID-19. The study was conducted of largely working-age people, and so finding zero fatalities out of sixty positive cases is not surprising.   What was unexpected was finding that only 0.7 percent of MLB employees have been infected throughout the country.”I was surprised by it,” says Battacharya. “I was expecting it to be a little higher.” Up next for Bhattacharya’s coronavirus research is an antibody study of residents of Mumbai, India, where more surprises may await. 

Twitter’s new policy on labeling “potentially harmful and misleading content” about coronavirus will not apply to the World Health Organization’s January tweet that stated there was “no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission.” The social media platform announced Monday that it would be labeling and providing context to “some Tweets containing disputed or misleading information related to COVID-19.” Yoel Roth, Twitter’s head of site integrity, added in a call with reporters that Twitter could remove tweets if they “directly pose a risk to someone’s health or well-being.”  In its press release, the platform further clarified that the measures would be applied retroactively, and said it would “take action” based on a number of categories, including tweets “confirmed to be false or misleading by subject-matter experts, such as public health authorities,” as well as claims where “the accuracy, truthfulness, or credibility of the claim is contested or unknown” and information “that is unconfirmed at the time it is shared.” It also said it would consult unspecified “trusted partners” to help “identify content that is likely to result in offline harm.” But when asked if the WHO’s January 14 tweet — which claimed officials had “found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission” — would be clarified, Twitter told National Review that it did not intend to label the tweet. A spokesman also declined to comment on who was involved in Twitter’s list of “trusted partners.” Multiple reports have detailed how the WHO’s denial of human transmissibility, which cited Chinese officials, was false. A timeline of the Chinese Communist Party’s initial coronavirus response shows that on December 25, Chinese medical staff in two different Wuhan hospitals came down with an unknown virus and were quarantined, while a week later a study found that only 27 of the first 41 cases could be traced to the Huanan seafood market. Additionally, Taiwan has said it warned the WHO and Chinese authorities of potential human transmissibility on December 31, after its doctors learned of mainland cases among medical staff, but was ignored.   The same day of the WHO’s tweet, the head of China’s National Health Commission, Ma Xiaowei, privately warned President Xi Jinping and local health officials that “clustered cases suggest that human-to-human transmission is possible,” after authorities in Thailand discovered the first case reported outside of China on January 13. Twitter, which in March began tagging posts for misinformation, has previously said that CCP officials who claimed coronavirus originated in the U.S. did not violate its rules and terms of service.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Chinese telecom giant Huawei, currently facing charges of fraud, intellectual property theft, and racketeering, is featuring CNN host Van Jones on a panel to discuss the rise of coronavirus “misinformation” days before its temporary license to do business in the U.S. expires. Huawei’s webinar, set to be hosted along with the National Association of Black Journalists (NABJ) on May 13, “will explore how journalists and leaders across industries can come together to fight against a unified enemy: COVID-19,” according to its registration page. Jones will be joined by musician will.i.am, consultant Dr. Ebony Hilton, and journalist Roland Martin. The CCP has claimed in recent weeks that it is a “victim” of disinformation surrounding the origins of the pandemic, despite a detailed timeline showing its failures to address the initial outbreak in Wuhan.  Huawei, which has close ties to the Chinese Communist Party, has come under increasing scrutiny for its stealing of trade secrets from American competitors. The Department of Justice said in February that the firm has conducted a “decades-long” operation to “misappropriate intellectual property” from U.S. technology firms, while Trump administration claimed that Huawei has secretly accessed American cell phone data for over a decade. In a speech at the Munich Security Conference in February House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D., Calif.) warned that “China is seeking to export its digital autocracy through its telecommunication giant Huawei.”  The DOJ said last month that it was emphasizing for all 94 federal prosecutors to focus on investigating and bringing cases related to Chinese efforts to steal American intellectual property. The Trump administration banned U.S. firms from doing business with Huawei in May 2019, but issued a temporary general license that is set to expire on May 15, in order to give companies time to decouple. CNN, which has faced allegations of publishing Chinese propaganda, did not return a request for comment on whether Jones had been given the approval to join the panel.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A belated Mother’s Day thought, about family life right now during these coronavirus days and what the work of the church is in every apartment and home — and as I was talking to Luanne Zurlo about last week, even in homeless shelters where some of the families her charter-school network serves in the South Bronx live. Most of us were nowhere near a church for Easter, and yet, the work that is happening in family life day after day in quarantine is as important as it gets. Here’s what JPII said about mothers and fathers in Evangelium Vitae: As part of the spiritual worship acceptable to God (cf. Rom 12:1), the Gospel of life is to be celebrated above all in daily living, which should be filled with self-giving love for others. In this way, our lives will become a genuine and responsible acceptance of the gift of life and a heartfelt song of praise and gratitude to God who has given us this gift. This is already happening in the many different acts of selfless generosity, often humble and hidden, carried out by men and women, children and adults, the young and the old, the healthy and the sick. It is in this context, so humanly rich and filled with love, that heroic actions too are born. These are the most solemn celebration of the Gospel of life, for they proclaim it by the total gift of self. They are the radiant manifestation of the highest degree of love, which is to give one’s life for the person loved (cf. Jn 15:13). They are a sharing in the mystery of the Cross, in which Jesus reveals the value of every person, and how life attains its fullness in the sincere gift of self. Over and above such outstanding moments, there is an everyday heroism, made up of gestures of sharing, big or small, which build up an authentic culture of life. A particularly praiseworthy example of such gestures is the donation of organs, performed in an ethically acceptable manner, with a view to offering a chance of health and even of life itself to the sick who sometimes have no other hope. Part of this daily heroism is also the silent but effective and eloquent witness of all those “brave mothers who devote themselves to their own family without reserve, who suffer in giving birth to their children and who are ready to make any effort, to face any sacrifice, in order to pass on to them the best of themselves.” In living out their mission “these heroic women do not always find support in the world around them. On the contrary, the cultural models frequently promoted and broadcast by the media do not encourage motherhood. In the name of progress and modernity the values of fidelity, chastity, sacrifice, to which a host of Christian wives and mothers have borne and continue to bear outstanding witness, are presented as obsolete … We thank you, heroic mothers, for your invincible love! We thank you for your intrepid trust in God and in his love. We thank you for the sacrifice of your life … In the Paschal Mystery, Christ restores to you the gift you gave him. Indeed, he has the power to give you back the life you gave him as an offering.” How is resurrection going to happen after this moment where so many people are scared, out of jobs, lost loved ones they didn’t even get to have a funeral for? People who know love and sacrifice and hope and joy. Faith is critical and the family is the first and best school. Not perfect. Not easy. Heroic. We can tend to take these things for granted and not encourage and support one another enough. We all need all the support (spiritual, moral, and, of course, financial, but let’s not forget the spiritual and moral) we can get these days.  And since we are still in the Easter season, take some time with it if it is helpful. Give yourself a moment to realize how important who you are and what you’re doing is!  

1. The Secret Group of Scientists and Billionaires Pushing a Manhattan Project for Covid-19 2. Canadian Catholic bishop funds research for a safe and efficient coronavirus vaccine 3. 6th Cir. has now published its decision over the weekend to block Kentucky Gov. Breshear's ban on in-person church services.  The church can hold services so long as it conforms to the same public health rules as other places that are still open.https://t.co/o4ckueodII pic.twitter.com/UN2H853Psw — Gabriel Malor (@gabrielmalor) May 11, 2020  4. This is in the New York metropolitan area: In the joy of Easter, I wish to announce the good news that in consultation with the pastors of the Diocese, we will be able to begin the outdoor public celebration of Mass on May 21, the Ascension of our Lord. https://t.co/MOfETPGheQ — Bishop Frank Caggiano (@BishopCaggiano) May 11, 2020   5. A reminder that the work of the Church continues in shutdown, from El Paso: On April 29, after a probate lawyer contacted [Bishop Mark Seitz] during the pandemic, he participated in the interment of 46 cremains that had never been claimed and provided a space for their burial in one of the diocese’s Catholic cemeteries. He said he wanted to take part in the burial as a “final expression of respect, being assured that there’s someone praying for them.” “I imagine them also praying for those who show them this charity, and maybe welcoming us someday,” he said. He’s also participated in food deliveries organized by the diocese’s network of helpers, including deliveries to some convents where women religious had been struggling to put food on the table, and to hungry local families, including one in which the mother had recovered from COVID-19 and had returned from the hospital. He spoke with her from outside, through a door to the family’s apartment. “I was so glad to make the connection,” he said. He also has been busy personally giving thanks to those who donate to their parishes via a phone bank, whose number is flashed on the screen during local Masses broadcast on local TV stations. It’s important, he said, to let others see the work of church members amid the pandemic. “It’s to let people know that the church just hasn’t rolled up the sidewalk and gone away at this time,” he said. “I realize that when people see me out there, they know the church is out there.” 6. In Inner-City Black Churches: More Grief, Fewer Resources, Stronger Faith  7. NY priest on virus front lines with embattled congregation   8. COVID-19 Is Ravaging the Global Church 9. Forced to start gain? Pandemic adds to challenges for refugees 10. This sounds like some very unnecessary government overreach as a Spanish cardinal is investigated for what sounds like a beautiful blessing, done prudently 11. “What happens when we lose them and our whole ‘society’ moves online? What happens when actual social networks no longer function in the real world?“ 12. To The Woman Considering Adoption 13.  A Florida circuit court judge finalizes adoptions over Zoom. “Time and again, I have seen children who have been traumatized find peace when they know they are part of a permanent family,” he said. “There is something about receiving unconditional love that heals us all. During a pandemic, children need to find the peace a forever home affords all the more.” 14. As a person with a disability, quarantine is what I deal with everyday  15. An honor to speak with Monica Kelsey, founder of @SafeHavenBox1 — which have saved 6 babies in Indiana in the past 18 months! Monica shares her story as a child of rape, abandoned at birth, then adopted. Her mission to save babies is beautiful: https://t.co/1RQHzLiilh — ErickaAndersen (@ErickaAndersen) May 11, 2020  16. As David Brooks did last week, Abby M. McCloskey suggests we have a national service moment, citing WFB 17. A visit to a rural Catholic college that has 171 students, 12 horses, and zero textbooks 18. Half-Time High School May Be Just What Students Need 19. Little girl writes heartfelt thank you letter to mail carrier and gets many in return 20. Bringing a child w/a chronic illness home from the hospital is  a unique joy, relief.(Happening today 🎉) The first 50 times, I thought “maybe this is the last time; everything would be ok if this could be the last time.” I’ve finally learned to simply be grateful for the todays — Kelly Rosati (@KellyMRosati) May 9, 2020     

In the Wall Street Journal, former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum points to the glaring poison of open abortion clinics in this time of shutdown: We all now understand how little and vulnerable we are. We recognize that life is fragile and not to be taken for granted. When push came to shove we all prized life above the economic freedom to pursue our dreams—and even to preserve our health. Politicians on the left and right shut down surgery centers, cancer-treatment centers and other places that used personal protective equipment, because it was needed on the Covid frontlines and such procedures were considered elective or nonessential. There was one exception to the closure of these types of medical facilities in states run by Democratic governors. These facilities for 50 years have put economic freedom (and on rare occasions health) over the life of the most helpless, most vulnerable among us. How can governors insist on closing life-saving cancer centers as nonessential while keeping open abortion clinics, whose sole purpose is to end life? How can governors insist on saving every life possible, no matter the hardship to working families in their states, while keeping open facilities so people don’t have to live with the responsibility of raising new life? In this moment of crisis, our character is laid bare, for better and for worse. The vulnerable elderly are in the news, the unborn not so much. Out of this crisis, there are so many questions about who we are and what we want to be about to reconsider. On a good day, so many women feel pressure and not an empowering exercise of freedom or basic health care when they access legal abortion.  My syndicated column today is a bit of a plea to the likes of Andrew Cuomo who has been saying some beautiful things about human life. Can we really talk about what this means? Especially for the unborn, the elderly, the disabled, the sick in any way? We have been talking about them, let’s start working together to really protect life in our public policy. And pray for conversions! If St. Paul happened, Andrew Cuomo certainly isn’t impossible. (Bernard Nathanson, certainly comes to mind!)  

Just before I went into quarantine, I was in one of the Sisters of Life convents where they do their hope and healing ministry. There were roses by the altar and a Divine Mercy image of Jesus. Each rose represented a child who was lost to abortion. Women who have abortions had been there for a retreat a few days before. Some women put multiple roses by the altar, representing multiple babies lost to abortion. I keep thinking of those women during these quarantine times. They are signs of hope, that they can have the humility to go to God with their abortion and encounter His love. There was a woman I saw walking out of a Planned Parenthood in the fall who looked so devoid of hope, like life had been taken from her, which, of course, it was. I hope she encounters the Sisters of Life or Project Rachel or anyone else who can help her see herself as God sees her. Mother’s Day can also be excruciating for a woman who lost her child to abortion. So can these coronavirus times, knowing that you played a role in the ending of an innocent life. The sisters continue to minister to these women at this time. Abortion doesn’t kill their love for a woman, whom they want to help experience God’s mercy and healing. They do the work that Pope Saint John Paul II talked about in his Evangelium Vitae, “The Gospel of Life”: I would now like to say a special word to women who have had an abortion. The Church is aware of the many factors which may have influenced your decision, and she does not doubt that in many cases it was a painful and even shattering decision. The wound in your heart may not yet have healed. Certainly what happened was and remains terribly wrong. But do not give in to discouragement and do not lose hope. Try rather to understand what happened and face it honestly. If you have not already done so, give yourselves over with humility and trust to repentance. The Father of mercies is ready to give you his forgiveness and his peace in the Sacrament of Reconciliation. To the same Father and his mercy you can with sure hope entrust your child. With the friendly and expert help and advice of other people, and as a result of your own painful experience, you can be among the most eloquent defenders of everyone’s right to life. Through your commitment to life, whether by accepting the birth of other children or by welcoming and caring for those most in need of someone to be close to them, you will become promoters of a new way of looking at human life. God loves you and may just be raising you to be leaders in a culture of life and hope we surely need.  

Last week, Taiwan announced a major donation of over seven million face masks to the U.S., Europe, Africa, the Middle East, and Asia in response to the ongoing coronavirus crisis. In Wisconsin, we experienced this generosity firsthand in the form of 100,000 surgical-grade masks, which will help keep our state healthy. This donation marked the third tranche of substantial international assistance from Taiwan, which stands in stark contrast to behavior of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) throughout the crisis.  The CCP’s contributions to the pandemic have inspired legislation holding the CCP legally liable and rapidly reducing supply-chain dependencies on China. These are solid steps, but in our new Cold War, the strategic center of gravity is not the CCP, but rather our allies and partners. As one Chinese diplomat wrote in 2012, “the core of competition between China and the United States will be to see who has more high-quality friends.” It’s hard to have a more high-quality friend than Taiwan — a vibrant democracy under intense pressure that deserves our full support.  Unfortunately, support for Taiwan has been inconsistent. Unlike NATO’s crystal-clear Article V collective-defense commitment, the U.S. commitment to Taiwan has been muddled. Since the Carter administration, the United States has adopted a policy of “strategic ambiguity.” Once upon a time, proponents of this strategy may have told themselves that they were calming tensions by deterring both sides from precipitous action: Beijing could not count on our restraint if they opted for invasion, while Taipei could not count on our support if they declared independence. Yet while Taiwan has embraced restrained, responsible statecraft, Beijing has poached Taiwan’s diplomatic allies, used economic leverage to punish Taipei, and engaged in dangerous military provocations with growing frequency. At a broader level, the cross-strait balance of power has shifted in Beijing’s favor thanks to a rapid rise in military spending, and General Secretary Xi Jinping has made clear his intent to annex Taiwan by whatever means necessary. The Chinese military threat to Taiwan is no longer a long-term hypothetical scenario. Rather, it is a dangerous course of action that gets more likely the less we stand up to CCP aggression.  
 Fortunately, there are plenty of ways to demonstrate resolve and strengthen our relationship with Taiwan. In 2018, Congress passed the Taiwan Travel Act, making it U.S. policy to allow high-level meetings between U.S. and Taiwanese government officials, including military officers. Earlier this spring, President Trump signed the Taiwan Allies International Protection and Enhancement Initiative (TAIPEI) Act, which authorizes the State Department to pursue both carrots and sticks for countries that strengthen or weaken relations with Taiwan. The Trump administration has also regularized and increased arms sales to Taiwan, providing them with F-16s to modernize their aging air force.  Building on this momentum and coming out of the coronavirus crisis, the U.S. should go farther by establishing a multinational COVID-19 task force in Taipei with U.S. scientific and diplomatic participation. When conditions permit, Secretary Pompeo could visit Taipei to give an address at the new American Institute in Taiwan on Taiwan’s role in helping humanity see through the CCP’s lies and defeat the coronavirus. Congress should also invite President Tsai to address a joint session of Congress. Both Congress and the White House should push for Taiwan’s meaningful participation in international organizations such as the World Health Organization and the International Civil Aviation Organization. An early test will come on May 18, when WHO member states are set to vote on Taiwan’s observer status at the World Health Assembly. Regardless of how that vote turns out, it is time to end our policy of strategic ambiguity with Taiwan, because there is nothing ambiguous about the CCP’s designs on Taiwan. As Deputy National Security Adviser Matt Pottinger outlined in a remarkable speech, “The cliché that Chinese people can’t be trusted with democracy was . . . the most unpatriotic idea of all. Taiwan today is a living repudiation of that threadbare mistruth.” The CCP knows this, and it is why they are increasing pressure against Taiwan on all fronts.   But just as Taiwan’s very existence calls into question the CCP’s legitimacy, so too would the invasion, absorption, or coercion of a democratic partner call into question the seriousness of American defense commitments. Regional allies such as Japan and Australia would nervously ask themselves whether they too would be abandoned under the wrong circumstances. By taking Taiwan, the People’s Liberation Army Navy would have a foothold to turn Japan’s flank and break out of the first island chain, adding Taiwan’s numerous foundries to China’s and gaining a near-monopoly on global microelectronics production in the process. In order to prevent this from happening, the U.S. must provide a full-throated defense of Taiwan’s sovereignty and territorial integrity. Now is the time for a declaratory statement of policy committing the United States to the defense of Taiwan. While this approach is not without risk, as we have learned painfully from decades of failed policy toward the CCP, the greatest risk of all comes from complacency.  It is time to stand with Taiwan. 

The World Health Organization said it could not invite Taiwan to an upcoming international health summit, despite pleas from the U.S. and its allies, due to “divergent views,” after China said it “deplores and opposes” efforts to include Taipei in the gathering. WHO principal legal officer Steven Solomon explained to reporters on Monday that the WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom could not invite Taiwan — which is not a member of the WHO — to participate in the annual meeting of the World Health Assembly (WHA) if members of the international body disagreed.  “To put it crisply, director-generals only extend invitations when it’s clear that member states support doing so, that director-generals have a mandate, a basis to do so,” Solomon explained. “Today however, the situation is not the same. Instead of clear support, there are divergent views among member states and no basis there for — no mandate — for the DG to extend an invitation.” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said last week that Tedros should include Taiwan in the upcoming WHA meeting, saying “he has the power to do, and as his predecessors have done on multiple occasions.” The proposal was supported by New Zealand, Canada, Australia, and Germany, but China disparaged the claim, saying that those supporting it “severely violate the one-China principle.” Last month, Tedros himself accused Taiwan of racist “attacks” over his handling of the coronavirus pandemic, an allegation that Taiwan denied as “unprovoked and untrue.” Tedros’s claim came after Taiwan said in March that the organization had ignored its December warnings that human-to-human transmission of coronavirus was possible. The WHO tweeted on January 14 that “Preliminary investigations conducted by the Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Kari Stefansson, CEO of the Icelandic company deCODE genetics in Reykjavík, studied the spread of COVID-19 in Iceland with Iceland’s Directorate of Health and the National University Hospital. His project has tested 36,500 people; as of this writing, Iceland has 1,801 cases and ten deaths. On a per-capita basis, Iceland ranks near the very top in testing. In an interview with the Science Museum Group, Stefansson makes an extraordinary statement: Children under 10 are less likely to get infected than adults and if they get infected, they are less likely to get seriously ill. What is interesting is that even if children do get infected, they are less likely to transmit the disease to others than adults. We have not found a single instance of a child infecting parents. Other researchers in other countries aren’t quite so sure of that, determining that children can definitely carry the virus. (It may be that children’s immune systems fight the virus better, resulting in less coughing, which reduces the likelihood of infecting someone else.) If the Icelandic conclusion is accurate, it would be a strong argument for reopening schools, suggesting that children would not be at harm from exposure to each other, and that teachers would be similarly unlikely to catch the virus from their students. (Teachers could catch the virus from other teachers and other adults in the school.)  

Major League Baseball’s 30 owners approved a plan to begin the baseball season in early July, with the proposal now heading to the player’s union for approval amid the coronavirus pandemic. Games would be played without fans to start, with each team playing around 82 regular-season games, inter-division and interleague matchups based on geographical proximity, according to The Associated Press. The playoffs would also be expanded to include 14 teams, by adding two additional wild cards for both the American and National leagues.  Other facets of the plan include the likely cancellation of the All Star Game, which was originally scheduled to take place at Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles on July 14, as well as the establishment of the designated hitter in the National League. Rosters would also be expanded from 26 to 30 players. A likely point of contention between the owners and the players’ union, which will hear the proposal on Tuesday, is that players would only receive their cut of a 50-50 revenue split with the league, rather than their normal negotiated salaries. The MLB would still require medical and government approvals to play games, with the prospect that some teams could be forced to play in their spring-training stadiums or neutral sites to avoid ongoing lockdowns.  A number of states have already begun to reopen, with New York, the hardest hit state in the country, announcing that it would begin a phased pull-back of its lockdowns on May 15.  “The decline has gotten to a point where we are just about where we started the journey,” Governor Andrew Cuomo said Monday. “We have abated the worst by what we’ve done, and now we can intelligently turn to reopening.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said Monday that New York has reached “the other side of the mountain” with the coronavirus outbreak in the state and can begin reopening the economy in phases. “We’re right about where we were on March 19 before we went into the abyss of the COVID virus,” Cuomo said at his daily news conference giving updates on the virus outbreak.  “We’re coming out of the other side. So in many ways, from my point of view, we’re on the other side of the mountain, right? We got hit with the virus, we saw that incline, we saw the number of cases growing, we saw the number of deaths growing. We finally hit a plateau because we did what we needed to do, and we changed our behavior, and we closed down, and we turned the corner, and then we started to come down the other side,” Cuomo continued. Some “low-risk” businesses such as landscaping companies and drive-in movie theaters will be allowed to reopen on Friday, when the state’s stay at home order is scheduled to expire. However, many measures put in place in response to the outbreak will remain in effect, including eviction protections. Non-essential businesses will remain closed in each of the state’s 10 regions until regions are able to show that they have met certain criteria, including enacting social distancing protocols and performing health screens of employees, before reopening in four phases.   “The decline has gotten to a point where we are just about where we started the journey,” Cuomo said Monday. “We have abated the worst by what we’ve done, and now we can intelligently turn to reopening.” The governor emphasized last week that the state must open its economy gradually to prevent a spike in the infection rate, forcing it close businesses again. “If we didn’t do anything, you would have seen that infection number keep going straight up,” Cuomo said Friday. “We reopen irresponsibly, you will see that infection number go straight up.” New York state has seen more than 340,600 cases of the coronavirus, close to a fourth of all cases in the U.S., and more than 26,600 people have died in the state after being infected.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Mark Hayward, a sociology professor at the University of Texas at Austin who advises the Centers For Disease Control on its mortality statistics, told Britain’s Independent newspaper the “overall burden of mortality” from COVID-19 in the U.S. could be closer to double the current 75,000 deaths. That claim is only true if you believe the virus itself is responsible for the lockdowns and their broad bans on non-COVID health care. But it is more accurately viewed as a consequence of policies that can and should be reversed.  Two weeks ago, the New York Times wrote: “ERs have about half the normal number of patients, and heart and stroke units are nearly empty . . . Some medical experts fear more people are dying from untreated emergencies than from the coronavirus.” Dr. Santiago Garcia of the Minneapolis Heart Institute says “people are having a hard time reaching out to the physicians.” He notes that one of his colleagues reported a patient losing their eyesight after failing to get to their macular degeneration test, which checks the health of the retina. Allina Health, which operates 13 hospitals and more than 90 clinics through Minnesota and western Wisconsin, postponed 4,000 surgeries last month, some of them for cancer patients.  The biggest proponent of the “excess mortality is the real COVID-19 count” notion globally is the Financial Times. But Sweden, with comparatively laxer lockdown policies in place, has fared better in terms of excess deaths than other European countries with far stricter lockdowns, well below their calculated 49 percent average increase, at 18 percent.  Deaths caused by people blocked from needed health care should not be labeled COVID-19 deaths. They are more appropriately tagged “lockdown deaths.” 

Rarely do you see a network put so much effort into downplaying their own potential scoop as NBC News does here: A private analysis of cellphone location data purports to show that a high-security Wuhan laboratory studying coronaviruses shut down in October, three sources briefed on the matter told NBC News. U.S. spy agencies are reviewing the document, but intelligence analysts examined and couldn’t confirm a similar theory previously, two senior officials say. The report — obtained by the London-based NBC News Verification Unit — says there was no cellphone activity in a high-security portion of the Wuhan Institute of Virology from Oct. 7 through Oct. 24, 2019, and that there may have been a “hazardous event” sometime between Oct. 6 and Oct. 11. It offers no direct evidence of a shutdown, or any proof for the theory that the virus emerged accidentally from the lab. The first thing we need to know, and that these sources and this report do not provide, is what the “normal” level of cell phone use in the high-security portion of the Wuhan Institute of Virology is. If it did indeed drop to zero, was that a huge drop compared to the normal activity? Was there usually very little phone activity in this part of the building? Somewhere in between? The bigger the drop, the more significant this is — and less likely it was driven by something like the bosses yelling at their employees for spending too much time on their phones at work or something. It is also fair to wonder how complete this cellphone location data is.  The time period of the lack of cell phone activity is a little early in light of what we know about the outbreak, but not by a great deal. The NBC News report states that “the first known case of coronavirus in China has been traced back to Nov. 17, but some researchers are beginning to question that timeline, given that a case has been documented in France in December.” The November 17 date comes from an unnamed source showing a Chinese government document to the South China Morning Post.   The French case is somewhat disruptive to the timeline of previously-known cases, but not by a lot. The French patient’s samples were collected at a hospital on December 27, but he was not initially tested for SARS-CoV-2. (Almost no one had heard of it then.) Doctors recently went back and retested his sample and now believe he was infected with the virus between December 14 and 22. What’s particularly intriguing is this patient had not returned from China or anywhere abroad, although “the patient’s wife worked at a supermarket near Charles de Gaulle airport and could have come into contact with people who had recently arrived from China.” By December 21, Wuhan doctors begin to notice a “cluster of pneumonia cases with an unknown cause.” It is possible that sometime in early to mid December, an asymptomatic carrier traveled from Wuhan to Paris, then shopped in the supermarket, spread it to the wife, and she then spread it to this man. Finally, if there was some sort of hazardous event that made everyone leave the “high security portion” of the Wuhan Institute of Virology in October, that event may have been driven by something hazardous that was completely different from SARS-CoV-2. That said, if the WIV had a separate, unrelated, serious accident in October, it would be further evidence to refute the never-that-plausible “the Chinese researchers were simply too diligent and professional to ever have an accidental release of a virus from their facilities” argument.  

CBS News’ 60 Minutes misrepresented Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s position regarding the origin of the novel coronavirus in a Sunday tweet. “Last Sunday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo attempted to resurrect a debunked theory that the virus was man-made in China,” read a Sunday tweet from the 60 Minutes account. As the U.S. took the lead for illness and death from coronavirus, the White House moved the focus to the Chinese government. Last Sunday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo attempted to resurrect a debunked theory that the virus was man-made in China. https://t.co/MZbfe4LeXi pic.twitter.com/bIjTRfboTg — 60 Minutes (@60Minutes) May 10, 2020     During the interview referenced in the 60 Minutes tweet, Pompeo was asked by ABC’s Martha Raddatz whether he thinks the coronavirus was “man-made or genetically modified.”  “Look, the best experts so far seem to think it was man-made. I have no reason to disbelieve that at this point,” Pompeo said, apparently misspeaking. Raddatz pointed out that the Office of the Director of National Intelligence has said the scientific consensus was that the virus was not manmade or genetically modified. “That’s right. I agree with that,” Pompeo said, clarifying his earlier remark. “Yeah, I’ve seen their analysis. I’ve seen the summary that you saw that was released publicly. I have no reason to doubt that that is accurate at this point.”  “I’ve seen what the Intelligence Community has said. I have no reason to believe that they’ve got it wrong,” the secretary of state responded, adding that “what’s important” is that the Chinese Communist Party “had the opportunity to prevent all of the calamity that has befallen the world, and here we find ourselves today.” The State Department called the network’s mischaracterization of Pompeo’s position “deeply irresponsible.” CBS News also neglected to reach out to the State Department for comment or clarification before airing the report, the department said.  On Wednesday, Pompeo said at a press briefing that there is “significant evidence” to believe the coronavirus originated in a lab, but added that, “we don’t have certainty about whether it began in the lab or whether it began someplace else.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Most people willingly participated in the compulsory COVID-19 lockdown to “flatten the curve” of infection — that is, slow down the rate at which people became ill — to prevent hospitals from being overwhelmed. That worked, and now, steps are being taken to get back in gear. But once technocrats taste the power to dictate behavior, they don’t want to give it up. Writing in Oxford’s Practical Ethics, influential bioethicist Alberto Giubilini urges that governments force us to download a phone “contact tracing app,” currently being tested in a voluntary trial on the Isle of Wight. Here’s how the app works, according to The Guardian: (1) Person A downloads the contact tracing app and enables Bluetooth (2) Her phone logs distance data with any phones that are nearby. (3) Data is anonymous for A and everybody she comes in contact with. (4) If person A falls ill she notifies the app that she has symptom (5) The data gathered by her phone is uploaded to a central server. (6) People who have been in close contact with her are sent an alert and further advice In other words, the government and/or tech company would always know where we have been and everyone with whom we have interacted. How does Giubilini justify such a dictatorial mandate? Temporarily suspending some privacy rights would prevent some much greater harm (in terms of economic loss, unemployment, mental health, etc., in case we need to return to the lockdown, and in terms of higher number of infections or deaths if we exit the lockdown without an effective contact tracing mechanism). Don’t you hate the smell of utilitarianism in the morning? If people want to voluntarily participate in such a system, fine with me. But mandatory? Absolutely not. Anyone who believes that “strict guidelines will protect against abuse” in such a system has paid no attention at the “social credit” tyranny China is constructing using technology such as this, AI, and facial recognition. And how many readers believe such a contact tracing program would remain “temporary” or be limited over time to COVID-19? I sure don’t. The bioethicist also wants to mandate COVID-19 vaccinations once one is developed. How is this justified? Unless one thinks that bodily integrity is a quasi-sacred value, it is unreasonable to think that the breach of bodily integrity represented by injecting a vaccine through a thin needle or the small risks of vaccine side effects outweigh the harms of the virus and those of compulsory lockdown. Actually, bioethicists like Giubilini and his ilk have long told us that bodily integrity (autonomy) is a “quasi-sacred value.” After all, isn’t that the very justification for abortion as a purported fundamental right? Besides, he sniffs, people agreed with the compulsory lockdown, so why not this? One thing always leads to another with these guys.   We shouldn’t be surprised that Giubilini wants everyone forced to receive inoculations. Ezekiel Emanuel, Joe Biden’s chief health adviser, has urged that every child in America be legally required to receive a flu shot every year because between 34 and 186 children die a year from influenza. He has also opined that doctors should be forced to perform abortions even if it violates their religious beliefs. Unsurprisingly, Giubilini has too.  Yup, bioethicists love their mandates. And there is no better opportunity for technocrats to grab power than during a health emergency.  

Viruses mutate — meaning they change and evolve as they multiply and spread — and one of the big fears about SARS-CoV-2 is that at some point it could mutate into something even more deadly and even more contagious. Thankfully, so far that hasn’t happened. A University College London team analyzing virus genomes from more than 7,500 infected people identified 198 recurrent genetic mutations in the virus, and a lead researcher concluded, “there is nothing to suggest SARS-CoV-2 is mutating faster or slower than expected. So far we cannot say whether SARS-CoV-2 is becoming more or less lethal and contagious.” While we shouldn’t count on it, there is a chance that mutation will work in our favor, eventually. John M. Barry’s The Great Influenza is considered one of the most authoritative histories of the 1918 influenza pandemic. In that book, Barry discusses how the continuing mutation of that epidemic’s spectacularly lethal virus ended up saving people: By nature the influenza virus is dangerous, considerably more dangerous than the common aches and fever lead people to believe, but it does not kill routinely as it did in 1918. The 1918 pandemic reached an extreme of virulence unknown in any other widespread influenza outbreak in history. But the 1918 virus, like all influenza viruses, like all viruses that form mutant swarms, mutated rapidly. There is a mathematical concept called “reversion to the mean”; this states simply that an extreme event is likely to be followed by a less extreme event. This is not a law, only a probability. The 1918 virus stood at an extreme; any mutations were more likely to make it less lethal than more lethal. In general, that is what happened. So just as it seemed that the virus would bring civilization to its knees, would do what the plagues of the Middle Ages had done, would remake the world, the virus mutated toward its mean, toward the behavior of most influenza viruses. As time went on, it became less lethal. Barry lays out numerous examples from cities in the United States and around the world and concludes, “despite aberrations, then, in general in youth the virus was violent and lethal; in maturity it mellowed. The later the epidemic struck a locality, and the later within that local epidemic someone got sick, the less lethal the influenza. The correlations are not perfect. Louisville suffered a violent attack in both spring and fall. The virus was unstable and always different. But a correlation does exist between the timing of an outbreak in a region and lethality.” One major factor working against us compared to our unlucky ancestors in 1918 is that viruses, carried and spread by the infected, move at the speed of humanity. The 1918 influenza traveled primarily by ship and railroad, particularly carried by soldiers moving from one place to another as part of World War I. By comparison, SARS-CoV-2 traveled at the speed of air travel, roughly 575 miles per hour, from one densely populated city to another.   Previous coronaviruses, such as SARS and MERS, had higher fatality rates, but were less contagious. One would be foolish to count on a phenomenon that is a mathematical probability, not a law. But . . . if SARS-CoV-2 is a particularly dangerous combination of contagiousness and lethality, then at least some, and perhaps most, future mutations will make the virus at least somewhat less contagious and less lethal. Maybe natural mutation will make this virus easier to treat as the pandemic progresses. Barry also makes an important point to keep in mind about the structure of viruses and mutation. Viruses have a giant “head,” attached to a long tube-like part called the sheath, stem or “stalk,”, and at the other end an end-plate with tail fibers that look a little like a spider or insect.* Most vaccines attack the head, which is the part that mutates the most — which is why vaccines are only partially effective. (Think of the flu vaccine given each winter, and how many people catch a different strain.) But the stem or stalk part of the virus doesn’t change very much from mutation to mutation.  Last year, researchers at the University of Michigan determined that some antibodies attack the stalk of the influenza virus — a much more effective way of killing the virus, and one that works upon almost all the viruses that the antibody encounters. Right now, we’ll take any treatment or potential vaccine we can get. But if we can develop either a treatment or vaccine that focuses on attacking the stalks of the coronaviruses . . . it will be like the Merrimack or the Monitor showing up for a battle with wooden ships. *This is the structure of a type of virus called a bacteriophage; other viruses have different shapes. That said, one of the potential vaccines in development is using a bacteriophage to bring a “virus-like particle” into a person’s nasal cavity, triggering the body’s immune system to generate antibodies that would kick into action if the body encountered SARS-CoV-2. The virus-like particle will also “attach to receptors that the coronavirus would bind to, limiting potential sites for transmission.”  

A group of 18 Republican state attorneys general on Monday called on congressional leaders to hold hearings on China’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. In a letter to the Senate and House leadership, the attorneys general noted the widespread conclusion that China concealed the coronavirus outbreak during its initial stages.  “In what Secretary of State Pompeo has described as a ‘classic communist disinformation effort,‘ the Chinese government, aided by the World Health Organization, appears to have intentionally misled the world over the last 6 months,” the letter states. “During this same period, COVID-19 has wreaked havoc on our states and the Nation. We must all hold China accountable for the devastation and destruction caused by COVID-19.” One of the signatories to the letter, Missouri attorney general Eric Schmitt, has sued the Chinese government for damages stemming from the pandemic. The letter states that “many” of the signatories “are considering similar legal actions.”  In an interview with National Review in April, Schmitt argued that his suit could “ultimately be successful…to the tune of tens of billions of dollars.” The suit “seeks recovery for the enormous loss of life, human suffering, and economic turmoil experienced by all Missourians” during the pandemic.  Congressional Republicans have already called to investigate aspects of China’s influence over the World Health Organization, as well as Chinese funding and influence at American educational institutions.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

On the menu today: a deep dive into how different state governments are handling nursing home lockdowns and reopenings, and note about South Korea’s handling of the pandemic. Stop Yelling at Beachgoers and Start Yelling at Governors over Nursing-Home Policies When confronted with terrible news, the immediate instinct of far too many Americans is that it must somehow be the fault of the people they already disliked. The Babylon Bee’s satire was painfully accurate once again with their recent headline, “‘Those Dumb Red-Staters Going To The Beach Deserve To Die,’ Man Tweets From New York Subway Train.”  On March 30, the American Health Care Association and National Center for Assisted Living issued updated guidelines, based upon CDC findings, declaring that, “unless a person is tested for COVID-19 and negative before admitting them to your building, you should assume the person has COVID-19 regardless of their having or not having symptoms . . . We strongly urge [long-term-care] facilities to begin now creating separate wings, units or floors by moving current residents to handle admissions from the hospital and keep current resident separate, if possible.” This was typed out in bright red font for emphasis. On March 20, the Society for Post-Acute and Long-Term Care Medicine issued a statement declaring, “nursing homes should not be forced by local hospitals or officials to accept new admissions who demonstrate clinical evidence or a positive test for active COVID-19, unless they are considered non-infectious based on current CDC guidelines.” The California Association of Long Term Care Medicine issued a similar resolution. Dr. Michael Wasserman, the head of the group, told NPR, “If you push folks out of the hospitals to make space and you push them into nursing homes a couple weeks later, for every one of those you send to the nursing home, you may get 20 back in the hospital.”   All of these health associations and institutions grasped how dangerous it would be to have recovering but still potentially contagious patients in the same buildings as larger groups of elderly people who need care. As noted late Friday, the state governments of New York and New Jersey enacted regulations that required nursing and assisted living homes to readmit residents who had been treated for coronavirus, whether or not they were fully recovered, in an effort to reduce the use of hospital beds. The New Jersey Department of Health explicitly prohibited the facilities from requiring patients to be tested for the virus before admission or readmission. Yesterday, New York governor Andrew Cuomo reversed that policy. This policy has been in place since March 25, so for the past six weeks and four days, nursing and long-term care homes in New York state have not been able to say, “we won’t let that patient in, because we fear that patient could expose our other residents to the virus.”  California enacted this policy for ten days, then adjusted it; now the state is promising to pay senior and adult care residential facilities up to $1,000 per day to accept recovering coronavirus patients.  Michigan’s governor Gretchen Whitmer did not enact a policy requiring nursing and long-term care homes to take in recovering coronavirus patients. But the state of Michigan permitted long-term homes to take in these patients, as long as the patients were isolated and the homes determined they had sufficient personal protective equipment. By mid-April Whitmer required nursing homes and other long-term care facilities create “a separate unit” for residents who have tested positive for COVID-19, or send them to a facility in the region that has one. Meanwhile, the state’s lists of nursing homes with coronavirus cases were painfully incomplete. Not every state did this. Louisiana explicitly banned the transfer of patients from hospitals to nursing homes if the patient has active coronavirus, has a pending test, or has undiagnosed, active respiratory symptoms.  Connecticut set aside four facilities — two of which had been previously vacant, two which set aside separate floors — to house recovering coronavirus patients. Washington opened specialty wings in three assisted-living facilities. Back on March 29, Massachusetts moved residents out of certain homes to set up ones specifically for recovering coronavirus patients, and when the locals complained, the state’s Department of Public Health explicitly stated that the approach followed by New York, New Jersey, and California would be too risky: “Without designated coronavirus care sites, hospitals would have to discharge COVID-19 patients to any skilled nursing facility with open capacity, which could put the rest of the healthy residents at risk, a DPH spokesperson said.” But it is worth noting that by April 24, the New York Times reported, “Nursing homes in Massachusetts are also being asked to take coronavirus patients, but only if they verify that they have adequate staff and protective gear and can isolate the infected. In return, those homes will collect 15 percent more in reimbursements for every Medicaid patient.” Can anyone think of any potential danger from giving a nursing home a greater financial incentive to accept coronavirus patients? In Pennsylvania, the problem was somewhat different. The Philadelphia Inquirer revealed this morning that by mid-March, the state health department had a “robust and aggressive plan” to respond to coronavirus cases in nursing homes . . . but for some reason state agencies just didn’t do what the plan called upon them to do: The quick response plan was circulated within the Health Department, with emails showing staff nurses and others were asked to volunteer. In the third week of March, it was shared with providers, said Zachary Shamberg, president and CEO of the Pennsylvania Health Care Association, which represents more than 400 long-term care facilities. But the plan was never fully implemented, and a similar — though far more limited — effort wasn’t activated until mid-April, long after major outbreaks had already taken hold. (I am reminded of the city of New Orleans having a lot of plans for hurricane response and evacuation before Hurricane Katrina, and then not enacting them when it counted.) Pennsylvania’s state government is also unwilling to say which long-term care facilities have coronavirus cases and deaths: The Pennsylvania Department of Health has repeatedly refused to release data showing coronavirus deaths at specific long-term care facilities across the commonwealth. Efforts by The Caucus, a publication of LNP Media Group, to obtain the names of affected long-term care institutions with coronavirus cases and resulting deaths have been rejected by the agency, which regulates, inspects and licenses the facilities. Florida’s health department tried to work out agreements between hospitals and nursing homes; some nursing homes in the state have isolated patients returning from a hospital for 14 days, whether or not they’ve tested positive for the coronavirus. But the state is still dealing with a rising number of cases and deaths in these homes, in part because of insufficient testing of the staff working there: There is little mystery behind what is considered the main culprit in this grim statistic: asymptomatic carriers — many of them long-term care staff members, who are getting tested infrequently or too late. But despite state efforts to ramp up testing, administrators at nursing homes and assisted-living facilities told the Miami Herald and Tampa Bay Times it is a piecemeal program that is failing to identify risk and completely contain the virus among the state’s most vulnerable. All of these states barred visitors to nursing homes, cutting off the elderly from their children and grandchildren. And then some states brought in coronavirus patients, and then I guess they just hoped that the ventilation systems wouldn’t spread the virus too much. These decisions are so spectacularly wrongheaded, so epically foolish, that those responsible deserve to be remembered forever. Think about how much ink has been spilled, telling us what a great job is being done by Cuomo, Whitmer, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy, California governor Gavin Newsom, and Pennsylvania governor Tom Wolf, and how lucky those states’ residents are to have such visionary and indefatigable leaders. You will probably see someone citing these numbers and declaring that the death toll from this pandemic is the result of a handful of blue state governors. That is not quite accurate. Even if a state enacted a strict policy like Louisiana, it cannot guarantee that the coronavirus will not end up in a nursing home or long-term care facility. According to the New York Times, Louisiana ranks 10th in the country in the number of deaths in long-term care facilities with 784 — 35 percent of the deaths in the state. Because coronavirus patients can be asymptomatic, staff may be unknowingly spreading it around — or anyone who enters the facility, like deliverymen or paramedics. New York tops the list with 5,380 deaths in nursing and long-term care homes, but that sum is only 20 percent of the state’s total. New Jersey has 4,825 deaths in nursing and long-term care homes, 52 percent of that state’s total. Massachusetts ranks third in the country with 2,837 deaths, and 59 percent of that state’s total. Pennsylvania ranks fourth, with 2,518 deaths, making up two-thirds of all deaths in the state. Even good policies can be enacted too late. Connecticut ranks fifth, with 1,627 deaths, 55 percent of that state’s total. ABC News this morning: “The deadliest place for COVID-19 transmission remains in nursing homes, which now account for more than 26,000 deaths in the U.S., according to public figures released by 35 states and Washington, D.C. That means that of the data available, nursing homes account for one-third of the nation’s fatalities from the ongoing viral outbreak, a new ABC News analysis shows.” For most of America, today begins week nine of quarantine, lockdown, social-distancing, and other measures. Across much of the country, the rules are getting loosened a bit, and communities are taking the first tentative steps to reopening. The chances are good that you’ve found the past eight weeks, at minimum, deeply frustrating, and perhaps even agonizing. Businesses closed, jobs lost, kids at home from school, everyone isolated, keeping six feet apart, wondering how much longer they can keep living their lives with just neighborhood walks and take-out and delivery and Netflix and every darn commercial beginning, “in these uncertain times . . .” And all this while — with everyone in America sacrificed in the name of keeping the most vulnerable safe — state administrators deliberately placed those who were still contagious with the virus under the same roof as large groups of elderly Americans and just hoped it would work out okay. ADDENDUM: Over the weekend, Michael Kim laid out a detailed firsthand description of South Korea’s far-reaching measures to handle the potential spread of the coronavirus — a level of invasive monitoring and mandatory quarantines that many Americans would find unacceptable. “If you’ve been to a place where someone who has coronavirus has also visited, someone will contact you to get tested and undergo self-isolation for another 14-day period . . . There’s absolutely no protests or demonstrations about the anti-freedom measures or invasion of privacy. I’m not an expert in Korean politics but it seems like everyone accepts these measures as required to address this pandemic.” Kim’s description is useful to keep in mind every time you encounter a “why can’t the United States respond as well as South Korea has?” complaint. South Korea has a different culture, different expectations for balancing individual liberty and responsibility to others, a different level of trust in their government, and a smaller, more densely populated population. (Maybe if you’ve spent almost 70 years living with the threat of a sudden bloody invasion by your neighbors to the north, you listen to government warnings more and you don’t blow off talk of a deadly threat as hype.)  

Chinese dictator Xi Jinping postures as a proponent of multilateralism, but the regime’s actions in the South China Sea suggest otherwise. They appear to follow Mao Zedong’s principle that conflicts are best solved through the brutal application of force and that “peace is lost through compromise.” The South China Sea is the world’s busiest maritime trade route, and its mostly barren islands, reefs, and atolls, and rich fishing waters, have global geopolitical significance. China is in effect laying claim to virtually 90 percent of the disputed region and shows no willingness to resolve competing claims peacefully.  On April 3, a Chinese coast-guard ship intentionally rammed and sank a Vietnamese fishing vessel. The two countries are in conflict over jurisdiction of the Paracel Islands and fishing rights in the waters around the archipelago. On April 18, China unilaterally announced the establishment of the Nansha and Xisha administrative districts in the Paracels and the Spratly Islands, drawing a protest from the Philippines, which has a presence of its own on at least nine Spratly islands and islets, including Fiery Cross Reef. The Asia Maritime Transparency Initiative, which monitors territorial conflicts, says Fiery Cross has been transformed into a Chinese missile base. In an earlier move, in mid-February, a Chinese naval ship locked its radar on a Philippines naval vessel near the Commodore Reef in the Spratlys, signaling a strike as an act of intimidation. China in recent months has also provoked conflicts with Malaysia, Brunei, and Taiwan. China’s aggression has made a mockery of efforts by members of the Association of Southeast Asia Nations (ASEAN) to adhere to a code of conduct to resolve territorial disputes in the region. That code reflects the organization’s commitment to “compromise, consensus, and consultation.” According to Le Hong Hiep, an expert on Vietnamese affairs at Singapore’s ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute, China’s “actions not only create tensions with Vietnam, Malaysia and the Philippines, but also cause ASEAN members to question China’s sincerity in negotiating a code of conduct for the South China Sea.”  China appears to be exploiting the coronavirus pandemic to advance its South China Sea expansion project by “brute force … using its increasingly powerful navy to assert its dominance by harassing the shipping of rival states, even at times, in their own territorial waters.” But just as China’s failure to stop a local epidemic from becoming a global catastrophe has brought it precisely the bad PR it was hoping to avoid, its South China Sea bullying has resulted in intensified anti-Chinese reactions in Southeast Asia and around the world. Beijing’s efforts to staunch the country’s hemorrhaging international reputation have had the opposite effect. For instance, on April 24, in the midst of the pandemic, the Chinese embassy in Manila released a music video of a song called “Iisang Dagat” (“One Sea”). Chinese ambassador Huang Xilian wrote the lyrics, the lead singer was a Filipino-Chinese, and a Chinese diplomat joined the performers in celebrating “a new era of friendship” between the two countries. But the video received over 65,000 “dislikes” on the first day it was online. Filipinos lambasted the video’s imagery of a sea shared by both countries as belying the reality of the dispute.  
 China’s illegal assertiveness in the South China Sea — its wolf-warrior diplomacy — is damaging the state’s and Chinese people’s reputations. But it is also perhaps the greatest threat to international peace and security in the world today. Understanding the sources of China’s behavior is thus a matter of paramount concern.  Foremost among them is the ethno-nationalism embraced by Xi Jinping and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP). Along with rapid economic growth, since 1989 nationalism has solidified the legitimacy of CCP rule. Economic growth had faltered before the onset of the coronavirus, but now the country faces food shortages, unemployment, inflation, a debt crisis, and, given the inflexibility of centralized and often corrupt management, even the specter of financial collapse. The CCP has relied merely on two factors to legitimize its rule in China despite its notorious record of human-rights violations and corruption: economic performance and nationalism. As the economy suffers, nationalism intensifies. The kind of nationalism that has emerged in China is, like that of Nazi Germany, intrinsically aggressive toward nonconforming individuals, groups, and other societies. It follows a logic expressed by Isaiah Berlin in a penetrating 1978 essay: “Nothing that obstructs that which I recognize as my — that is, my nation’s — supreme goal, can be allowed to have equal value with it.” When a state holding this view of itself encounters another that views it differently, it feels it has a right to force the other to yield.   The use of coercive force — internally and in international relations — is thus inherent to China’s blood-and-soil nationalism. Conflict in the South China Sea also diverts public attention from Xi Jinping’s policy failures and unpopular power grabs: his coronavirus cover-up, trade war with the United States, inability to crush the democracy movement in Hong Kong, and embarrassing pursuit of a personality cult and self-serving removal of the presidential term limit. Xi is heavy-handedly purging potential enemies in the Communist Party and further tightening control over society.  Indeed, the regime’s aggression in the South China Sea is consistent with its aggression at home against religious and ethnic minorities, human-rights advocates, and any individual or party whose views, or existence, challenges its aspiration toward monolithic control and global hegemony. The international community needs to respond firmly to this aggression. But the burden of the regime’s actions is borne by the Chinese people, whose well-being and future are most at risk.  Jianli Yang, a survivor of the Tiananmen Square massacre, is the founder and president of Citizens Power Initiatives for China. Aaron Rhodes is the president of the Forum for Religious Freedom Europe and human-rights editor of Dissident magazine. 

Federal health regulators have developed guidelines for the phased reopening of nursing homes, which have proved to be extremely vulnerable to the coronavirus, even as the pandemic continues to infect more people across the country. An early draft of the guidelines from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services proposes a phased reopening process similar to the Trump administration’s guidelines for states to begin lifting lockdown and stay at home orders, the Wall Street Journal reported.  The guidelines propose several reopening phases for nursing homes, where homes would remain mostly closed in the first phase. If a nursing home reported no new cases of the virus for 14 days, it could move to the second phase. Nursing homes where a quarter or more of residents were infected would have to wait longer, 28 days, before moving to phase two, which would allow limited visitation and communal dining and activities while practicing social distancing. The final draft of the guidelines may be different from the draft that was circulated, the Journal added. The measures proposed in the draft version were criticized by some industry officials, who argued nursing homes do not have enough testing or protective equipment to reopen yet. On March 13, CMS said communal activities and nearly all visitors should be restricted in nursing homes in order to stem the spread of the coronavirus in such facilities. The respiratory illness caused by the virus has run rampant in several nursing homes and adult-care facilities across the country and killed thousands of elderly people, who are particularly vulnerable to the effects of the coronavirus.  Since CMS took a leading role in closing nursing homes in the wake of the pandemic, “it only makes sense that CMS would also be highly engaged with working with stakeholders to plan for a potential future reopening,” a CMS spokesperson said.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The U.S. will issue a warning that China is planning to steal research on possible coronavirus vaccines via cyber attacks, the New York Times reported on Sunday. China is actively seeking “valuable intellectual property and public health data through illicit means related to vaccines, treatments and testing,” a draft of the warning by the FBI and Homeland Security Department reads. The Trump administration will draw attention to the role of “nontraditional actors,” namely students and researchers employed by the Chinese government to steal data on vaccine development.  The warning will come as part of a deterrent strategy from the administration, including the United States Cyber Command and the National Security Agency. The U.S. has increasingly raised the alarm over Chinese-funded research and propaganda at American universities. In November 2019 the Times reported that the FBI was looking into 180 possible cases of intellectual property theft by China-connected researchers. The phenomenon “seems to be hitting every discipline in biomedical research,” Dr. Michael Lauer, deputy director for extramural research at the National Institute of Health, said at the time.  In addition, Republican representatives on the House Oversight Committee last week launched a probe into Chinese funding of American education programs. “We  cannot allow a dangerous communist regime to buy access to our institutions of higher education, plain and simple,” Representative Jim Jordan (R., Ohio) said in a statement. “We owe it to the American people to hold China accountable and to prevent them from doing further harm to our country.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					S
				ince at least the time of ancient Greece and Rome, massive outbreaks of disease have repeatedly ravaged the human race. Until quite recently, epidemics of cholera, smallpox, typhus, yellow fever, and influenza were commonplace, collectively taking, over the centuries, hundreds of millions of human lives. Occasionally these plagues have become disasters known as pandemics, spreading far from their points of origin to batter much of the world.  Perhaps the most infamous and fearsome of these afflictions was the bubonic plague, or Black Death, of the late Middle Ages. Originating in Asia, where it apparently killed many millions, it arrived in Europe in 1348. In the next six years it snuffed out the lives of an estimated 25 million Europeans, at least one-third of the continent’s population. During the next several centuries, lesser outbreaks of the bubonic place erupted as many as 40 times in parts of Europe and Asia. North America has not been immune to the diseases of the Old World. Indeed, European settlers unknowingly brought some of them, such as smallpox and influenza, to the New World in the 17th and 18th centuries. Yellow fever probably arrived in the Americas via the slave trade and became a source of epidemics in cities such as New York and New Orleans. In 1793 an outbreak of yellow fever in Philadelphia killed nearly one-tenth of the city’s population and prompted President George Washington and the new federal government to flee what was then the nation’s capital. By far the most lethal pandemic in American history occurred just over 100 years ago, when the “Spanish influenza” (as it was then called) mysteriously erupted and invaded every continent on earth. The first known wave of it seems to have arisen in the United States in the spring of 1918, as World War I was nearing its climax. At that time the U.S. Army was training hundreds of thousands of draftees in more than 40 crowded encampments before sending the soldiers in crowded ships to the battle zone in Europe. During the spring many of these servicemen caught the influenza, and some carried it to Europe, but relatively few died — at first. Many civilians also fell ill with the disease, but they generally survived.  For a time in the summer of 1918, the pandemic seemed to peter out. Then, in late August — in Europe, the eastern United States, and a section of Africa — it returned in mutated form. This second wave was far more deadly than the first, and it spread like a silent tornado. Striking first at U.S. sailors in Boston Harbor on August 27, it soon found its way inland. According to the New England Historical Society, on September 8 it reached Camp Devens (about 40 miles from Boston), where 50,000 U.S. soldiers were stationed. By September 23 more than 10,500 of them were sick with the influenza. By the 29th, they were reportedly dying at the rate of 100 per day.  
 Along the Atlantic seaboard and beyond, the pandemic spread with incredible speed and ferocity, assailing more and more of the civilian population. In Philadelphia, where the disease arrived via a visiting ship in September, hundreds of workers in the Navy Yard quickly became infected. Despite this warning sign, the city’s public-health director refused to cancel a scheduled Liberty Loan parade designed to raise money for the war effort. At least 200,000 people jammed the parade route on September 28. Within a week 45,000 residents of the city were stricken with the influenza. Within six weeks, 12,000 Philadelphians expired from it, the highest death toll for any American city.  By the time the pandemic’s second wave subsided in early 1919, at least 45,000 residents of Massachusetts had succumbed. By the time a third wave of the epidemic ended in the spring of 1919, an estimated 500,000 to 675,000 Americans had died of the disease, in a period when the U. S. population was less than one-third of what it is today. In the U.S. Army, which sent more than a million soldiers to fight overseas in World War I, more personnel perished from the influenza than from combat wounds. The United States was not the only nation to suffer from the catastrophe. Historians estimate that the Spanish influenza killed at least 40 million to 50 million people worldwide (and possibly 100 million), probably eclipsing the ghastly record long held by the Black Death. Because, unusually, the virus hit young adults hardest, they died in disproportionate numbers. It is thought that as many as 10 percent of young adults in the entire world may have succumbed to the disease. In all, nearly one-third, and quite possibly more, of the world’s population became infected (although most survived). The influenza pandemic of 1918–19 has been called “the deadliest disease outbreak in human history.”   What might we, in the midst of our own pandemic, learn from America’s ordeal a century ago? As a historian, I am impressed by the many contrasts between then and now. In 1918, the American medical community lacked the knowledge and resources to combat the new menace effectively. It did not know what caused the disease or how to cure it. No vaccine for influenza existed. The pharmaceutical industry and the network of scientific-research laboratories that we take for granted today were barely out of their infancy in 1918.  Moreover, the supply of doctors and nurses on the American home front was abnormally low. Many of the younger ones were serving in the Army and service organizations in Europe. This dearth of civilian medical personnel added to the tremendous strain on the medical system when the pandemic swept through the cities.  Nor was the communications environment — so important for public-health initiatives — at all similar in 1918 to our own. Telephones and automobiles were uncommon, radio stations did not yet exist, and the main source of information for average citizens was the local newspaper. If you wanted to communicate with friends and relatives beyond your town or city, there was just one inexpensive method: mailing a letter. Today, of course, we live in an age of saturation media and instantaneous communication in which the flood of news never stops. We learn of distant disasters (like an epidemic in China) with ease. The whole world has become our “neighborhood.” Not so in 1918. In part because the United States was much less urbanized and less “wired” in 1918, the public response to the pandemic that year was much less centralized and coordinated than what we are witnessing in 2020. Although the federal government had a Public Health Service that issued reports and advisories, the federal bureaucracy (except for the War Department and temporary wartime agencies) was minuscule compared with today’s. Hence most governmental responsibility for fighting the pandemic fell on municipal authorities, not Uncle Sam.  In fact, for a while in 1918, some local and federal public-health officials — including the surgeon general of the United States — deliberately de-emphasized the gravity of the pandemic, out of fear of undermining wartime morale and frightening people into hysteria. During the summer and even into the autumn, a number of officials insisted that the rampaging influenza was merely a variant of normal, seasonal flu and that there was “no cause for alarm” if “ordinary precautions” were observed. Today no one would accuse the American public-health establishment of minimizing the peril. Instead, it is facing criticism in some quarters for relying upon statistical models that allegedly exaggerate the threat. Interestingly, one intervention that public-health authorities did not attempt in 1918 was the sweeping suspension of economic activity for an extended period as a form of what was then called “crowding control.” To be sure, during the worst of the pandemic, many (but not all) municipalities closed schools, churches, and entertainment venues and quarantined the sick. Some cities ordered stores and businesses to alter their hours of opening and closure in order to relieve congestion on public transportation. And the disease on its own temporarily disrupted some businesses, when large numbers of ailing workers were unable to report to their jobs. But to the best of my knowledge, no one in authority in 1918 proposed what has been done in 2020: a deliberate, government-ordered shutdown of most of the nation’s economy on a scale never before witnessed in history. Why not? Two reasons stand out. First, after entering the world war in 1917, the Wilson administration initiated an unprecedented program of intervention in America’s free economy. It nationalized the railroads, set controls on food production and consumption, and imposed a sweeping regime of regulation and “war socialism” in order to mobilize America’s resources to help win the war. It justified these intrusions as essential to defeating the highly regimented masses and army of imperial Germany. For most senior American war planners and managers, one suspects, winning the war against the human enemy was paramount, and the eruption of a virulent disease was a secondary problem, to be addressed, as such challenges always had been, mainly at the local level. Furthermore, a primary objective of Wilson’s war mobilization was to dramatically increase production of food, ships, weapons, and other products required by the United States and its allies for victory. To empty the nation’s factories and order everyone to stay home might have slowed down the flu pandemic, but it might also have lost the First World War. I doubt that the idea of enforcing “social distancing” on such a scale ever occurred to anyone.  The second reason the federal government took no further steps in 1918–19 may be found in the attitude and priorities of the nation’s commander in chief. During the 15 months that the Spanish influenza ravaged the United States, President Woodrow Wilson, though aware of the scourge, made no public statement about it at any time. Focused on winning the war and forging a new world order, he left it to the Army and others to manage the public-health emergency at home. In fairness to Wilson, we must note that in 1918 the American people did not consider their president to be their consoler-in-chief. Only in recent times have we come to expect our presidents to “feel our pain,” visit sites of natural disasters such as flood and hurricanes, and offer victims words of compassion (and the promise of federal assistance). In 1918, apparently no one criticized Wilson for his silence. Today such presidential aloofness would be roundly condemned. Another contrast between then and now is also noteworthy. If America today, with its much larger population, were to suffer mortality rates similar to those of 1918–19, the total fatalities would probably exceed 2 million people. As this essay is written, deaths from COVID-19 have not yet reached 80,000, and the outbreak appears to be easing in some places. By this standard, the pandemic of 1918 dwarfs its successor. Let us hope and pray that — unlike 1918 — our current virus, after receding, does not return in a second and more deadly wave later this year. This points to another important difference between then and now. In 1918, the United States was embroiled in a titanic war against a foreign foe. It was this conflict — not the battle against influenza — that dominated the headlines most of the time and aroused the patriotic fervor of most of the American people. In 2020, by contrast, the United States is not deeply engaged in a foreign war, with its relentless pressures for national unity. Instead, the struggle against COVID-19 is occurring in a political environment beset by disunity, polarization, and partisan rancor not witnessed in many years. Initially, some weeks ago, it seemed that the stunning appearance of COVID-19 might become the “external shock” that would liberate Americans from their bitter political passions and unite them in a concerted effort against a common threat. Barring a dangerous recrudescence of the virus, that outcome looks increasingly unlikely. Nevertheless, a review of some parallels between 1918 and 2020 may give us some grounds for encouragement. In 1918, the American people confronted challenges similar to those we face today — and overcame them. Then, as now, the pandemic was most baleful in crowded urban areas. Then, as now, mass-transportation systems — streetcars, railroads, and troop ships in 1918, and international air travel in 2020 — greatly facilitated the spread of the contagion. Then, as now, authorities with no medicinal remedies promoted what we now call “non-pharmaceutical interventions,” such as face masks, rigorous hygiene, and the practice of social distancing. Especially at the height of the crisis in 1918, most people behaved stoically and pulled through, despite losses of life that far exceeded our own. A number of them also did something else, which should forever inspire us. In Philadelphia, for instance, in the grim autumn of 1918, when the pandemic was out of control, a committee of citizens stepped forward and organized medical personnel to oversee every section of the city. Families accepted orphaned children into their homes. Priests driving horse carts went street by street, urging traumatized people to give up the dead bodies in their houses. In Philadelphia and elsewhere, nurses whose own lives were at risk cared bravely for the sick and the dying. Their example enhanced the prestige of the nursing profession. In Boston, teachers — temporarily unemployed because the schools were closed — were told that they could receive their salaries if they performed relief work. Despite the risk, many volunteered to assist the beleaguered nurses. Today countless Americans are responding to our own pandemic with similar compassion and resourcefulness. The examples are legion. Doctors, nurses, and other first responders are working long hours in crowded hospitals, while people outside cheer them on. Musicians are giving concerts in streets and at food pantries. High-school seniors are donating their graduation robes to hospitals where medical gowns are scarce. Volunteers are delivering food to lonely shut-ins. Pharmaceutical companies and other businesses are racing to develop antiviral drugs and produce medical devices at record speed. Hotels and owners of RVs are offering space to medical staff who dare not return home after work, lest they inadvertently infect their own families. Churches are using Zoom and other devices to overcome enforced isolation and encourage their brothers and sisters in the faith.  For more than a century, historians and foreign visitors have noted and marveled at the American spirit of voluntarism, mutual support, and community uplift in both good times and bad. Years ago Herbert Hoover called it “rugged individualism.” By this he did not mean selfish, cutthroat competition but something more noble: cooperative, problem-solving initiatives taken by free and resourceful Americans at the grass roots — people who did not wait to be told by a distant authority what to do. It was the spirit, he argued, that America’s pioneers had exhibited when they traveled in wagon trains and settled the West. To Hoover, a distinctive characteristic of America’s political system was what he called “self-government of the people outside government.” This is a striking formulation. Time and again in our history — including moments of peril such as 1918 — “ordinary” people have arisen to overcome obstacles and improve the lot of others. This generous, can-do spirit is still alive today. In the coming months, Americans will likely face many vexing difficulties, both medical and economic. In this time of distress, it might help to recall our history and the words of an old hymn: “Brighten the Corner Where You Are.” Whatever our perspective on our current challenges, let us address them in a manner befitting our forebears — with pluck and dignity — and do our best to “brighten the corner” where we live. 

Andrew Cuomo the other day reminded me how much I miss people-watching. Early on in this quarantine season, you would see people describing the introvert’s paradise being ushered in. First of all, don’t make assumptions. Your favorite introvert may very well benefit from a check-in. And this introvert unexpectedly misses crowds — literally one of the last things I would have ever thought I had a fondness for.  But think for a moment — maybe this is your experience, too — what a day in New York City looks like. A midday walk from Mass at St. Patrick’s Cathedral to National Review’s offices only a few blocks away, off Fifth Avenue, brings constant encounters with all kinds of humanity. There are people carrying bags from stores that many of us wouldn’t even bother walking into, knowing there’s nothing we could afford. There are people rushing. There are counterterrorism police patrolling (including in the church). There are tourists stopping in the middle of the street to take selfies. There is Tabby, about mid-walk, who always claims that squashed gluten-free fig bars are her favorite, when that’s all I have to offer from my purse. There are men delivering catering for breakfast (lots of coffee) or lunch. Whenever you make eye contact, it’s hard not to realize that this is a person with a biography, with concerns and dreams and sacrifices and joy and pain. Sometimes you can tell the pain is outweighing the joy. With others, the joy might be contagious, even just passing by. Of course, most people are somewhere else, under headphones or behind screens. Pope Francis has talked about the epidemic of anesthetization. We find something to numb us because we don’t know how to handle the drama of life otherwise. This is why one of the chief mistakes of this time is not considering religion essential. I’m not saying we should have St. Pat’s at full capacity, but let’s make a statement about who we are — people whose lives are gifts, creations of a Creator. Maybe inadvertently, the governor of New York stumbled on all of this during a recent press conference about the slow reopening of things. He asked rhetorically, “How much is a human life worth?” He continued, saying: “That is the real discussion that no one is admitting, openly or freely. That we should. To me, I say the cost of a human life — a human life is priceless. Period.”  Although we have stopped so much of our regular activity to protect vulnerable human life, what about the inconsistences? We are learning about some grave mistakes involving nursing homes. And what about the abortion clinics that remain open? What about the fact that Andrew Cuomo only last year expanded legal abortion in New York, lighting the Freedom Tower and the bridge he named after his own father in celebration? Just last spring, he talked about his support for legalizing assisted suicide in the state. And even during these coronavirus times, New York State became a surrogacy state. While we all wish well to Anderson Cooper, a new father by surrogacy, a coalition of pro-lifers and liberal feminists opposed this move in the Empire State, pointing to the exploitation of women that legalized surrogacy can make mainstream. The Sisters of Life have their home base in New York, and their existence is about giving people confidence that their lives are priceless, that every human life is priceless. Sometimes if we don’t believe it about ourselves, it’s going to be hard to protect it and defend it when times get especially difficult, never mind to walk with people. The way the Sisters of Life put it is that you were chosen for life by a Creator who loves you and created you in His image and likeness. You or I can’t convey the pricelessness of life to everyone in the world, but we can in our encounters. And we can insist on an end to the inconsistencies. It’s good that people conventionally want pro-lifers to be consistent, but how about “pro-choicers,” too? How about an end to the euphemisms, for a start?   During these quarantine times, the Sisters of Life continue to be approached by women, including from inside abortion clinics, who feel that they don’t have a choice, that the pressure in their life is too great to go through with their pregnancies. This is not health care or freedom they are experiencing, it is a miserable culture of death, at the very same time we are talking about life. Let’s start connecting some dots here, openly and freely. Thank you, Governor Cuomo, for getting the discussion going. New York has been dubbed the abortion capital of the world. Let’s make a change for life. Let’s give your words meaning and transformative power. 
   


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					W
				ithout consensus, there is no consent — that’s almost a redundancy: The two words come from the same Latin root meaning “agree,” but each has its own special role in the political lexicon. We speak of “consensus” as a generally agreed-upon fact or set of facts, often with the qualifier “expert” or the mock-qualifier “elite,” but we consent to a course of action, a regime, or a state, which can deploy force legitimately only with “the consent of the governed.” That’s Liberal Democracy 101.  When you lose the ability to forge consensus, you begin to forfeit consent, and effective governance becomes difficult if not impossible — as we are seeing right now in the coronavirus response. Consensus, with its suggestions of compromise and trans-partisanship, is an idea not at the apex of its career. On the left, progressives and populists spent years mocking and lamenting the so-called Washington Consensus, under the aegis of which such despised institutions as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund clucked their tongues at the world’s poor countries, with their profligate governments and public debts. Who are these pointy-headed, green-eye-shaded bean-counters to tell the diverse nations of the world how to run their own affairs? During the debate over the grievously misnamed Affordable Care Act, Derek Thompson of The Atlantic saluted Barack Obama for finally taking “a stand against bipartisanship,” concluding: “The important thing is that Obama has drawn the line in the sand, with Republicans on one side and Democrats on the other.” On the right, “elite consensus” plays roughly the same role that “patriarchy” plays among feminists — an infinitely adaptable scapegoat. For instance, in the debate over the rise of Donald Trump in the run-up to the 2016 election, our friend Ben Domenech insisted that an “elite consensus in Washington, a bipartisan consensus,” had kept Republicans from acting on illegal immigration, bottling up legitimate demands for action and resentment until they exploded in the form of the Trump campaign. Rush Limbaugh sums up the Right’s ideas about seeking consensus: “To me, defeating, politically, people I disagree with is the order of the day, and I don’t think I defeat them by compromising with them.” There are many conservatives whose reverence for the Constitution approaches bibliomancy — they view it as a kind of magical item, to be sworn on, rather than a document — but the Constitution is itself famously the result of a series of difficult political compromises, some of them distasteful. We are fortunate that the men who negotiated it ultimately were able to turn their attention to projects other than defeating their political enemies, for instance building the national institutions of the country and its federal government.  Our inability to forge a policy consensus is the result of our inability to forge a necessary prior consensus about certain facts and realities. “Elite consensus” has done much to earn its low reputation. For example, a great deal of damage has been done to our political culture by the school of progressive constitutional jurisprudence that seems to have been extracted from “The Emperor’s New Clothes”: It holds that rights explicitly protected by the Bill of Rights — especially those in the First and Second Amendments — are barely there, if they are there at all, while progressive political priorities, such as the right to abortion, are not only obviously there in the text where they obviously are not but also are fixed and unquestionable in a way that explicitly enumerated rights such as keeping and bearing arms are not. “What, you can’t see it there in the text? There must be something wrong with you!” This goes beyond interpreting the law: “You can’t see that your uncle is actually your aunt, and always has been? You’re a bigot.” “You think that taxes should be lower or that there’s too much crime? You’re a racist. Oh, you may think you’re not a racist, that you don’t have any ill will toward members of other races or assumptions of superiority about your own, but, trust us, you’re a racist. And we have doctorates.” Etc.   The theme continues. Conservatives can be bores on the subject of media bias, but they are not wrong about it. The double standards, ignorance, and outright lies (see, for example, Paul Krugman’s most recent fictions) that mark too much of the reporting and commentary in institutions such as the New York Times are a serious impediment to journalism doing what it is journalism is supposed to do. Retreating into bias-affirming echo-chambers is the wrong response, and a destructive one, but it is not a surprising one. How many times do you have to catch someone lying to you before you decide he’s a liar?  This works itself out in both obvious and subtle ways. Consider the case of modeling policy outcomes. In the case of the so-called Affordable Care Act, the Congressional Budget Office was asked to make projections based on absurd assumptions, and so it put out a paper saying, in effect, “Here’s what you get with these absurd assumptions, but let’s not forget the part where the assumptions are absurd.” The heavily qualified claims in that forecast became unquestionable truths. In the matter of climate change, we have seen the partisans of Science! suggest that scientists should offer the public carefully dramatized alarmist scenarios in the service of the greater good, calculating what “the right balance is between being effective and being honest,” as climatologist Stephen Schneider put it in that famous Discover essay.  Some models and forecasts are based in dishonesty and bad faith, others are the result of honest incompetence, and others simply err by failing to account for this or that, as all models must do. And there are still more complications: We will never know what the actual worst-case scenario for the coronavirus epidemic in the United States would have looked like, because people did engage in social distancing and other prophylactic measures. That is complicated still further by the fact that the behavior of the man on the street is not neatly aligned with national or local policies — there are people blowing off the rules in states with stricter on-paper responses and people taking extra steps in states with less risk-averse rules in place. But for many people, all they will see is that some credentialed somebody somewhere predicted millions of deaths that did not (let us pray, will not) come to pass. The coronavirus death projections will simply be another version of the myth, beloved on the right, that the 2016 election polls were wildly inaccurate, which they weren’t.   In sum, this ends up being an excuse for people to simply ignore reporting or scholarship they don’t want to think about. Healthy skepticism becomes partisan-inflected motivated skepticism. “If you want me to believe that the sun is going to rise in the east, you’ll need a more credible source than” the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, National Review, the CBO, the FBI . . .  The Right’s indictment of “elite consensus” is on solid ground in that it was progressives who in the postwar era captured and perverted the consensus-producing institutions: the newspapers and other media, the universities and other educational institutions, the courts (partly reversing that has been one of the Right’s critical domestic political victories in this generation), etc. Of course it is possible to overstate the case or to present the case in unfair terms, but the diminished credibility of the major news media, the courts, the political professionals, and the academics is not the result of histrionic right-wing criticism. It is the result of shoddy work by the people entrusted with the care and development of those institutions, of corruption and intellectual dishonesty at the highest levels filtering down to high-school history classrooms. 
 It is hardly surprising that, as we have seen in recent weeks, the two major tribes of American life cannot achieve widespread consent to a policy consensus during a time of acute national emergency — because there is no consensus about the facts of the case, which is itself the result of there being no consensus about who it is we can trust to document and adjudicate those facts. The falling dominoes of institutional failure and intellectual malfeasance have left standing very little of the institutional credibility we need to develop and implement useful and necessary public policies. The dangers and harm resulting from that are obvious even to a fringe libertarian like me. I do not want government to do very much, but I want government to do the things that we need it to do, and to do them effectively. With the economy cratering, unemployment at unthinkable highs, tens of thousands dead and thousands more to die, it is almost impossible to write this, but: We are lucky that this epidemic is not a great deal worse than it is, because we are not ready for it and do not seem to have the capacity to get ourselves ready for it. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					E
				ighty years ago, on May 10, 1940, Winston Churchill took over as Britain’s prime minister and Hitler launched his attack on Holland, Belgium, and France. The Blitzkrieg, as it became known, was a spectacular military success: In less than six weeks Nazi Germany defeated the Allied armies and occupied the Low Countries and a big part of France while at the same time kicking the British off the Continent.  How the Germans did it has been the subject of numerous books. But one thing that emerges is that, both at the time and later, the Allies, and the then-neutral Americans, failed to understand what really happened. A set of myths developed, many of which were believed and propagated by various military experts and intelligence services. Most historians put the critical turning point on the morning of May 15, when in a moment of panic the French prime minister Paul Reynaud told Churchill, “We have been defeated.” The panic was based on mostly distorted and inaccurate information from the French army’s high command and from the intelligence services. The offensive was expected, but the location was not, with the attack coming about a hundred miles south of where the allies thought the main thrust would take place. The army’s command structure was unable to adapt quickly enough to the new situation, and this in turn created panic at the highest levels of government. Today, with the Wuhan coronavirus presenting a completely unexpected challenge to governments all over the world, panic, or something like it, seems to be gripping leaders at all levels. In Michigan and Maine the governors have obviously tried to hide their panic behind masks of authoritarian bluster. In New York, Andrew Cuomo had a very public ventilator-shortage breakdown, though he recovered. The media naturally stuck the tape of his panic down the memory hole.  The problem is greater than just a few moments of panic. It involves the sad fact that some people who’ve been credentialed as experts are incompetent time-servers, men and women who fit the requirements of leading big organizations but lack the imagination and daring to deal with the unexpected. In war it is all too often the case that peacetime generals are just not up to the job. In the current time of plague, few of the public-health experts who are attached to what one might call “top-down” solutions have covered themselves in glory. Political leaders should have learned to be skeptical.  
 Trump’s mistakes have been caused mostly by his tendency to be overly optimistic, due in large part to his narcissism (a characteristic he shares with most recent presidents) and his combativeness. The president has better reason than most to distrust the experts, but he also has no way to quickly find new and competent experts to replace them. Modern medical science can accomplish great things given both time and resources, but in emergencies such as this one, competent and trusted leadership is more important and, judging from the evidence, in very short supply.  Remember how long it took Churchill to find generals who could develop effective strategies and win battles. We can only hope that Trump will not have to wait months (or, whoever is the next president, years) for public-health professionals to defeat this virus. 

Very soon, you and I will have to figure out how to navigate a semi-open America where coronavirus is a terrible fact of life. The lockdowns and stay-at-home orders that state and city governments announced in March are breaking down. This is not red-versus-blue. This is reality. Two weeks ago, Georgia’s Republican governor Brian Kemp faced widespread criticism for his easing of restrictions on business and outdoor activities, even as Colorado’s Democratic governor Jared Polis did the same thing. Now most states are joining in.  In the past few days, California’s Gavin Newsom has said he will begin relaxing parts of his statewide directives, and so has Virginia’s Ralph Northam. Maryland’s Larry Hogan has announced that residents of his state will be able to undergo non-emergency medical procedures and play a round of golf. Newsom, Northam, and Hogan are not the sort of politicians likely to be swayed by a “Lockdown Rebellion” protest. The governors have been led to these decisions by the realization that blanket limitations on individual behavior have done about the best they could do. States imposed these rules to “bend the curve” of infection so that the medical system did not become overwhelmed. The policy worked, up to a point. New York City, where Ground Zero has taken on another, equally horrible meaning, avoided the nightmare Italian scenario in which doctors had to deny care to some in order to save others. Nationwide, the curve was not so much bent as flattened. The seven-day average of cases and deaths peaked in April. It has since leveled off, and tapered somewhat. Some 1,700 deaths per day for the near future is an awful statistic to contemplate. Especially because other democracies — Taiwan, South Korea, Australia, New Zealand — were able to bring the disease under control.  America is not like them. Three are islands, and the fourth, Korea, is surrounded on three sides by water and on one side by the DMZ. America is also much bigger. We have six times the population of South Korea, and many more times the people of Australia, Taiwan, and New Zealand. We are a more diverse and less cohesive society. Our system of government is designed for inefficiency, to better protect individual liberty. Our bureaucracies show it. America was unprepared. Unlike the smaller Asian democracies, America did not experience and thus did not learn from the SARS outbreak of 2003. George W. Bush’s 2005 warning was ignored. The sense of invulnerability that comes with living between two oceans, and with allies to the north and south, was once again exposed as an illusion. Leaders at every level of government — federal, state, local — downplayed the threat until it was too late. The desperate circumstances forced us to use the bluntest tool available: shutdown.   The lockdowns were necessary. They were also unsustainable. Americans, so accustomed to freedom, were bound to chafe at being told what to do. Justified fear of coronavirus devastated the food and beverage, travel, hospitality, and entertainment sectors. The economic toll could persist just for so long before it became unbearable. Nor are public health, personal freedom, and economics the only competing values in this emergency. Spiritual life has been harmed. For people living alone, the social and psychological costs of prolonged isolation can be traumatic. For children, extended separation from friends and socializing experiences will have unknown consequences. 
 The lockdowns are precarious. Therapeutics are in the trial-and-error phase. A vaccine, if one can be found, is many months away. What’s needed is a means of bridging the gap between pandemic and immunity.  The epidemiologists’ preferred strategy is test, trace, and isolate. That is how our fellow democracies suppressed the outbreak. It will be harder for us. The scale of testing required for the plan to work is massive. At the current rate of increase, it will take us months to achieve. There are also supply problems to consider and logistical obstacles to surmount. It’s not a matter of snapping one’s fingers. Frontline medical personnel, for example, continue to identify shortages of personal protective equipment months into the crisis. Amassing the significant labor force necessary for “contact tracing” might not be too difficult in a time of mass unemployment. What will be harder to overcome are the legitimate worries Americans will have over violations of privacy. Not to mention how they might respond to the techniques of “isolation.” Checking oneself into a government-approved corona-hotel requires a deference to authority and devaluing of autonomy that runs against the American grain. We have enough trouble getting folks to wear masks.  John Cochrane of Stanford’s Hoover Institution calls the expert recommendations a “smart reopening.” He also says it is unlikely to happen. Instead, we are in for a “dumb reopening,” where people tentatively resume patterns of life resembling normality until they hear of rising infections in their area and reduce social contact voluntarily, causing a decline in new cases. “There are hundreds of little behaviors each of us take that push the reproduction rate around.” Think of a turtle retreating to his shell.   It is astonishing (and frightening) to consider that, despite our technology and wealth, America seems fated to respond to the coronavirus much in the same way it responded to the Spanish influenza a century ago: stop and go, in fits and starts, a 3,007-county patchwork of closings and re-openings and more closings, where individual responsibility and self-discipline matter as much as, if not more than, bureaucratic fiat. A “dumb reopening” would not suppress the disease, but it might provide a chance to address some of the economic, social, religious, cultural, and psychological damage that the coronavirus has wrought. And, given the recent decisions by officials both Republican and Democratic, a “dumb reopening” lies ahead. Whether we like it or not. This piece originally appeared on the Washington Free Beacon. 

1. Turkey’s occupation of northern Syria includes population transfers 2. World is washing its hands of Lebanon, Maronite bishop warns 3. China’s war on whistleblowers 4. Just finished a great, if sobering, conversation with Fordham professor @CCamosy about COVID-19, nursing home abuse, and having a consistent life ethic. Stay tuned for the audio podcast, or watch the whole thing now, here https://t.co/NP1udv6USS pic.twitter.com/iK1lAZS26t — Matt Lewis (@mattklewis) May 8, 2020  5. Nearly 90 percent of the coronavirus deaths in Connecticut last week were nursing home patients  6. N.J. to send 120 National Guard soldiers to longterm care facilities to help with coronavirus response  7. Coronavirus pandemic may lead to 75,000 “deaths of despair” from suicide, drug and alcohol abuse, study says  What’s especially alarming is how many there were before Coronavirus 8. Argentine president vows to legalize abortion, despite pandemic shutdown 9. Church/state deal means Mass will be back in Italy on May 18 10. Life Has Moved to Zoom. Can Prison Visitation Do the Same? 11. New York Priest Lifts Spirits of Nursing Home Shut-ins with a Special Dose of Culture 12. My friend Andrew Walther is headed to EWTN from the Knights of Columbus. He’s been a behind-the-scenes gift for persecuted Christians and other religious minorities, among others. Smart, well-read, faithful, and courageous. I’m looking forward to good, renewed things at a media enterprise established by a woman who we will likely one day celebrate as an official saint of the Church. 13. 2020 Gerber baby is first adopted baby chosen for campaign   14. Small Churches Are in Particularly Big Trouble Right Now 15. Tim Alberta talks to a restaurant owner in a small town in Michigan 16. In Rejecting the Zoom Seder, What Did Orthodox Jews Affirm? 17. I Just Flew. It Was Worse Than I Thought It Would Be. 18. Peggy Nooon’s latest, if you haven’t read it yet: I want to get back to the national morale. All these dreadful economic numbers—you can’t let people sink into defeatism. You can’t let them think there is no hope, or that things in the future are just going to be bad. They are Americans, they know how to suffer—even the ones who’ve never suffered a day in their lives, it’s still in their genes. But they’re like the pioneers, they have to be able to believe while they’re on the long trek that there’s some fertile area around the next bend, or the one after that. They have to know there’s a safe place where they can finally settle. 19. Seventy-five years ago today Nazi Germany surrendered. Immense gratitude to my beloved father (now 94) and the other heroes of all allied nations who fought and sacrificed to destroy Hitler's war machine. pic.twitter.com/BNCRIP1DgI — Robert P. George (@McCormickProf) May 8, 2020  20. Anthony, Our Angel in Disguise Holy Week, 2020     

A lot of people find it remarkable that the stock market has done well over the last seven weeks while the economy has been bleeding out. See here for an example, and here for some theories that have been put forward to explain the disjunction. I don’t really see what the mystery is. Everyone realized that we were going to go through a major economic contraction, including massive job losses, before we actually did, and trading reflected that knowledge. As information about the scale of the economic problem we faced made it look more and more dire from roughly Feb 20 to March 23, markets declined. That they have partly bounced back since then suggests that markets are more optimistic about the economic hit we will take than they were at the low point are but still think it will be big. (We should always, of course, keep in mind that these anthropomorphic statements about markets are metaphorical.)  It would be weird if stocks acted the way these observers seem to think they should, e.g., falling on reports that jobs had been lost over the previous four weeks. It would mean that stock markets were extremely inefficient at processing information.  

California Governor Gavin Newsom announced Friday that he had signed an executive order to mail ballots to the state’s 20.6 million registered voters, citing potential health risks due to the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. “There’s a lot of excitement around this November’s election in terms of making sure that you can conduct yourself in a safe way, and make sure your health is protected,” Newsom said Friday. In March, the state allowed ballots to be mailed in for its primary, which saw a record-high of 72 percent of all ballots that were cast by mail.  California Secretary of State Alex Padilla, who heads the state’s elections, commended the move “It’s great for public health, it’s great for voting rights, it’s going to be great for participation,” he said. California already allows for generous absentee voting, passing a 2002 decision which gives voters the option to request permanent voting by mail, regardless of the reason. While Newsom’s decision applies only to the November election, it could set a precedent for other Democratic states, with voting by mail quickly becoming a partisan issue. It comes after the state’s lawmakers and local officials requested the measure, saying coronavirus will severely hamper voting efforts, a complaint echoed by prominent Democrats. “Why should we be saying to people, ‘Stand in line for hours,’ when we don’t even want you leaving the house?” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi said in April. But President Trump has repeatedly slammed calls for mail-in voting, saying last month that it lets “people cheat” and involves “a lot of dishonesty.”  Newsom said that his order would still allow an “appropriate number” of in-person voting sites, saying that some voters, including those that are disabled, require technological help to cast a ballot.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

My friend Olivia has written a moving and insightful piece at Market Watch on her experience as a young person with stage IV cancer, self-isolating alone in the Scottish countryside. For a 21-year-old, I have a fairly unusual relationship with my own mortality. Last December, my 45-year-old mother passed away, having been diagnosed with terminal cancer four years earlier. Two days later, on Christmas Eve, I was diagnosed with stage 4 cancer myself. I am now self-isolating alone in a cottage in the Scottish countryside — as someone undergoing chemotherapy, I have been classified ‘extremely vulnerable’ to coronavirus, so living with my family was too dangerous. For me, the uncertainty generated by coronavirus isn’t new — it feels like the rest of the world has caught up with what I discovered four years ago. I was forced, prematurely, to reckon with some hard facts. That one day I will die. That I may do so at any time, even today. And that there is only a certain amount I can do to prevent this. That might sound horribly morbid to some, terrifying to others — but to me, as for my mother, it is death’s inevitability that offers direction on how to live. I highly recommend reading the whole thing. Quite apart from anything else, it’s beautifully written. (Do say a prayer for her, if you’re so inclined.)  

The Washington Post reports that nursing homes may account for a majority of all COVID-19 deaths:  States are still collecting data, but so far six have reported that residents of nursing homes accounted for more than half their deaths, according to analysis by the Kaiser Family Foundation. The numbers are murky in part because the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention hasn’t released details on how many deaths were among nursing home residents.  Some states, such as Wisconsin, have begun testing all nursing home residents and employees. It makes sense to test employees as frequently as possible, but that likely won’t entirely solve the problem. The rapid tests have a 15 percent false-negative rate, and those infected may be contagious during the two days before symptoms appear.  Given how deadly the virus has been in nursing homes, wouldn’t it make sense to hire a nursing-home workforce that can isolate outside the workplace (at least until a more accurate rapid test is available)?   Nursing-homes would likely have to offer a sizable premium (subsidized by the government) to attract enough employees who would be willing and able to isolate themselves, but wouldn’t the cost be small compared to what the amount the government has already spent responding to the pandemic and lost in tax revenue?  

Federal agency the Office of Special Counsel on Friday stayed the removal of a whistleblower who alleged he was fired over resistance to promote hydroxychloroquine in the effort to contain the coronavirus pandemic. The Office of Special Counsel said there were “reasonable grounds” to believe Dr. Rick Bright, head of the biomedical research arm (BARDA) of the Department of Health and Human Services, was ousted on political grounds.  Bright’s lawyers said the Office “advised that in light of this determination, it would contact the Department of Health and Human Services (‘HHS’) to request that it stay Dr. Bright’s removal as Director of BARDA for 45 days to allow OSC sufficient time to complete its investigation of Bright’s allegations.” HHS officials in April cast doubt on Bright’s claim of political retaliation, saying that Bright had in fact promoted hydroxychloroquine. “If Bright opposed hydroxychloroquine, he certainly didn’t make that clear from his email — quite the opposite,” an HHS official told Reuters.  “As it relates to chloroquine, it was Dr. Bright who requested an Emergency Use Authorization from the Food and Drug Administration for donations of chloroquine that Bayer and Sandoz recently made to the Strategic National Stockpile for use on COVID-19 patients,” HHS spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley said in April. Bright told reporters on Tuesday that the Trump administration “was rushing blindly into a potentially dangerous situation” by ordering 3 million chloroquine pills from Bayer produced in India and Pakistan.  While hydroxychloroquine was initially touted by elected officials including President Trump and New York governor Andrew Cuomo as a possible treatment for coronavirus, the FDA has cautioned medical professionals regarding the potential for serious side effects.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Coronavirus outbreaks in nursing homes have been particularly deadly in California, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, and New York. You could make a strong argument that the country’s deadly coronavirus problem is largely a nursing home problem, dangerous everywhere but far more prevalent in a half-dozen or so of the country’s more heavily and densely populated states. What’s more, many of these states enacted coronavirus response policies that likely put nursing and assisted-living home residents at higher risk for infection. Notice the California policy described by the San Jose Mercury News: Even as senior care centers have been particularly hard hit by the coronavirus — with patient and staff deaths accounting for nearly 40 percent of all COVID-19 deaths across California — the state is calling on assisted living facilities to house infected patients in exchange for money. A letter from the state Department of Social Services sent to licensees of senior and adult care residential facilities on Friday urged them to temporarily take in patients who have tested positive for the virus — for up to $1,000 a day — to make room in hospitals for people who become critically ill and require acute care. But health experts and advocates say the plan risks introducing the virus into facilities that have been spared or those already dealing with their own outbreaks. That need continues to grow. As of May 3, nearly 10,000 patients and staff in long-term care facilities in the state of California have tested positive for the virus, and 926 of them have died, according to figures released by DSS, which oversees assisted living, and the California Department of Public Health. Notice the complaints described by Health News Illinois: “The Illinois Health Care Association and the Health Care Council of Illinois, the state’s two largest nursing home associations, say they have been asking for more testing for weeks. And that personal protective equipment has been hit or miss across facilities, with some operating on a day-to-day supply.” Chicago’s WGN reports, “More than 40 percent of COVID-19 deaths in Illinois have been at nursing homes and long-term care facilities” — more than 1,000 lives. Notice the Michigan policy described by Detroit’s WXYZ: A Sterling Heights senior care center saw a spike in COVID-19 cases among residents after accepting two dozen positive patients recently discharged from area hospitals. The move followed an executive order by the Governor outlining rules for treating COVID-19 patients at long-term care facilities after they were discharged from hospitals. Patients would be isolated, the order required, and staff were required to wear appropriate personal protection equipment. And by Bridge Michigan: Despite promises from Gov. Gretchen Whitmer for better transparency on senior care during the pandemic, Wilson’s mother lives in an assisted-living facility — and Michigan doesn’t collect information about coronavirus at the home or 4,000 others like it statewide. Notice the Pennsylvania policy described by the Morning Call of Allentown: The escalating tragedy in Pennsylvania nursing and personal care homes, which have more than two-thirds of the state’s coronavirus deaths, has prompted lawmakers to point fingers at the Wolf administration. “There is no excuse for what is going on, OK?” said Chester County state Sen. Andrew Dinniman, who like Gov. Tom Wolf is a Democrat. “The Department of Health has failed our nursing homes.” A total of 3,416 coronavirus deaths has been reported statewide through Thursday. Of those, 2,355, or nearly 69%, were associated with nursing or personal care homes. But about 80% of deaths newly reported by the state Thursday ― 247 out of 310 ― were at the facilities. In the Lehigh Valley, the state reported 177 deaths in such facilities, with 77 in Lehigh County and 100 in Northampton County. The region has seen 263 deaths overall. This week, the nursing homes operated by Lehigh and Northampton counties, Cedarbrook and Gracedale, respectively, both reported sharp increases in deaths. Health Secretary Dr. Rachel Levine, testifying Thursday before two Senate committees, said the state focused its response in the early days of the Pennsylvania crisis on hospitals because it wanted to be prepared for a potential surge of patients. Notice the New Jersey policy described by InsiderNJ: Senator Joe Pennacchio has obtained a letter sent by the New Jersey Department of Health dated March 31 directing hospitals and nursing care facilities not to inhibit transfer of hospital patients with COVID-19 entering post-acute care settings such as long-term nursing and rehabilitations facilities. The letter also states “post-acute care facilities are prohibited from requiring a hospitalized patient/resident who is determined medically stable to be tested for COVID-19 prior to admission or readmission. “New Jersey has continually cited testing as a way to identify and respond to COVID-19.  Therefore, it doesn’t make sense that we would specifically not want to test patients who would enter isolated nursing homes containing our most vulnerable population,” said Pennacchio (R-Morris, Essex, Passaic). “The State of New Jersey has direct regulatory oversight over these nursing facilities.  Although the population of nursing homes makes up less than 0.7% of the Garden State’s population, the 4,151 deaths in these facilities accounts for half of all New Jersey’s COVID-19 deaths,” concluded Senator Pennacchio. Notice the New York state policy described by the New York Post: The new Health Department info released late Monday adds 1,700 presumed coronavirus deaths to the grim total, suggesting that COVID-19 complications have killed 4,813 residents of nursing homes and adult-care facilities — and that doesn’t include those who died in hospitals. Cuomo downplayed the count Tuesday: “I would take all of these numbers now with a grain of salt,” since “what does a ‘presumed death’ mean, right?” So why on earth did his health commissioner, Howard Zucker, force nursing homes to take in virus-positive patients starting March 25? The Post contrasted New York’s policies with those of Florida: No Sunshine State patient can be discharged from a hospital into a nursing home without a negative test result. Florida hospitals had already refused to send coronavirus-positive patients back; the new rule means even those who show no symptoms must be tested and confirmed negative. A defensive Cuomo on Tuesday claimed the state had done “everything you can” to keep the coronavirus from spreading among New York’s seniors. But that’s just not true. Right now, a lot of people really want to believe that as bad as the coronavirus outbreak is, the consequences have been mitigated by good decisions made by governors like Gavin Newsom, J. D. Pritzker, Gretchen Whitmer, Tom Wolf, Phil Murphy, and Andrew Cuomo. But those governors, whatever their other strengths, all presided over state governments that served their nursing homes and assisted living facilities poorly — either through an inability to provide protective equipment (Illinois), insufficient attention (Pennsylvania), or by sending recovering but still contagious patients back into buildings with lots of other vulnerable elderly (California, Michigan, New Jersey, and New York). The national media have paid copious amounts of attention to the risk of spreading the coronavirus in places like the beaches of Florida and the reopening of businesses in Georgia. A refocus of the national media’s attention and criticism upon the nursing homes in states like California, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and New York is long overdue. A lot of people have relished accusing the anti-lockdown protesters of “killing grandma.” It is time we took a more serious look at what lawmakers’ decisions led most directly to the deaths of so many grandmothers and grandfathers.  

Twenty years ago, as a lowly adjunct professor, I taught crisis management for Harvard in China. My memories, and some qualms about doing so, have flooded back as the world ponders whether China’s political system enabled the virus’s spread by discouraging local officials from reporting bad news. During those “executive education” programs at Tsinghua University in Beijing, I hoped that my colleagues and I might help nudge the Chinese system toward greater openness. But even back then — at a time when China was “ascending” to the WTO and optimism reigned among us globalists — our experiences of the country left me with doubts.  How to handle crisis was part of the curriculum when the Harvard Kennedy School struck a deal with the Beijing government to provide public-management education for local officials from across China. I have no idea whether the mayor of Wuhan was in the group I helped teach, but it’s quite possible. Our goal was to expose local and regional officials to Kennedy School-style techniques, which combine technocratic policy analysis with political leadership. It didn’t take long to see that the school’s dedication to fostering “freer” societies was going to be tested in the weeks a group of faculty spent at Tsinghua, thanks to what I understood to be the cooperation of the opaquely named Organization Department of the Central Committee. It was above my pay grade to question whether the school should have entered into such a relationship in the first place. As I reflect, it’s possible that we planted some seeds for a freer society — but it’s just as likely that we helped provide legitimacy for a totalitarian government.  My role was to teach classes by the famous Harvard case method, in which narratives (cases) framed political or policy decisions to be discussed and argued over. Open debate alone represented the possibility of progress for China, or so I told myself. Of course, we were using cases set in other countries, in order, we hoped, not to upset Chinese government officials. One such case directly foreshadowed the coronavirus pandemic. It dealt with Hong Kong’s response to the bird-flu epidemic of 1997, and it was meant to provoke discussion about how officials speak to the public at times of crisis: Can reassurance and candor be reconciled?  
 The central figure in the case was Hong Kong’s public-health commissioner, Margaret Chan, who went on to become the head of the World Health Organization. When it was revealed that live-market chickens were the likely cause of the bird flu, Chan told Hong Kong residents, “I eat chicken every day.” Eventually, Hong Kong chose to kill every chicken in the territory, a decision widely judged to have saved the world from the illness. Our students mocked Chan’s statement as the Hong Kong public had, thus opening the door to the idea of accountability for public officials and citizen influence over public policy, both foreign concepts in China. And because the story had a relatively happy ending, another essential principle was made plain: It’s possible to make mistakes in handling a public-health crisis but they are best openly acknowledged and corrected.  Despite such promising signs, the program, it turned out, also took some ominous turns that made clear the serious limitations of outside efforts to reform China — and foreshadowed the COVID-19 crisis. I recall specifically our discussion of a case I wrote myself, about police corruption in La Paz, Bolivia. It tells the story of a reform-minded mayor of La Paz dealing with a largely illiterate and corrupt local police force. The mayor, Ronald MacLean, who went on to co-found Transparency International, considered a variety of ways to weed out the corrupt from the force and motivate the rest. But his approach was not embraced by the class. One official had a dramatically different and revealing perspective. The mayor, he said, should simply assemble a “secret army of replacement police” and, without warning one morning, have them swoop in and take over, replacing all the current cops, who would be brought up on charges. Might that not spark popular resentment? Would police work improve? The questions did not resonate.   I’d never encountered that sort of response to the La Paz case before, although I’d taught it around the world. The important thing, it seemed, was for the Chinese government’s middle managers to demonstrate to officials higher up the food chain that the corruption problem was contained. In the People’s Republic, the “people” really didn’t play a role in the government’s thinking. Arguably, the same systemic weakness could be seen in the belated response in Wuhan. Secrecy is a feature, not a bug, of the CCP system, and it has real consequences. As the class went on, it became clear that Harvard’s involvement had unforeseen effects on the enterprise we were all engaged in. Chinese officials would now be able to boast of having been trained by Harvard professors, and local officials who were participating were getting the message that the Communist Party had, in some sense, the approval of Harvard. What’s more, officials from the Organization Department — the HR branch of the Party Central Committee — were in the class, likely evaluating the hand-picked up-and-comers who were our students on grounds of political correctness. Over time, we noticed that participants were looking to senior officials for guidance as to what to say.   Of course, one never knows what seeds one plants, perhaps even over informal dinner discussions. I recall quietly citing the work of Harvard economist Dani Rodrik, finding that economic growth is more likely to be sustained over time in democratic societies. Perhaps the right person was listening. But I fear not: Cooperation between Harvard and the Chinese Communist Party government continues today, even as it is increasingly clear that the country is becoming less, not more, free. Yale, NYU, Duke, and UC Berkeley, among other prestigious American universities, have also established campuses in China. As a recent Department of Education complaint about universities reporting income from China makes clear, there is big money involved: Yale alone may, according to the DOE, have failed to report $375 million in overall foreign financial support. So, too, is there the risk that intellectual cooperation is a one-way street, as seen in the recent case of a Harvard chemistry professor charged with lying to federal officials about being paid to share his research with the Chinese government. But the greatest risk of all may be selling legitimacy to an illegitimate regime. 

A staffer for Vice President Mike Pence has tested positive for coronavirus, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany announced Friday. Pence’s scheduled flight on Air Force Two to Des Moines, Iowa was delayed at Andrews Air Force Base with the vice president aboard for close to an hour after the staffer’s positive test was revealed. The infected staffer was not aboard, but six other aides who had been in contact with the staffer recently were requested to disembark and remain in Washington, D.C.  The White House medical office is currently attempting to determine who else in the White House may have had contact with the staffer, who has no symptoms and tested negative yesterday but positive Friday morning. “We have put in place the guidelines that our experts have put forward to keep this building safe,” McEnany said during her Friday press briefing. “We clean the facility, we social distance, we keep people six feet away from each other.” Another Pence staffer tested positive for the virus in March but has since returned to work. The news comes just a day after reports broke that President Trump’s personal valet also tested positive for the virus. The valet reportedly had close contact with the president as he helped him with personal tasks, but Trump denied that was the case.  “I’ve had very little personal contact with this gentleman,” Trump said Thursday. “I know who he is, good person, but I’ve had very little contact.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The latest conversation from National Review Institute’s Center for Religion, Culture, and Civil Society’s “virus-free” programming is with Luanne Zurlo. She’s the executive director of the Brilla Charter school network. Brilla and Seton Education Partners provide character education and opt-in religious education after school in buildings that were former Catholic schools. The schools are in the South Bronx, one of the poorest congressional districts in the country and the hottest of the hot spots for coronavirus. The teachers are not only about distance learning, but about keeping tabs on how families are doing. Seton, named after Saint Elizabeth Ann Seton, who was a pioneer of the Catholic school system, is feeding families, helping with rent, and other basic needs during this challenging time where many of the parents of their students immediately lost their jobs as shutdowns began.  (Full disclosure: I’ve been a speaker for a number of years at an annual retreat for the Seton fellows, the missionaries who teach the after-school religion classes.) Zurlo is also the author of Single for a Greater Purpose: A Hidden Joy in the Catholic Church, making a theological and cultural argument that committed singlehood ought to be considered a vocation, a permanent status for those who choose and are called to it. She also offers some insights about being quarantined alone in Manhattan.  In 40 minutes, we cover a little of all of that. I think you’ll be interested in helping Seton Education Partners (I’ve now made a contribution) and find Single for a Greater Purpose a necessary and helpful impact. ﻿﻿
Your browser does not support the HTML5 Audio element.
 

Workers with the least education have been hit particularly hard by the economic devastation caused by the coronavirus pandemic, the jobless rate for workers with a high school degree rose to more than twice the rate for those with a college degree in April. As the coronavirus caused states to issue lockdown orders and all but essential businesses were forced to shutter, the economy shed 20.5 million jobs last month while the unemployment rate spiked to 14.7 percent, eliminating nearly all the country’s job gains since the Great Recession in 2009.  High school graduates without a college degree saw their unemployment rate rise to 17.3 percent in April, while the jobless rate for those who have completed a college degree climbed to only 8.4 percent. Meanwhile, those with less than a high school degree suffered even more job losses; their unemployment rate surged to 21.2 percent, easily passing the 15.8 all-time high for that demographic during the Great Recession. Many low-wage jobs such as service industry positions are impossible to perform remotely and have been slashed as restaurants and stores close up shop and lay off scores of workers.  As recently as February, the unemployment rate had dropped to a 50-year low of 3.5 percent. “Today’s report reflects the massive impact that measures to contain the coronavirus have had on the American workforce,” Labor Secretary Eugene Scalia said of the April jobs report, which was released by the department on Friday.  “By re-opening safely, we have the capacity to avoid permanent job losses for the overwhelming percent of Americans who, the report shows, currently view their job loss as temporary,” he added. The Trump administration has expressed hope that the economy could at least partially recover in the latter half of the year as stay at home orders are relaxed and businesses reopen. “Those jobs will all be back, and they’ll be back very soon,” President Trump said on Friday.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A federal judge has upheld a policy in Arkansas that requires women to obtain a negative test for COVID-19 before undergoing an abortion procedure. The ACLU and the sole abortion clinic in Arkansas sued the state over the regulation, arguing that it violates women’s constitutional right to abortion. The judge, Brian Miller, said that the decision was “agonizingly difficult” because the policy limits individual liberty, but he concluded that the context of the global health crisis made the rule reasonable as a matter of protecting public health.  In an effort to limit the spread of the coronavirus, Arkansas instituted this rule to require that women obtain a test for the disease, and test negative, within 48 hours of having an abortion. The abortion clinic claimed that women who couldn’t access tests were being unfairly prevented from getting an abortion. Arkansas had also instituted a policy limiting elective abortions, as part of a wider prohibition on elective procedures, but that restriction was eased last week. As Arkansas attorney general Leslie Rutledge pointed out, the policy requiring a negative COVID-19 test for women seeking abortion was merely one part of a broader state policy requiring negative test results for anyone who wants to obtain any kind of elective procedure. In essence, the abortion clinic was suing for an exemption to a broad policy aimed at limiting the spread of disease, not targeting abortion. Here’s how an ACLU attorney responded to the judge’s decision to uphold the policy: “People cannot pause their pregnancies, and this politically motivated restriction is already pushing care out of reach.”  Only a radical abortion-rights activist would call such a policy — imposing the same testing rule on a wide variety of procedures in addition to abortion — a “politically motivated restriction.” As abortion-advocacy groups have demonstrated several times throughout the COVID-19 outbreak, public health matters little to them. All that really matters is protecting abortion providers’ ability to continue profiting from abortion, regardless of the health crisis.  

Several Senate Democrats are proposing a new coronavirus relief bill to supplement the initial direct cash payments provided to Americans as part of the phase-three CARES Act. Under the bill, introduced by Senators Kamala Harris (D., Calif.), Bernie Sanders (I., Vt.), and Ed Markey (D., Mass.), all Americans earning less than $120,000 per year would receive a monthly check for $2,000.  “Congress has a responsibility to make sure that every working-class household in America receives a $2,000 emergency payment a month for each family member,” Sanders said. In a statement touting the bill, Harris argued that Congress has not done “nearly enough to meet the needs of this historic crisis,” while Markey called the payments “the most direct and efficient mechanism for delivering economic relief to those most vulnerable.” The checks would be retroactive to March and last until three months after Covid-19’s public health emergency is declared over, and would be delivered even if individuals do not have a Social Security number or filed taxes last year. Senate Republicans have expressed concerns over additional massive outlays of funding, with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) saying last month that “we just added another $500 billion to the national debt. Let’s see how things are working.” The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) reported Friday that the country lost 20.5 million jobs in April, good for the highest unemployment rate since the Great Depression.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Theory: “The coronavirus epidemic shows why we need government to be more involved in economic decision-making, especially involving critical goods, so that the common good can be protected from the profit motive.” Reality: “He Had Never Sold a Ventilator. N.Y. Gave Him an $86 Million Deal. An engineer landed one of the state’s biggest coronavirus-related contracts after FEMA volunteers forwarded his name.”      

It’s not easy to shop these days, but Sunday is Mother’s Day, so remember to go out and get her something — even if it’s just a card and flowers from the grocery store. I’ve got the best. Thank you for everything, Mom. On the menu today: a long look at Sweden, a short look at Mexico, and the return of the pop-culture podcast.  The Swedish Approach Won’t Work in a Less-Healthy Nation “We should do what Sweden did! Try to get to herd immunity as fast as we can!” Within National Review, John Fund and Joel Hay are more or less advocates or enthusiasts for the Swedish approach, and Nick Frankovich and Ramesh Ponnuru are skeptics.  As of this writing, Sweden has 24,623 cases of coronavirus and 3,040 deaths. Sweden has 2,438 cases per million people and 301 deaths per million people. The United States has 3,906 cases per million people . . . but only 232 deaths per million people. Sweden currently ranks tenth in the world in deaths per million people. It is worth noting that an outbreak in a tiny, densely populated country can rocket a country to the top of the list. At this moment, San Marino, a microstate entirely surrounded by Italy, ranks first. Andorra, a tiny country between Spain and France, ranks third. Sint Maarten, the Dutch-speaking half of an island in the Caribbean, ranks eighth. The United States ranks 13th, with the Isle of Man stuck between us and Sweden. Perhaps the most important point in the discussion around Sweden is the recognition that different countries’ populations will have different preexisting health conditions; what works for one won’t necessarily generate the same results.   Begin with the question of scale. If you look at the top ten most populous countries in the world, many of them are authoritarian, dealing with significant poverty, or both: China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, Brazil, Bangladesh, Russia, Mexico. (Read to the end of today’s newsletter for an important related point.) Heading into a crisis like this, the United States has to ensure access to personal protective equipment, hospital beds, ICU units, tests, potential treatment drugs, for the potential treatment of 330 million people (although I suppose you could rule out the population under 18). That’s just a much more difficult task than securing what’s needed to prepare for a viral outbreak in Hong Kong (7 million people), Taiwan (23 million people), or South Korea (51 million people). All of those countries have handled the outbreak well, and significantly better than the U.S. — but we should keep the degree of difficulty in mind. Sweden has about 10 million people. Much like the United States, Sweden is having serious outbreaks of the virus in nursing homes, and complaints about insufficient access to personal protective equipment. Much like the United States, their rate of testing is increasing much less quickly than their leaders wanted.  When you compare populations, other key differences become clearer. Sweden has about 4 million citizens over the age of 60; the United States has about 150 million. (UPDATE: Nationmaster puts this sum at 148.6 million, but the Population Reference Bureau and the Census Bureau put it at about 52 million. The point stands that the U.S. has many, many times more elderly to protect from the virus.) With 7.6 million people living in urban areas, Sweden ranks 57th in the world in that metric. We rank third with almost 240 million. Neither of our population densities is particularly high by world standards, but ours is a little higher. A Goldman Sachs assessment noted that the Swedish approach wouldn’t work for many other European countries: “Its population density is about half that of Italy, and Sweden has a high proportion of single-occupancy households, and a relatively low proportion of multi-generational households.”  Perhaps most importantly, Sweden is literally the least-obese country in the world, just 12 percent. We rank 16th, with 33 percent of our population being obese. (Some put the percentage of obese Americans closer to 40 percent.) A study of coronavirus patients admitted to the intensive care unit at university hospitals at Johns Hopkins, University of Cincinnati, New York University, University of Washington, Florida Health, and University of Pennsylvania found “an inverse correlation between age and body mass index” — meaning the younger a person was in the ICU, the more likely they were to be obese. (“Obese” means a body mass index over 30; for someone who is 5 feet, 9 inches tall, that would be 203 pounds or more.) From this, it is not hard to imagine an attempt at “herd immunity” in the United States that would result in a much higher death rate, because we have more people who are obese. We can argue about why America has more obese people, but there’s little that can be done to change that fact now or in the near future. (If losing excess weight was easy, everyone would be doing it already.)   Now imagine Sweden’s minimalist approach in the U.S. and how that would effect not just obese Americans, but those with heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, asthma, smokers, those undergoing cancer treatment, bone marrow or organ transplants, HIV, kidney disease or undergoing dialysis, liver disease, lupus, any other potential immunocompromised condition, and those 65 and over. We have a lot of people who are “healthy enough” to function on a day to day basis, but who have at least one condition that would make a fight with coronavirus life-threatening. Your mileage may vary, but I look at the millions upon millions of Americans who could lose that fight with the virus and find the Swedish approach unworkable here — just too much risk to too many people. Right now, the Sweden fans are arguing, “But they’re not going to have a second wave!” We will see. We’re still quite a long way from being finished with the first wave. There are good reasons to think that the second wave in the United States may not be as bad. As for the notion that this approach spared the Swedish economy . . . the Wall Street Journal looks at the country and concludes that they’re going to have a slightly less bad economic recession — not that they will be spared: Sweden’s decision not to impose a mandatory national lockdown has drawn global attention from policy makers eager to judge the strategy’s impact on public health and the economy. But it turns out the situation here is not as different as it might first appear. Even without legal prohibitions, many Swedes are voluntarily following authorities’ social-distancing recommendations and limiting travel, pushing down domestic consumption. And the country can’t insulate itself from lockdowns among its trading partners. Exports are falling. The result: Sweden’s economy is contracting, but not by as much as some others in Europe. Meanwhile, it is recording deaths per capita from the virus that are considerably higher than in neighboring countries — though below levels seen in France, Italy and the U.K. Shops, restaurants and even nightclubs have been allowed to stay open in Sweden. There are no curbs on the manufacturing and services industries. But that doesn’t mean life is normal here. Despite recent warm weather, streets are quieter and business is slower because many Swedes, like Ms. Sandblom, take government guidelines seriously and even go beyond them to avoid catching the highly contagious pathogen. All of that is contributing to what Sweden’s government estimates will be a 6 percent contraction in domestic consumption this year. Combined with a forecast 10 percent drop in exports, Swedish authorities predict, the result will be a 7 percent decline in overall 2020 economic output. Maybe that looks good in light of today’s utterly abysmal jobs numbers. But it seems to me that much of the discussion around Sweden is driven by a desire to believe that there is an easier path out there, that our leaders are just too dumb to see it, and that by yelling loudly about it enough, America will alter its course.  People hate the lockdowns — now wrapping up week eight — with good reason. Thankfully, most states are starting to loosen the rules here and there; as the weather improves, more people will want to spend more time outside and enforcement is going to start being impossible. Post-lockdown America will not mean post-coronavirus America. Big Countries Are Either Hit Hard by the Virus or Lying about It A few moments ago, I wrote: “If you look at the top ten most populous countries in the world, many of them are authoritarian, dealing with significant poverty, or both.” This means that the United States is arguably the only country in the world that has high population, considerable wealth compared to other countries, and can be trusted to count and report its coronavirus cases and deaths in a reasonably accurate manner. (Yes, yes, I hear you, I said “reasonably accurate,” and whatever the flaws in our data, our numbers are sure as hell more accurate than the ones coming out of Beijing or Moscow.) And it appears the Mexican government isn’t being honest about their situation, either: The Mexican government is not reporting hundreds, possibly thousands, of deaths from the coronavirus in Mexico City, dismissing anxious officials who have tallied more than three times as many fatalities in the capital than the government publicly acknowledges, according to officials and confidential data reviewed by The New York Times. The tensions have come to a head in recent weeks, with Mexico City alerting the government to the deaths repeatedly, hoping it will come clean to the public about the true toll of the virus on the nation’s biggest city and, by extension, the country at large. But that has not happened. Doctors in overwhelmed hospitals in Mexico City say the reality of the epidemic is being hidden from the country. In some hospitals, patients lie on the floor, splayed on mattresses. Elderly people are propped up on metal chairs because there are not enough beds, while patients are turned away to search for space in less-prepared hospitals. Many die while searching, several doctors said. The End of Grading Presidents on Performance  An observation from Ramesh about the idea that most elections are referendums on the performance of the incumbent: “In retrospect, it appears that the referendum theory of presidential elections was an artifact of a less politically polarized time. When a lot of voters floated between the parties, presidents could win or lose landslides based on their perceived performance. Now we have two hardened and roughly evenly matched party coalitions with more uniformly antagonistic views, and almost all voters lean toward one or the other of them.” ADDENDUM: As promised yesterday, a new, long, and uncensored edition of the Jim and Mickey Show, tackling lockdown life, those horrible commercials that begin “in this time of uncertainty . . .” ESPN’s The Last Dance, a bit about Tiger King, a lot about Counterpart, the outbreak of Karens, when or if we’ll ever go back to movie theaters, and more.  

In Impromptus today, I address a number of issues, as is the column’s wont. One of them is lockdown politics. These are very difficult politics for an officeholder, and for an ordinary citizen, too. Anyone who speaks in terms of black and white is not speaking very helpfully. Earlier this week, Governor Cuomo of New York said, “There’s a cost of staying closed, no doubt — economic cost, personal cost. There’s also a cost of reopening quickly. Either option has a cost.” That is an attitude of maturity, or of facing reality, which may amount to the same thing.  I have opinions, heaven knows, and strong ones, but I also have some humility when it comes to this question — the lockdown/reopen question. “To govern is to choose,” someone once said. I don’t envy the choosers today. Governor Whitmer of Michigan is knocked as too strict. “Heil, Hitmer!” said at least one sign in Lansing, held by a protester. (I believe that was meant as a criticism.) Governor DeSantis of Florida is knocked as too lax. I think that, in the main, what we have here is a nationful of governors and other officials who are doing their best in a terrible and weird situation — a situation in which virtually no one will be satisfied. I don’t think the Democrats are acting on their fantasy of total control; I don’t think the Republicans want to see grandparents drop like flies.  What is that man doing up there? I am speaking of Truman, whose picture sits atop this post. He makes an early appearance in Impromptus today. Some of us, in the NRI Book Club, are reading Up from Liberalism, the 1959 book by William F. Buckley Jr. “NRI,” as you know, stands for “National Review Institute.” For info on the book club, go here. WFB did not think very much of Harry S. Truman — not in the late ’50s, he didn’t. Here is what WFB had to say about the 33rd president in Up from Liberalism: I sat in the spring of 1958 before the television screen and beheld Mr. Truman, with the zest he has for that kind of thing, cavorting from vulgarity to vulgarity, oversimplifying issues, distorting history, questioning motives, provoking base appetites. He proceeds to call Truman “the nation’s most conspicuous vulgarian.” He laments that prominent Democrats — even sober and august ones — behold this “vulgarian” without complaint. Here is another passage from WFB — a Baroque one, but a sure one: The failure to take accurate measurements where Mr. Truman is concerned, the failure on the part of men who, however much they approved his personal courage, his decisiveness, his zest, his administration, the political objectives of the Democratic Party — their failure to stand firm in judiciously assessing his dismaying personal limitations leads or would seem to lead to an anarchy in the world of taste and judgment. You know who comes in for it worse than Truman, the ex-president, in Up from Liberalism? The incumbent president, Eisenhower. Not liking Ike, WFB faults him for many things, among them the inability to speak clearly and sensibly. Words mattered a lot to WFB, and he thought they were important in a leader. This was a constant theme of his political commentary. Anyway, WFB: It is a lightly guarded national secret that Mr. Eisenhower has a way of easing virtually every subject he touches into a syntactical jungle in which every ray of light, every breath of air, is choked out. But disadvantageous though this incapacity is (in an age where, War being Unthinkable, so many battles depend on verbal trenchancy), it is not a cause of national alarm. The nation has had inarticulate presidents before and has, in the short term, survived them. The distinctive danger in the case of Mr. Eisenhower lies in the fact that his inarticulateness is traceable to an organic ignorance of the nature of the society whose well-being it is his historic destiny to watch over at the moment of our great peril. All right, one more word — concerning the title over this post I am jotting. One day, WFB sent me a recording of music, with a note saying, “Me no like. You?” (I can’t remember whether I did. Or whether I listened to the music. I should check.)  

U.S. unemployment hit 14.7 percent in April amid the coronavirus pandemic, the highest unemployment rate since the Great Depression. The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) reported Friday that the country lost 20.5 million jobs in April, “with particularly heavy job losses in leisure and hospitality.” The 10.3-point increase the unemployment rate from March to April is the largest ever recorded, and marks the first time in over a decade that unemployment has hit double digits. The previous worst jobless rate since the Great Depression, when unemployment hit 25 percent, was 10.8 percent in 1982.  In a live reaction to the numbers, President Trump was not shocked, telling Fox News in an interview that “even the Democrats aren’t blaming me for that” as the country battles Covid-19. “It’s totally expected, it’s no surprise,” Trump stated. “. . . What I can do: I’ll bring it back.” The labor force participation rate hit its lowest point since 1973, falling to 60.2 percent. Among different industries, employment in leisure and hospitality was nearly cut in half, falling by 7.7 million. Despite the virus, the healthcare industry lost 1.4 million jobs, primarily among dentists and private practitioners. One bright spot in the report showed that of those unemployed, 18.1 million — 78 percent — said that their layoff was temporary.  But BLS revealed at the conclusion of its report that “the overall unemployment rate would have been almost 5 percentage points higher than reported” had individuals who were classified as employed, but who were not working, been included.  “As was the case in March, special instructions sent to household survey interviewers called for all employed persons absent from work due to coronavirus-related business closures to be classified as unemployed on temporary layoff,” the report reads. “However, it is apparent that not all such workers were so classified.” On Thursday, the Labor Department said that over 33 million Americans have applied for unemployment benefits since mid-March.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					O
				n Thursday, Dominic Raab, Britain’s foreign secretary, announced that Britain is ready for its “next phase” of the lockdowns. Raab said the prime minister will lay out the plans to “ease up” restrictions this weekend. This comes after Britain reached the highest death toll in Europe. At this point, many Brits will be wondering whether the lockdowns were worth it. Personally, I don’t know. I suspect that neither do you. And — I’m beginning to think — that neither do they. They, the politicians, the decision-makers, the officials, the scientists; the people we pay taxes to get us out of tight spots. If the models of the recently disgraced Neil Ferguson are anything to go by, then the U.K. lockdown has saved tens of thousands of lives. But if we’re to listen to Sweden’s leading epidemiologist, Johan Giesecke, instead, then these efforts have been “futile.” That’s a rather large margin of error.  When it was first announced, genuine critics of the lockdown, those who accepted that COVID-19 was a real and serious threat but disagreed that mandatory lockdowns were the correct response, were disregarded as nuts and right-wingers. Peter Hitchens was accused of killing people with this rhetoric. But then some heavyweights came into the fight. People such as the Oxford epidemiologists and Giesecke (the Swedish scientist) and, in the non-science camp, Jonathan Sumption, a widely respected former U.K. Supreme Court justice and historian, nicknamed “the brain of Britain,” who did the rounds in the Times, the BBC, and the Mail on Sunday, making the authoritative anti-lockdown case. Sumption said it “all boils down” to one question: “Is it worth it?” In other words, is the threat of coronavirus worth forcibly confining healthy people to their homes? He said that every citizen is entitled to ask himself this question; indeed, that he ought to ask it. And that he had done so and reached the answer, no.  Sumption considers the response to crisis as being disproportionate to the threat posed.  He argued that the threat of COVID-19 was clearly real but “exaggerated.” He argued that we ought to maintain a sense of perspective, do away with our “irrational horror of death,” and remember that this is “not the greatest crisis in our history” or even “the greatest public health crisis in our history.” Why, then, he asked, did it warrant the “greatest interference with personal liberty in our history”?  Whether he is right or not, it is true that the British government’s response was rushed and political. Sumption argued that it had responded in a “blind panic following the delivery of Imperial College London’s Professor Neil Ferguson’s statistical projections” after which it had “legislated the lockdown on the hoof in a late-night press conference.” Ferguson, who has since “stepped back” from his advisory role (after breaking his own lockdown rules in order to conduct an affair with a married woman), was not the only person warning the government, of course. Nevertheless, Sumption argued that those politicians in charge had become “trapped by their own decisions” and were, thereafter, merely trying to “avoid criticism by sheltering behind the scientists.” When the nightly ritual of clapping for the National Health Service began, it did seem that something fundamental had shifted in the public’s thinking, almost overnight. Sumption put his finger on it: “Suddenly, it is our duty to save the NHS, not the other way around.” And in locking in everyone, not just the infected, we began to mimic the approach of the authoritarian Chinese. Indeed, one of the reasons that Sweden, a socially democratic country, refused to pursue this approach was that it believed it philosophically incompatible with the country’s liberal values. “A society in which the Government can confine most of the population without controversy is not one in which civilized people would want to live,” writes Sumption. “Guidance is fine. Voluntary self-isolation is fine, and strongly advisable for the more vulnerable. Most of them will do it by choice. But coercion is not fine. There is no moral or principled justification for it.”   The argument most commonly waged against Sumption’s position is that, writ large, it would cause mass death. That might be true, but the evidence is far from certain. The U.K.’s COVID-19 death rate, for instance, is almost double that of Sweden, despite its more-aggressive measures. Besides, Sumption’s point that “life is about more than avoiding death” still holds. “To say that life is priceless and nothing else counts is just empty rhetoric,” he wrote, citing the example of going to war in 1939 because lives were worth losing for liberty, and driving cars because lives are worth losing for convenience. Of course, neither war nor road-traffic accidents are contagious. But the fact remains that, for most people who contract the virus, the threat is not existential. What is more existential is poverty. Already the chancellor of Britain has proposed £330 billion ($389 billion) of state guarantees for bank loans to firms, equivalent to 15 percent of GDP, in addition to £20 billion ($25 billion) of grants and tax reliefs for the leisure industry and small businesses.  It is impossible to know for sure what “would have” or “could have” been if the government had responded differently. Nevertheless, as Brits enter the next stage of lockdown, they should continue to scrutinize their government’s actions. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					O
				ver the past few years, a small but growing cadre of religious conservatives has decided that classical liberalism — grounded in a belief in the natural rights and freedoms of the individual — is a grotesque mistake. The coronavirus pandemic should prompt this crowd to do a little soul-searching. Despite their differences, liberalism’s right-wing critics are united in their fierce antagonism to John Locke, whose doctrine of government-by-consent inspired the American Revolution and informed the Founding. According to Yoram Hazony, the Jewish philosopher and author of The Virtue of Nationalism, Locke’s account of human nature amounts to “a far-reaching depreciation of the most basic bonds that hold society together.” Similarly, Patrick Deneen, a Catholic political scientist and author of Why Liberalism Failed, denounces Locke’s theory of consent as “one of liberalism’s most damaging fictions,” a solvent of community, morality, and religious belief. Locke’s vision of human flourishing, they say, was really no different than that of Thomas Hobbes.  All of this talk began before the onset of the coronavirus pandemic, which has given most of us a more intimate taste of what it might be like to live under Hobbes’s Leviathan: “For by this authority . . . he hath the use of so much power and strength conferred on him that, by terror thereof, he is enabled to form the wills of them all, to peace at home, and mutual aid against their enemies abroad.” Most states have imposed severe lockdown measures, constraining and disrupting the lives of hundreds of millions of people. Public gatherings — including peaceful protests — have been outlawed. Schools and colleges have closed their doors. Religious services have been banned, and would-be worshippers harassed by local police. Thousands of businesses — in every state — have been indefinitely shut down. Earlier this week, a Dallas woman was arrested, fined, and sent to jail for trying to operate her hair salon in defiance of the Texas governor’s stay-at-home rules. “Feeding my children isn’t selfish,” she said. “I am not closing the salon.”  In Locke’s Second Treatise of Government (1689), he named “life, liberty, and property” as among the natural rights of man that governments were instituted to protect. By property, he meant much more than a person’s wealth and belongings. “Every man has a property in his own person. This nobody has any right to but himself,” he wrote. “The labor of his body, and the work of his hands, we may say, are properly his.”  
 Locke’s critics, who often appear not to have read his actual works, see only mindless and clawing consumption at the root of his worldview. But the Second Treatise leaves no doubt about the divine prerogative and the moral obligations that flow from it: Our equality “by Nature” forms “the foundation” of “that obligation to mutual love amongst men” and “the duties they owe one another,” namely, “the great maxims of justice and charity.” Locke then cites the golden rule to insist upon “a natural duty” to love our neighbors as we love ourselves. In a slap at political absolutism, he invokes the authority of the God of the Bible: “For men being all the workmanship of one omnipotent and infinitely wise Maker . . . sent into the world by His order and about His business; they are His property, whose workmanship they are made to last during His, not another’s pleasure.” Locke’s conception of human flourishing ultimately depends upon his belief that every person is endowed by God with creative powers and is called — in freedom — to engage in meaningful, honorable, productive work.  The Leviathan — now embodied in government at all levels — inevitably has other ideas. About 30 million Americans have filed for unemployment since the onset of the coronavirus. The unemployment rate for April is expected to top 15 percent, the highest since the Great Depression. Tens of thousands of small business have been devastated, and many will never recover. The human suffering involved in this cataclysm — drug abuse, depression, suicide, and the delaying of surgeries, cancer treatments, etc. — cannot be calculated. The virus would’ve taken a severe toll on American society regardless of the public-policy response to it, but evidence is mounting that the government’s Draconian pandemic-response measures have played a role in making things worse.  Said measures have been undertaken in an effort to “flatten the curve” and “save lives.” It’s a rationale Hobbes would surely applaud: “And though of so unlimited a power men may fancy many evil consequences, yet the consequences of the want of it, which is perpetual war of every man against his neighbor, are much worse.” Having lived through the English Civil War, Hobbes did not believe that people could be trusted to govern themselves. Aided by a phalanx of medical authorities, neither do many of our political leaders, regardless of the facts on the ground.  Locke took a different view, devoting his political career to the defeat of the authoritarian forces that were trampling basic civil liberties, ruining economies, and destroying the social fabric of Europe. His remedy was a political society designed — and limited — to preserve our natural, inalienable rights to life, liberty, and property.   Government by consent involves risks, but the alternative is a life of dependency, passivity, and servitude. Progressives, ever restless for centralized authority, have tried to negate Lockean ideals for decades. In a recent editorial, “The America We Need,” the New York Times derided classical liberals for taking “an impoverished view of freedom,” and called for a “muscular conception of liberty” that would make government the “guarantor” of universal health care, housing, and employment. What is new, and worrisome, is that some prominent religious conservatives are now singing a similar tune, while blaming Locke’s principles for unleashing selfish individualism at the expense of the common good. According to Patrick Deneen, classical liberalism has produced “an acquired ability to maintain psychic distance from any other human.” It apparently does not occur to him that Locke’s conception of freedom — rooted in reason and Revelation — might be the best protection against a state, say, forcefully mandating our physical isolation from one another. Meanwhile, conservative Catholics such as Harvard law professor Adrian Vermeule want the Church’s theological tenets to guide the state, “because strong rule in the interest of attaining the common good is entirely legitimate.”  In short, these religious conservatives have sought an approach to political life that would treat Lockean freedoms with contempt. And the pandemic has given us a fearsome preview of what such an approach might look like. No one should treat the lethality of this contagion lightly: We must do everything feasible to protect the most vulnerable among us. Seventy thousand deaths in a matter of months are a shocking tragedy. But only a rank materialist would disregard the social, moral, and spiritual consequences of the government’s unprecedented efforts to fight the virus. Indeed, the greater tragedy may turn out to be the subjugation of a free, prosperous, and just society by the nightmarish political creature Hobbes imagined, “that mortal god to which we owe, under the immortal God, our peace and defense.” 

The public overwhelmingly relies on the press to provide them with accurate information and proper context. When it comes to COVID-19, many press outlets are consistently failing to do that. In fact, the reporting on data related to the epidemic has increasingly led to conclusions that aren’t accurate and an audience that is misinformed.  The perfect example was an article from The Hill that told readers Texas was seeing “thousands of new coronavirus cases days after state’s stay-at-home order lifted.” Seems rather obvious that The Hill started with a view that moving into a re-opening phase is a mistake and things are getting worse, and then looked for a way to support that conclusion. This claim managed to mislead readers in two key ways: (1) Given the incubation period and a lag in testing, new cases that are identified on a certain day are unlikely to have any relationship to policies implemented days earlier. (2) “New cases” is a very misleading metric because it does not account for increases in testing. The rate of positive tests in Texas has declined significantly.  Mainstream outlets have attempted to tie new cases and deaths to recent re-opening actions in Florida, Georgia, and Texas, despite it being clear that any spike in cases or deaths would not be apparent for weeks after such policy changes. Such actions could lead to a spike in new cases, but trying to tie them to those seen right now is clearly incorrect. In addition, members of the press continue to conflate reporting of new cases with a growth in the rate of new cases. The New York Times and Axios have both recently published charts showing large increases in new cases around the country when New York is excluded from the data (though the latter has since updated its article containing such a chart to account for criticism similar to my own). Those outlets and other members of the press then wrongly used the charts to justify claims that the number of new cases is not going down and the “U.S. curve isn’t bending.” These charts do not account for massive increases in testing throughout the country. Charting the same data (Chart 1) relative to testing increase (Chart 2) and in the form of positive testing rates (Chart 3) makes it clear that the rate of new cases is actually decreasing.  The same outlets that raised concerns about the United States lacking sufficient testing are now interpreting the data in a way that punishes testing increases. The result is that many readers have been misinformed into believing that the situation is getting worse, which has the unintended consequences of feeding into false claims that the actions we have taken so far were ineffective. In attempting to find support for a narrative that things are getting worse and red states are making a mistake in considering moving to a re-opening phase, these outlets have resorted to misleading their readers. If media outlets expect to be trusted on this subject, they need to present the data in an accurate way and with proper context instead of looking for ways to support their pre-determined conclusions.  

1. The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom releases its annual report on religious freedom around the world 2. Turkey, for sixth time, cuts water supply to 460,000 civilians in north Syria 3. One south Bronx church has seen 13 coronavirus deaths 4. Caitlin Flanagan on having Stage IV cancer during these times  Do please pray for her and her family and all the people she gives voice to  I remember how much our Kate O’Beirne enjoyed her book on motherhood 5. David French: “Ahmaud Arbery’s killers should be arrested and tried for murder.” 6. From Harvard: Religious services may lower risk of ‘deaths of despair’  7. “The hospital has seventeen beds for intensive care. The city of New York asked us to have seventy beds available. And we only have one intensive care doctor.” 8. Meet the 107-Year-Old Woman Who Survived the Coronavirus and Spanish Flu 9. Pandemic brings ‘a very different kind of Church’ to London’s homeless 10. Should the likes of the Little Sisters of the Poor stick to knitting? 11. Horses bring joy to seniors through nursing home windows 12. Catholic schools are at risk and so are the students 13. AFT and superintendents group to districts: Ignore DeVos’s guidance on aid to private schools  14. Jennifer Fulwiler with some life advice and a new book on The Today Show 15. Last week, the Sisters of Life had a virtual gala. You can watch it anytime here, and I think you’ll be happy you did.       

Buried in the recent announcement by the Bureau of Economic Analysis that real gross domestic product (GDP) decreased at an annual rate of 4.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020 was a remarkable fact: Nearly half of the GDP decrease was due to reduced spending on health-care services. You read that correctly — in the middle of the worst pandemic in over a century, and after decades of unrelenting expenditure growth, we spent less on medical care. How can one explain this anomaly?  It is because Americans, in response to government guidance and fear of an unfamiliar pathogen, are putting off medical care — care that is often essential to their health. Both the CDC and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) instructed hospitals and outpatient facilities to delay elective procedures and to reschedule all non-urgent ambulatory visits and hospital admissions, in order to preserve medical manpower, hospital beds, ventilators, and personal protective equipment (PPE) for treatment of an expected surge of COVID-19 patients. State and local authorities issued stay-at-home guidelines and travel bans. Hospitals, health-care providers, and patients have complied. Hernia repairs, hip replacements, colonoscopies, mammograms, and a variety of other common procedures are no longer performed unless urgent need can be demonstrated. Visits to physicians’ offices have plummeted as patients shelter in place and as fear of contracting COVID-19 at a medical facility has taken hold.  Primary-care visits have dropped by 50 percent. Visits to specialists are down even more — cardiology, pulmonary medicine, and surgery have declined by about two-thirds; dermatology, otolaryngology, and ophthalmology are down by three quarters or more. Telemedicine has partially offset these declines, but many patients lack the wherewithal for video communications, and most procedures just cannot be done remotely.  But the overwhelming surge of COVID-19 patients requiring hospitalization and ICU care did not materialize. Outside of a few hospitals in a few hotspots, notably New York and a small number of other cities, health-care capacity was not close to being overwhelmed. In fact, many hospitals, forced to suspend elective procedures, are awash in empty beds. The additional bed capacity that New York City assembled was scarcely used — the Javits Center, set up to treat 2,500, is closing, having treated about 1,100 over the past month. The 1,000-bed Navy hospital ship Comfort left New York after having treated only 182 patients. Faced with empty beds and offices, providers have started to lay off staff. In March, health-care employment declined by 43,000 — a monthly loss not seen in over 30 years. The March job losses were mostly in the offices of dentists, physicians, and other health-care providers.  Outpatient-office dismissals continued in April and hospitals have started laying off thousands as well.   The impact of these policies is not limited to the economy. Cancer surgeries and chemotherapy regimens have been delayed or altered, with an uncertain impact on survival. Lower numbers of hospital admissions for heart attacks, strokes, and other grave conditions suggest that people who need urgent attention are staying home for fear of contracting illness at the hospital. That means they are dying at home or suffering disabilities that could have been avoided with proper care. 
 People are also avoiding important but “routine” outpatient visits to monitor and adjust treatments for chronic conditions, even though unmonitored diabetes and hypertension can deteriorate, leading to life-threatening complications. Some procedures such as cataract surgery and joint replacements, while technically elective, have enormous impact on quality of life. And the fact that a procedure is not emergent does not mean it can be delayed forever. Sooner or later, delayed cancer screening results in disease progression, delayed treatment, and reduced survival. COVID-19 cases and deaths have been declining, even in hotspots such as New York, and were never very high in large areas of the country. There is ample medical capacity should cases start to rise again. The time has come to ease restrictions on elective and routine care before we do real and lasting damage to people’s health. Lowering health-care spending has long been a policy goal, but this isn’t the way to do it. 

Five people. If you or a loved one dies at this time in the state of Rhode Island, that’s the limit on how many people will be at any gathering for prayer for the eternal rest of the person who has died. “It doesn’t have to be that way,” Father Marcel Taillon, pastor of St. Thomas More Church and St. Veronica Chapel in Narragansett, RI, says in a video directed at Governor Gina Raimondo. Standing in his vast empty church, he points to neighboring states where as many as 25 and 50 can gather, obeying social-distancing protocols.  “Five is too low . . . It’s just too small . . . In the name of these families, it so excruciating and it doesn’t need to be this way . . . The grieving families are the most hurting families and because of the pandemic have been especially burdened.” Deciding which family members can be at a funeral is just too painful, he says, begging for an immediate change so no one else has to needlessly suffer in this way. He offered that the change would be an exercise in hope, something we all could use right now. And especially people who lose loved ones at this time. “It’s just too hard for people,” Fr. Taillon says.  Fr. Taillon notes that he first made the video available privately to the governor’s staff, but after a week was told that she had not changed her mind and posted it on Facebook Sunday. With all respect, he assures the governor he prays for her daily, and reminds her, too, that Rhode Island’s motto is the virtue of hope, thanks to its founder, Roger Williams, a Christian minister, who took it from a line in Hebrews about being anchored in hope. At a time when life and death are in the forefront of our daily life like no other time in many of our contemporary lives, Fr. Taillon reminds of us perhaps what we might try to escape — the mortality check the pandemic and all of our social distancing and quarantine practices are about. Some do not have that luxury.  Hope is not a good feeling, but a virtue and an orientation of our lives. If we came to know that we would be judged on what we deemed essential during this time, I wonder if we would do things differently. Churches are essential. Clergy are essential. We’re going to argue about that, it seems, but don’t when it comes to people who are dying at this time, from COVID-19 or anything else. It’s too painful, it’s also a scandal. I understand why people made some rash decisions, but as we reconsider things now, getting people help in their grief is clearly essential and cruel not to remedy.   

Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer said Wednesday that she supports banning firearms in the state Capitol after armed protesters demonstrated against the state’s strict lockdown measures last week. “There are legislators who are wearing bulletproof vests to go to work,” Whitmer told NBC News. “No one should be intimidated by someone who’s bringing in an assault rifle into their workplace.”  Dozens of protesters, some of them armed, went to the Michigan Capitol on Thursday last week and stood in the Senate gallery, which is open to the public, intimidating lawmakers and causing Democrats to reconsider the policy of allowing firearms inside the building. Michigan State Police troopers blocked the demonstrators clamoring to enter the House chamber. Michigan allows the open-carry of firearms, and it is currently legal to bring guns into the state Capitol building in Lansing. “There is conversation about changing that law,” the Democratic governor said of the possibility of banning guns inside the Capitol. “I think it’s long overdue, and I absolutely support that change. You shouldn’t be intimidated going to be the voice of the people who elected you.”  She went on to say the protests resembled “political rallies” and protesters were making a “political statement” since “Michigan is an important state and the 2020 presidential election is looming.”  Whitmer has attracted harsh criticism for her strict coronavirus lockdown polices, which prohibited residents from visiting their second residences and banned the sale of paint, furniture, and garden equipment. “There’s no question that there’s intense pressure to reopen, whether it’s coming from the White House or the people of our state, and that’s playing out all across the country,” Whitmer said Wednesday, adding that she recognizes people are “getting weary” of the social distancing measures. “And yet we know that the data tells us COVID-19 is still a very real threat in this country, all across the country,” she added.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Yesterday, the news that the U.K. now has the worst coronavirus death toll in Europe coincided with the Telegraph’s revelation that Neil Ferguson, the lead epidemiologist at Imperial College and key adviser to the British government, had been caught with his pants down, breaking his own social-distancing rules. Ferguson, you may recall — sometimes nicknamed “Professor Lockdown” — was the chap who warned the government that there could be up to 500,000 deaths if it didn’t immediately change course, maneuvering from a mitigation to a suppression strategy against COVID-19. Such was his influence that, almost overnight, the government abandoned its pursuit of herd immunity, rolling out the biggest restrictions of healthy and law-abiding people’s civil liberties that the country has ever seen. Ferguson strongly believed that his advice would save countless lives, and perhaps it has. But why, then, didn’t he follow it himself?  All while lecturing the public on the importance of cooperating with nationwide house imprisonment, Ferguson was conducting an affair with his married lover, who travelled across London on multiple occasions to “visit” him. The timeline provided by The Telegraph, who broke the story, leaves little room for excuses. It shows that while Ferguson briefed the country to stay put, his lover, superbly cast as the 38-year-old Antonia Staats (get it?), a left-wing activist, was traveling to and fro between her husband, their kids, and her $2 million home for her quarantine rendezvous with her favorite government scientist. As if this story couldn’t get any more bourgeois, the husband apparently wasn’t bothered by this, because the couple have an “open marriage.” It is the kind of story the British press love. Hypocrisy, stupidity, and a brilliant distraction from more pressing (and depressing) matters. Britain is currently in its seventh week of the lockdowns. In England and Wales, officials dispense a fine for breaking lockdown protocols every five minutes. Hypocrisy is the only remaining sin in secular Britain. Of course, the fact that Staats is married is neither here nor there. Brits no longer expect government officials and advisers to be faithful spouses. The infuriating part is that her first visit coincided with a public warning from Ferguson that lockdown measures were essential and would have to be prolonged. Meanwhile, her subsequent visits occurred after she had told friends that she suspected her husband had contracted COVID-19. Ferguson himself spent two weeks in “complete isolation,” having contracted coronavirus. So, here is a person instructing the country on how to live, in order to “save lives,” via the most draconian measures ever willingly tolerated in a liberal democracy, while flouting his own rules.  “I made an error of judgment and took the wrong course of action,” Ferguson said in a statement. “I deeply regret any undermining of the clear messages around the continued need for social distancing to control this devastating epidemic. The Government guidance is unequivocal and is there to protect all of us.” His I’m sorry I was caught apology resembles the one used a month ago by Scotland’s chief medical officer, Catherine Calderwood, who was forced to resign after twice visiting her holiday home against government advice. “People across Scotland know what they need to do to reduce the spread of this virus and that means they must have complete trust in those who give them advice,” she said.  
 When asked by a journalist whether he thinks Ferguson ought to be prosecuted, Matt Hancock, the health minister, said that would be a matter for the police. In the meantime, Ferguson will now “step back” from his involvement in SAGE, the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. Ferguson’s critics will be enjoying his fall from grace. Though the lockdowns are generally popular in Britain, some feel that the U.K. made a mistake in departing from the “herd immunity” strategy, similar to Sweden’s, and that policymakers have become overly reliant on “science” based on incomplete data and ever-shifting models that often prove wrong.  In 2005, Ferguson said that up to 200 million people could be killed from the bird flu. But only 282 people died worldwide between 2003 and 2009. In 2009, he predicted that the swine flu would, as a “reasonable worst-case scenario,” cause 65,000 deaths. It killed 457. In 2001, his team at Imperial advised that 6 million cattle, sheep, and pigs be killed, costing the British economy £10 billion ($12 billion) — a move that was criticized by fellow professionals as a “serious error.” In relation to the coronavirus, the Stanford team under John Ioannidis says that the Imperial model is based on assumptions that could lead the predicted death-toll numbers to be “substantially inflated.” The Telegraph, in its report on Ferguson’s fall from grace, was sure to include these faulty predications as well. So Ferguson made an “error of judgment” in breaking his own social-distancing rules, but does mean that he is also wrong in his coronavirus modeling? Not necessarily. The bigger story from yesterday is that the U.K. has the worst coronavirus death rates in Europe. It’s quite possible that a future public inquiry will reveal that this was due to the government’s slow, indecisive initial response. And that Ferguson is just one part of a much larger story about lousy leadership. 

The editorial board of the Wall Street Journal concludes: President Trump and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo have both said in recent days that they’ve seen evidence the coronavirus did come from a Wuhan lab. Mr. Trump said it appears to be an accidental release. If they don’t want the issue to be dismissed as an anti-China campaign ploy, they should make the evidence public. There might be good reasons to withhold the evidence at the moment — protecting sources and methods, and so on — but the board is generally right. An argument that amounts to, “we know this was accidentally released from a lab, but we can’t tell you how we know or what evidence led us to this conclusion” is just not going to persuade many people at home or abroad. As NATIONAL REVIEW readers know, there is a lot of circumstantial evidence pointing to an accidental release stemming from either of the two labs in Wuhan researching coronaviruses in bats, but no smoking gun. The evidence that persuaded the president and Mike Pompeo could be a bombshell with far-reaching ramifications around the world; it ought to be revealed. And if that evidence doesn’t exist, the leaders of the United States have done something terrible by declaring that it does. 

This new paper by economists Jose Maria Barrero, Nick Bloom, and Steven J. Davis called “COVID-19 is also a Reallocation Shock” lays out the labor impact we should expect in the aftermath of this crisis and the government policies that will exacerbate it (h/t to Tyler Cowen): As noted in a recent Wall Street Journal article, “The coronavirus pandemic is forcing the fastest reallocation of labor since World War II, with companies and governments mobilizing an army of idled workers into new activities that are urgently needed.” In other words, Covid-19 is also a major reallocation shock. They then go on to explain how the developing “evidence on the extent and character of this reallocation shock for the U.S.” They summarize their results this way: In other words, the COVID-19 shock caused 3 new hires in the near term for every 10 layoffs. These sizable new hires amidst a tremendous overall contraction align well with our anecdotal evidence of large pandemic-induced increases in demand at certain firms. … Drawing on our survey evidence and historical evidence of how layoffs relate to recalls, we estimate that 42 percent of recent pandemic-induced layoffs will result in permanent job loss. If the pandemic and partial economic shutdown linger for many months, or if pandemics with serious health consequences and high mortality rates become a recurring phenomenon, there will be profound, long-term consequences for the reallocation of jobs, workers and capital across firms and locations. Next comes a must-read discussion of the economic forces that will slow down the recover by reducing the job reallocation, including: Policy responses to major shocks and inherited features of the policy landscape can further stretch out the creation response, slowing the recovery. In this regard, we discuss four aspects of U.S. policy that can retard creation responses to the pandemic-induced reallocation shock: Unemployment benefit levels that exceed earnings for many American workers under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act, policies that subsidize employee retention irrespective of the employer’s longer term outlook, occupational licensing restrictions [that] impede mobility across occupations and states, and regulations that inhibit business formation and expansion. They also list Certificate of Need (CON) regulations (they mention the work of my colleague Matt Mitchell and Center of Growth Opportunity’s Chris Koopman), and land-use restrictions as factors that will delay reallocation and recovery. Finally, they have an important section on the Paycheck Protection Program, which links firm aid to employee retention hence deterring productive reallocation. The line-of-credit proposal I developed with Arnold Kling would do no such thing, which is another reason why it is a vastly superior alternative to PPP. As we write: Yet another advantage is that it contemplates a flexible economy that adapts to new circumstances, rather than only rewarding individuals and businesses that remain as they were before the crisis. Some businesses are trying to ramp up hiring even while others are laying off workers, and policy should allow individuals to respond to market incentives, rather than condition aid to businesses on their retention of workers regardless of how much those workers are needed. If Congress must do something in the next few weeks, they would be wise to fix all these regulatory issues that will delay a return employment rather than spend more money.  

The status of the COVID-19 fight is this: In the win column, the American people have made tremendous sacrifices and succeeded in saving our hospital systems from the overwhelm that drove up fatality rates in Northern Italy and Wuhan, China; in the loss column, the federal government has failed to stand up a “test and trace” system that would warn the exposed and quarantine the sick, rather than quarantining everyone.  There’s a term in Silicon Valley for software that’s advertised before anyone can guarantee it will even exist. It’s called “vaporware.” Much of the federal government’s response to the crisis has been vaporware. We’ve gotten lots of advertising and an implicit promise of a world-class operation to fight the disease. But it doesn’t exist yet and it’s becoming clearer that the White House is spinning its wheels, looking for something — anything — to do other than solving the crisis at hand. On Friday, March 13, after weeks of criticism of his disorganized response to the pandemic, Trump offered an answer: an “extraordinary public-private partnership.” China had controlled the virus with its massive, repressive state apparatus. South Korea and Singapore had done so with their more nimble states and publics conditioned for such a fight by the 2003 SARS outbreak. Trump’s new approach felt very American: Our marquee corporations would coordinate with the White House to beat the coronavirus. Stocks made a major rebound as Trump gathered a squadron of CEOs and announced the various initiatives on the White House lawn that Friday.  To hear the president tell it then, one expected to see the quick roll-out of drive-through testing centers in the parking lots of Walmart and Target retailers. CVS, Walgreens, and Rite Aid were said to be joining in, too. Google would launch an easy-to-use website helping people determine whether they should get a test, and directing them where to get one. This should have been the beginning of America’s test-and-trace scheme. But of course, it wasn’t. By the end of April, Google’s health-care oriented company, Verily, had launched a pilot website covering only the Bay Area. As May begins, the promised testing centers exist in fewer than a dozen of the retailers Trump touted. CVS has rapid testing in five states, with plans to expand. Walgreens has drive-through testing operations in eight states. Both plan to expand their testing capacity, but they won’t be able to meet demand until well after many Americans emerge from lockdown — and it won’t make too big a difference so long as CDC guidelines on who can get tested remain relatively strict.   Moreover, testing is only part of the puzzle: It needs to be joined to a contact-tracing system. Even a primitive tracing operation would require tremendous manpower to conduct interviews and inform those exposed. A more advanced one, like those used in South Korea, would incorporate data generated by cell phones. But the federal government hasn’t indicated whether it would set up its own contact-tracing app (as Germany and the U.K. have done), or whether it would build on existing private efforts, such as the one at Columbia University and the one being jointly developed by Google and Apple, which has been criticized by some governments for protecting users’ privacy at the expense of insight into the spread of the disease. 
 Fitting all these moving parts together into a workable test-and-trace system is the kind of coordination problem that an energetic White House could solve. It’s certainly not a task beyond the capability of other Western governments. Germany, with a robust test-trace-and-isolate regime in place, has already re-opened, having avoided the type of outbreaks seen in Italy, Spain, and France. The United Kingdom has begun its pilot test-and-trace program in the Isle of Wight. Why is the U.S. so far behind?  Our nation has the capacity and resources to accomplish what has been accomplished in East Asia and what is beginning to be accomplished in Europe. All the pieces of the system needed to do so are being developed. They may begin to be assembled through private efforts alone. But assembling them with speed and with a straight line of communication to the public would require real leadership from a White House willing and able to solve coordination problems and blend the efforts of private actors, states, and municipalities into a coherent national plan. Unfortunately, this is not that White House. In its outward-facing communications, the Trump administration has continued to tout the supposed effectiveness of its response. But up to now, the American people have faced down this pandemic on their own, while their president attempts to market his way out of another crisis. 

President Trump on two different occasions in January reportedly rejected the advice of advisers who urged him to ask China’s president for more transparency about the nature of the coronavirus. Trump brushed off his advisers when they urged greater transparency because he thought it might imperil future U.S.-China relations, the Wall Street Journal reported Thursday.  Trump’s advisers reportedly argued that a confrontation with China over its handling of the virus would be received well on both sides of the aisle. They proposed a special commission to investigate how the virus originated and examine China’s efforts to control the spread. The coronavirus outbreak, which began in the Chinese city of Wuhan, has cast a pall over the Trump administration’s efforts to improve relations with the communist country. As the outbreak turned into a global pandemic, U.S. officials have heightened their criticism of China’s early handling of the virus and accused Beijing of mounting a coverup of the extent of the spread within China’s borders. During the early days of the outbreak in January and February, Trump praised China several times for transparency around the coronavirus.  “The United States greatly appreciates their efforts and transparency,” the president wrote in a January 24 tweet, two days after he touted the administration’s trade deal with China.  Throughout February, Trump praised China’s President Xi for working “very hard” to combat the outbreak. Since then, however, he has adopted a more critical tone of China’s handling of the virus, slamming the World Health Organization for apparently taking China at its word about the nature and spread of the pandemic. “The W.H.O. really blew it,” Trump wrote on Twitter in early April. “For some reason, funded largely by the United States, yet very China centric. We will be giving that a good look. Fortunately I rejected their advice on keeping our borders open to China early on. Why did they give us such a faulty recommendation?” The U.S. intelligence community concluded last month that China deliberately provided incomplete public numbers for coronavirus cases and deaths resulting from the infection. Intelligence agencies have not determined whether the virus escaped from a Wuhan lab, but have said the virus was not “manmade or genetically modified.”  The WHO recommended in January that countries keep borders and trade open even as it dubbed the coronavirus outbreak a global emergency.  In December, when China is believed to have become aware of the virus, local and national officials issued a gag order to labs in Wuhan after scientists there identified a new viral pneumonia, ordering them to halt tests, destroy samples, and conceal the news.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In mid March, as the U.S. began to confront the coronavirus outbreak, New York governor Andrew Cuomo announced a statewide lockdown. “I want to be able to say to the people of New York, ‘I did everything we could do,’” he said. “And if everything we do saves just one life, I’ll be happy.”  House speaker Nancy Pelosi offered a similar rationale for an extended shutdown in April: “To say ‘People will die, so be it’ instead of a science & testing-based path to reopening the economy is deeply frivolous & wrong. Every life is precious. Each death is heartbreaking — for a family & for a community. This is something we are all in together.” Just yesterday, Joe Biden expressed the same sentiment. “I’ve said it before, and I’ll say it again: No one is expendable. No life is worth losing to add one more point to the Dow,” the presumptive Democratic nominee tweeted. Defending her harsh lockdown policies in Michigan, Democratic governor Gretchen Whitmer wrote in the New York Times that her actions were aimed at protecting public health: “. . . we will never know precisely how many lives were saved as a result.”  Earlier this week, Cuomo doubled down on his rhetoric as he argued against reopening the economy, asking at a news conference, “How much is a human life worth? . . . To me, I say the cost of a human life, a human life is priceless.”  
 It has been good to hear these and other politicians, on both sides of the aisle, affirm the value of life and place such an emphasis on crafting policy that attempts to recognize its dignity. It has been reassuring, too, to witness the willingness of Americans to temporarily sacrifice a great deal of freedom, and in many cases their livelihoods, to reduce the risk to the most vulnerable. It is difficult, though, to take these politicians seriously when they and their party intensely oppose offering protection of any kind to human life in the womb — and when supporters of abortion rights have capitalized on the COVID-19 crisis to push their preferred abortion policies.  As much as Democrats might wish otherwise, abortion isn’t a routine health-care procedure to remove an unwanted clump of cells or an inhuman parasite from a woman. Abortion intentionally kills a genetically distinct, living human being — that woman’s son or daughter. The small size of a fetus makes her no less valuable than the adult men and women dying of COVID-19. Her location inside her mother renders her no less unique, no less human, and no less worthy of life.  Yet instead of responding to abortion the way they’ve responded to the pandemic, pursuing every possible means of saving as many lives as they can, Democratic politicians have carved out a space to allow abortion to carry on despite the health risks. In Michigan, Whitmer deemed elective abortion “essential,” even as she limited most medical procedures as part of the state’s coronavirus response. “A woman’s health care, her whole future, her ability to decide if and when she starts a family is not an election,” Whitmer said. “It is a fundamental to her life. It is life-sustaining, and it’s something that government should not be getting in the middle of.”  Several other states have designated abortion “essential,” even as they place strict limits on most health-care procedures in order to curb the spread of disease and conserve medical supplies. In Virginia, Democratic governor Ralph Northam outlined his response to the spread of COVID-19 in nursing homes, tweeting, “We will continue to do everything possible to help the Virginians living and working in these facilities. These are our parents and grandparents, and we have an obligation to protect them.” The same day, he signed into law the Reproductive Health Protection Act, allowing non-physicians to perform abortions, removing parental-consent requirements for minors seeking an abortion, and removing standard informed-consent procedures. Meanwhile, advocates of unlimited elective abortion have used the pandemic to demand that the FDA loosen safety regulations and allow women to obtain at-home abortions without physician supervision, posing health risks to them and placing a greater strain on limited medical resources. In states that have included elective abortion among non-essential procedures, pro-abortion groups have filed lawsuit after lawsuit, fighting for their ability to continue profiting from abortion despite the crisis.  To comply with the stay-at-home order in Pennsylvania, Planned Parenthood closed every clinic save those that perform abortions. In Colorado, the president of the local Planned Parenthood affiliate described the number of abortions performed at her clinics as “pretty extraordinary,” citing an increase in women traveling from out of state.  As health-care professionals around the country work tirelessly to save lives from the coronavirus, abortion advocates fight to continue intentionally taking them. How much is a human life worth? To Cuomo, it appears to be worth something only when it is located outside the birth canal. Last January, the governor enacted one of the most radical abortion laws in the country. It permitted abortion for any reason up to 24 weeks, after fetal viability, and made it easier to obtain an abortion until birth.  He signed the bill in a ceremony on the anniversary of the Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade. Later that evening, he instructed New York City to illuminate the spire of Freedom Tower in pink to celebrate this expansion of the right to kill the unwanted unborn. “How much is a human life worth?” Cuomo asks. Far more than he and his fellow Democrats think it is. 

Old strategy: Stop flights from China! New strategy: Stop flights from LaGuardia! 

From a BBC report on the impact of the COVID-19 lockdowns on CO2 emissions: To keep the world on track to stay under 1.5C this century, the world needs similar cuts for the foreseeable future to keep this target in view. “If Covid-19 leads to a drop in emissions of around 5% in 2020, then that is the sort of reduction we need every year until net-zero emissions are reached around 2050,” said Glen Peters… from Cicero. [Cicero is the Centre for International Climate and Environmental Research] 1.5C is the target that emerged from the Paris Agreement on climate change. Rupert Darwall writing on the homepage today: The IPCC makes no bones about viewing net zero, it says, as providing the opportunity for ‘intentional societal transformation.’ Limiting the rise to rise in global temperature to no more than 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels — an ill-defined baseline chosen by the U.N. because the Industrial Revolution is our civilization’s original sin — requires ‘transformative systemic change’ and ‘very ambitious, internationally cooperative policy environments that transform both supply and demand.’ Thanks to COVID-19, we have a foretaste of what the IPCC intends. It envisages, for example, the industrial sector cutting its emissions by between 67 and 91 percent by 2050, implying a contraction in industrial output so dramatic as to make the 1930s Great Depression look like a walk in the park, a possibility the IPCC choses to ignore. The IPCC places its bets on a massive transition to wind and solar, but no amount of wishful thinking can overcome the inherent physics of their low energy density and their intermittency, which explains why countries with the highest proportion of wind and solar on their grids also have the highest energy costs in the world. One option the IPCC does not favor — a wholesale transition to nuclear power — seems unachievable anyway on the timetable it has in mind. Nuclear power stations typically take well over five years to build, and not many are planned for now. Germany is switching out of nuclear power, the Japanese are, to quote the New York Times “racing to build new coal-burning . . . plants” and the Chinese are wary of overdoing their nuclear construction because of the risk of accident. If something akin to the COVID-19 economy for decades is what you want, going for ‘net zero’ by 2050 may be a way to achieve it. Britain’s Conservative government put the 2050 target into law last year, making the U.K. the first G7 country to do, just another part of the ruinous legacy that prime minister Theresa May left behind her. Her successor, Boris Johnson, has endorsed this target, and so (the Independent reports): Boris Johnson must dump road-building plans, refit energy-leaking homes and plant millions of trees to rescue his climate change promises when the lockdown ends, his advisers are warning. The coronavirus recovery package must not “lock-in higher carbon emissions” if the UK is to achieve its legal commitment of ‘net zero’ discharges by 2050, they say in a letter to the prime minister. Good luck with that. 

Texas governor Greg Abbott, a Republican, announced on Thursday that he would eliminate jail sentences for violators of lockdown orders. “Throwing Texans in jail whose [businesses] shut down through no fault of their own is wrong,” Abbot wrote on Twitter. “I am eliminating jail for violating an order, retroactive to April 2, superseding local orders. Criminals shouldn’t be released to prevent COVID-19 just to put business owners in their place.”  Abbot’s announcement followed a Texas judge’s decision to jail a Dallas hair salon owner for seven days, after the owner opened her salon in defiance of lockdown orders. “Jailing Texans for non-compliance with executive orders should always be the last available option,” Abbot said on Wednesday. “Compliance with executive orders during this pandemic is important to ensure public safety; however, surely there are less restrictive means to achieving that goal than jailing a Texas mother.” The judge told Shelley Luther she could avoid jail time if she apologized, admitted she was wrong, and agreed to close her hair salon until it was allowed to open. This is her response…@CBSDFW pic.twitter.com/1phdNUsLme — Andrea Lucia (@CBS11Andrea) May 5, 2020  The hair salon owner, Shelley Luther, was told she could avoid a jail sentence if she apologized and admitted that her decision to reopen was “selfish.” “I have to disagree with you, sir, when you say that I’m selfish because feeding my kids is not selfish,” Luther told the judge. “I have hairstylists that are going hungry because they would rather feed their kids. So sir, if you think the law is more important than kids getting fed, then please go ahead with your decision. But I am not going to shut the salon.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The New York Times: The White House’s guidelines are nonbinding and ultimately leave states’ fates to governors. The criteria suggest that states should have a “downward trajectory” of either documented coronavirus cases or of the percentage of positive tests. Public health experts expressed criticism because “downward trajectory” was not defined and the metrics do not specify a threshold for case numbers or positive rates. Still, most states that are reopening fail to adhere to even those recommendations: In more than half of states easing restrictions, case counts are trending upward, positive test results are rising, or both, raising concerns among public health experts. The number of positive test results is rising, at least in part, because we’re testing more. If we want more tests, we’re going to find more positive cases. The number of tests with positive results might indicate a growing rate of infection . . . or it might just mean that the rate of infection is about the same as earlier, and we’re just measuring it more accurately now because more tests are being conducted. A demand that a state dramatically increase the number of tests being done AND to see a consistent “downward trajectory” in the number of documented coronavirus cases is a demand that states not reopen for a very long time.  We know that testing positive does not necessarily mean you’re going to be at risk of serious health problems. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control’s most recent numbers are that “the overall cumulative hospitalization rate is 40.4 per 100,000, with the highest rates in people 65 years and older (131.6 per 100,000) and 50-64 years (63.7 per 100,000).” UPDATE: I originally interpreted this figure as 40 out of 100,000 who test positive; this is 40 out of every 100,000 people at large. Using the figures on worldometers, the United States has 15,827 of 978,454 active cases categorized as “serious, critical.” That comes out to 0.0161… which comes out to 1,614 per 100,000. That’s worse than 40 out of 100,000, but it still indicates that roughly 98.3 percent of people can get the virus and not be put in the “serious, critical” category. Some people who get the virus describe it as the worst flu they’ve ever had, which is pretty bad, but it does indicate they can function normally once they’ve beaten the virus and are not contagious. Studies suggest a significant number of people with the virus have no symptoms at all, anywhere from 14 percent to 60 or 70 percent, and patients report a wide range of symptoms — many of which overlap with normal colds and the regular flu.   However, those who experience only minor symptoms or so will still be contagious for a period — which is why we don’t want them in the workplace or interacting with people any more than absolutely necessary. This piece originally concluded, “This means that 99,959 or so of every 100,000 people testing positive can get through this by staying home, and getting bed rest and the usual treatment of viral infections.” Again, that CDC figure is for hospitalization rate for the entire population, not for positive cases.  

House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R., Calif.) announced the creation of a “China Task Force” to examine  “a wide range of China-related issues,” including the Chinese Communist Party’s role in allowing coronavirus to become a global pandemic. Speaking to reporters in a press conference on Thursday, McCarthy accused Democrats of backing away from “something that has long been a bipartisan consensus in Washington,” claiming that he had reached an agreement for a bipartisan committee in February, only for the Democrats to pull back at the last minute.  “We cannot wait any longer, the stakes are too high to sit idly by, which is why today I am announcing the Republican-led China Task Force, and I invite the Democrats to join with us,” McCarthy stated. “There was one moment in time they said yes, a few months ago they said no, I’d say there’s no important time now to join with us together, to work as one nation, as we face these challenges.” The California Republican said the group would be composed of 15 Republicans representing 14 different committees of jurisdiction — “a microcosm of our entire conference.” Led by Representative Michael McCaul (R., Texas.), ranking member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, the committee includes Representatives Liz Cheney (R., Wyo.), Anthony Gonzalez (R., Ohio), Darin LaHood (R., Ill.), Mike Gallagher (R., Wisc.), Guy Reschenthaler (R., Pa.), Denver Riggleman (R., Va.), Elise Stefanik (R., N.Y.), John Curtis (R., Utah), Andy Barr (R., Ky.), John Joyce (R., Pa.), Adam Kinzinger (R., Ill.), Jim Banks (R., Ind.), Michael Waltz (R., Fla.), and Chris Stewart (R., Utah). Besides examining the CCP’s role in withholding early information, with a timeline showing officials withheld knowledge from the public about the virus’s transmissibility, the committee will also examine Chinese “influence” in American institutions, “economic threats,” and China’s  “efforts to gain the technological advantage.”  “Not only do we have to hold the CCP accountable for their role in the spread of coronavirus, the United States must take bold action to address the CCP’s malign agenda and better compete with China on the world stage,” McCaul told the Washington Post, which first revealed the committee. “This is the number one issue not only today but for the future.” McCarthy concluded by saying the group would compile a “comprehensive report,” with recommendations for potential legislative action coming by October.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

On the menu today: New York City’s coronavirus case numbers are gradually improving, but they’re still a long way from out of the woods, how the virus is creating dire days for big-city public-transportation systems, and a new study indicates that the colossal mistakes of the Big Apple in the early days of the outbreak helped set the course for the rest of the country.  The Coronavirus and the Dire Future for Big City Public Transportation As of this writing, the most recent date where New York City’s official data gives the number of new cases is Monday, May 4, where the city had 711 new diagnosed cases of the coronavirus. The Worldometers chart breaks down new cases by today and yesterday, but not further back. Still, Monday’s new case total in New York City is higher than the Wednesday’s case total for Alaska, Hawaii, Vermont, Wyoming, Maine, Idaho, West Virginia, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nevada, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, and New Hampshire . . . combined.  New York City’s new case total for Monday is higher than the new case total reported Wednesday in the states of Kentucky, Arkansas, Utah, New Mexico, Mississippi, Tennessee, Alabama, Rhode Island, Missouri, Iowa, Nebraska, Washington, Wisconsin, Kansas, Connecticut, Arizona, Louisiana, Delaware, Colorado, North Carolina, Florida, Ohio, the District of Columbia, or Michigan. Only twelve states have higher number of new cases — and that includes the rest of the state of New York. Of course, some of this reflect the city’s larger and denser population — if New York City was a state, its 8.3 million residents would be around our 11th-largest — but the upshot is that while New York City is “bending the curve,” that curve still has a long way to go.  “The problem has stopped getting worse” is not the same as “the problem is solved.” We should also note that no one would paint either New York State or the city as being a slouch when it comes to lockdowns . . . and yet they still saw the horrific and rapid spread that they did. Back on March 20, New York governor Andrew Cuomo issued new restrictions declaring, “non-essential workers should stay inside their homes at all times except for critical travel, such as going to the grocery store or pharmacy.” The lockdown will be in place until at least May 15, with subsequent extensions likely depending upon conditions in particular regions. It took a long time for the lockdown to “bend the curve,” and somehow, people staying at home are apparently still catching the virus. Cuomo noted with surprise yesterday: The majority of recently hospitalized coronavirus patients in New York are people who have followed the precaution of staying home, Gov. Cuomo said Wednesday. The governor said it was “shocking” that 66 percent of new coronavirus hospitalizations are people who are either retired or unemployed and not commuting to work on a regular basis. “This is a surprise: Overwhelmingly, the people were at home,” Cuomo said during a briefing on Long Island. “We thought maybe they were taking public transportation, and we’ve taken special precautions on public transportation, but actually no, because these people were literally at home.” A total of 46 percent of new cases were unemployed and 37 percent were retired. Age also played a factor, the data shows that 73 percent of people being hospitalized were 51 and older, the survey found. (Virologists strongly suspect air-conditioning and ventilation systems can spread the virus when it is airborne. Back in 2004, the World Health Organization determined that one outbreak of SARS was driven by bad plumbing, ventilation systems, and thin walls and ceilings between apartments. Maybe keeping everyone at home in apartment buildings is putting them at higher risk from their neighbors?)   Notice Cuomo’s comment about initially suspecting a connection to public transportation in the most recent cases. Back on April 13, a Massachusetts Institute of Technology researcher released a paper concluding, “The Subways Seeded the Massive Coronavirus Epidemic in New York City.” The world has a lot of enthusiasts of mass transit — often environmentalists who want to reduce carbon emissions — who do not want to hear or believe that the New York City subway system could be particularly dangerous, and they argued the MIT report “fails to provide statistical evidence and ignores significant confounding factors.” Throughout much of the early months of 2020, city officials insisted New Yorkers could not catch the virus by riding public transportation. City Health Commissioner Dr. Oxiris Bardot told the public February 6, “we’re telling New Yorkers, go about your lives, take the subway, go out, enjoy life, but practice everyday precautions . . . If it were likely that it could be transmitted casually, we would be seeing a lot more cases.” She repeated March 4, “there’s no indication that being in a car, being in the subways with someone who’s potentially sick is a risk factor, because, again, it goes back to the issue of casual contact.” On March 5, Mayor de Blasio specifically rode the subway to demonstrate that the system was safe. “I’m here on the subway to say to people nothing to fear, go about your lives and we will tell you if you have to change your habits but that’s not now.” The next day in a radio interview, the mayor declared, “If someone’s on the same train car as another person, that does not, from what we know so far, create a dynamic where you have an opportunity to catch this disease. It’s just a different reality.” (By March 15, the city closed all public schools.)   Yet the idea of subways being one of the main vectors of the virus’s spread makes complete sense: lots of people, often crowded together with much less than six feet separating them, breathing recirculated air, sitting in the same seats, touching the same poles and handrails and turnstiles and subway card machines. On any given weekday, between five and six million people use the city subways, with about 150,000 people entering at the Grand Central 42nd Street station alone. Yesterday, Cuomo acknowledged the obvious: There just isn’t enough room on most trains at most times for people to remain six feet apart.  The consequences of this argument will be long-lasting. Everyone knows we’re going to be living with this virus for a while; if the subways are perceived as the place you’re most likely to catch the virus, people will avoid it for at least the coming year, and maybe more. People who can afford alternative ways to get around will choose those options. The inability to get around the city safely will be one more factor driving the exodus from New York, and perhaps other large American cities. All the hassles of owning a car in the city will become much more tolerable if the alternative of public transportation might kill you. With Uber, Lyft, or a cab, you’re running the risk of being exposed to one driver and the possibility of a virus left behind the previous passengers — bad, but still not as many people as the subway at almost any time of the day. And beyond the question of whether public transportation will have enough riders to remain financially viable, contemplate whether large metropolitan public transportation systems will be able to find workers. A Metro Transit Authority conductor wrote in the New York Times this week: “We work at the epicenter of the epicenter, with a mortality rate substantially higher than that of first responders. Common sense tells you that subway trains and platforms are giant vectors of this virus. We breathe it in along with steel dust. As a conductor, when I stick my head out of the car to perform the required platform observation, passengers in many stations are standing 10 inches from my face. At other times, they lean into the cab to ask questions. Bus drivers, whose passengers enter right in front of them, are even worse off.” Even worse, the transit authority’s management handled this as badly as any cynic would fear: In mid-March, a bulletin came out mandating that conductors make an announcement every 15 minutes. Wash hands, soap and water, sanitizer, elbow-sneeze. “Together we can help keep New York safe.” The irony was that we didn’t have soap and water. At my terminal at that time, the restrooms were closed for three days after a water main break. Most employee restrooms are in similarly bad shape. Crew rooms are packed. The M.T.A. takes stern action against workers seen without goggles or cotton knit safety gloves. Yet we had to work without protection against the coronavirus. At first we were warned not to wear masks. The M.T.A. said it would panic the public. It said masks were dangerous for us. Later it said we could wear masks we bought ourselves. But by then there were few masks for sale. As New York Goes, So Goes the Country But you don’t have to live in or close to New York City to be affected by the bad decisions of the city’s leaders: New York City’s coronavirus outbreak grew so large by early March that the city became the primary source of new infections in the United States, new research reveals, as thousands of infected people traveled from the city and seeded outbreaks around the country. The research indicates that a wave of infections swept from New York City through much of the country before the city began setting social distancing limits to stop the growth. That helped to fuel outbreaks in Louisiana, Texas, Arizona and as far away as the West Coast. The findings are drawn from geneticists’ tracking signature mutations of the virus, travel histories of infected people and models of the outbreak by infectious disease experts. “We now have enough data to feel pretty confident that New York was the primary gateway for the rest of the country,” said Nathan Grubaugh, an epidemiologist at the Yale School of Public Health. Yesterday I noted that there’s a lot of frustration and anger in the country about the way the virus has disrupted, interrupted, and in far too many cases, ended lives, all looking for a target. From where I sit, if you want human beings to blame, the Chinese government is the entity that deserves the most blame, by a wide margin.   But if you absolutely must blame some Americans, Bill de Blasio and his team look like the fairest choice. No doubt, President Trump made all kinds of inane, inaccurate, unrealistic, and wildly overoptimistic comments in the first months of this outbreak. But at least he didn’t literally encourage people to keep spending time in one of the most contagious spots. ADDENDUM: I know today’s news is pretty grim, but chin up: The pop-culture podcast will emerge from hibernation very shortly.  

The Department of Labor revealed Thursday that an additional 3.2 million Americans filed new jobless claims last week, bringing the total number of Americans seeking unemployment benefits to over 33 million since mid-March. The data aligned with predictions from economists, who expected 3 million new claims for the week ending May 2, and suggested numbers slowed for the fifth week in a row since a peak of 6.8 million claims at the end of March. But with April’s new unemployment rate set for release on Friday, estimates show that over 20 percent of the country’s workforce is now out of work.  Continuing claims — the total number of Americans receiving unemployment benefits — hit a new high of 22.6 million in the week ended April 25, raising the insured unemployment rate, or the number receiving benefits as a share of the labor force based on eligibility, to 15.5 percent. A group of Republican Senators cited high unemployment rates in a letter to President Trump, asking for the administration’s recent “pause” on immigration to include a prohibition on guest-worker visas. “Congress MUST get focused on jobs. Rehire those laid off. Even in those parts of the country where workers can’t physically return to the job, we can get them the security of their job back. That’s how we will recover,” Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.), one of the co-signers of the letter, tweeted in response to the jobless numbers. This week, California became the first state in the country to access federal funding set aside for states to pay rising rates of those needing unemployment benefits. The Wall Street Journal found in an analysis that nearly half of all U.S. states have had their respective unemployment-fund balance fall at twice the typical rate from February through mid-April.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Republican-led state legislature filed suit against Democratic Governor Gretchen Whitmer on Wednesday over her extension of Michigan’s state of emergency, saying she overstepped her authority. Whitmer extended the state of emergency to last through May 28, a move the Republican leaders in the House and Senate say would require legislative approval.  “She has chosen to regulate every aspect of nearly 10 million lives with no consent or input from the people’s representatives, whose assistance the Governor publicly disdains,” states the lawsuit, filed in the Michigan Court of Claims. State Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey said the administration’s “decision processes” have been opaque to lawmakers. “We can’t see behind the secret curtain,” Shirkey said. “The Legislature is left with no choice but to seek the court’s intervention to restore constitutional order.”  “The law in Michigan is clear,” House Speaker Lee Chatfield said. “Only the Legislature has the power to extend the state of emergency.” “COVID-19 was a serious challenge enough to deal with, but I do believe the government’s response to it and the one-size-fits-all approach has led to millions of families hurting unnecessarily,” he added. Whitmer claimed that two laws, the Emergency Powers of Governor Act of 1945 and the Emergency Management Act of 1976, grant her the authority to extend the state of emergency as well as order broad social distancing measures to stem the spread of the virus.  The 1976 law supports the Republican argument that extending a state of emergency requires approval from the legislature. The 1945 law does not stipulate that the governor requires approval from lawmakers to issue “reasonable orders,” but Republicans argue that law was intended to apply to smaller crises, “geographically limited, civil disturbance-like emergencies.” Tiffany Brown, a spokesperson for Whitmer, called the lawsuit “just another partisan game that won’t distract the governor.” “Her number one priority is saving lives. She’s making decisions based on science and data, not political or legal pressure,” Brown said.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A group of GOP Senators is asking President Trump to ramp up his recent “pause” on immigration to include a prohibition on guest-worker visas, citing rising levels of American unemployment amid the coronavirus pandemic. Senator Tom Cotton (R., Ark.), joined by Senators Josh Hawley (R., Mo.), Ted Cruz (R., Texas), and Chuck Grassley (R., Iowa) are requesting that the White House halt new guest-worker visas and all non-immigrant guest-worker visas, as well as a suspension of new non-immigrant guest-worker visas for 60 days or until American jobless numbers fall to “normal levels.”  “As we work toward recovery, we urge you to keep the American worker in mind and limit the number of unnecessary guest workers while American families and businesses get back on their feet,” the senators write in the letter. While Trump announced a 60-day moratorium on immigration last month, the rule did not affect guest-worker programs, including EB-5 visas — which give immigrants green cards after a set amount of investment — H-2B visas for nonagricultural seasonal workers, H-1B visas for specialty occupation workers, and the country’s Optional Practical Training (OTP) program, which allows foreign students to work in the U.S. for 1-3 years after graduation. The senators explain that EB-5 program “has long been plagued by scandal” and amounts to a “pay-for citizenship scheme in many cases.” They also argue that suspensions to OTP, H-1B, and H-2B will help those citizens who recently graduated high school or college and have entered a tough job market.   “Given the extreme lack of available jobs for American job-seekers as portions of our economy begin to reopen, it defies common sense to admit additional foreign guest workers to compete for such limited employment,” they explain. Last week, the Department of Labor reported 3.8 million new jobless claims, bringing the total number of American seeing unemployment benefits to 30 million, or 18 percent of the total work force.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				n 19th-century English novels, bankruptcy is a tragedy that just happens to people, often with no real explanation, as though it were a natural disaster or an unexpected infection, a cartoon anvil out of the sky over the head of some poor Wile E. Coyote in Regency garb. Bankruptcy was on the mind of everyone from Charles Dickens to William Makepeace Thackeray to George Eliot to Anthony Trollope, and it is a major plot point in Dombey and Son, Vanity Fair, and The Mill on the Floss, among many other novels. The threat of bankruptcy produces suicides in The Way We Live Now and in Little Dorrit — such was its terror.  In our time, the economic effects of the coronavirus epidemic will be severe, and for many individuals and businesses they threaten to be, or already are, catastrophic. On the other hand (it’s an ill wind, etc.) bankruptcy lawyers are going to have one of their best years ever. And here is a sentence one does not often have occasion to write: There may not be enough lawyers to go around. As the Wall Street Journal reports, the bankruptcy world’s “ranks have been thinned by a decade of economic growth” following the 2009 high-water mark for Chapter 11 filings amid the financial crisis. Promising law students and young lawyers have avoided specializing in bankruptcy, and the courts may not be ready for the influx of cases. Notwithstanding the bleak prospect of being sent to live in Delaware, it is a fantastic time to be a bankruptcy lawyer. Because bankruptcy is associated with something that we are deeply uncomfortable talking about — business failure and personal financial distress — our bankruptcy procedures remain among the great unsung achievements of American life. We have retained the Victorian terror of bankruptcy, both the thought and the word itself — recall Donald Trump’s avoidance of the word “bankruptcy” when talking about being forced to take one of his struggling businesses and “throw it into a chapter,” his favorite evasive euphemism for bankruptcy. But bankruptcy in our time is not a disaster on par with dying in a cholera epidemic. Though it may be embarrassing and painful, our bankruptcy process performs the invaluable service of codifying the terms of failure. And failure is essential to the success of a free and dynamic economy — a world without it is a world without innovation and growth.  Failure is one of the main ways we adapt our economic arrangements to new conditions. Sometimes, those new conditions emerge slowly, as with the death by inches of many American newspaper publishers; sometimes, those conditions change almost overnight, as with the coronavirus. It is famously the case that most new businesses fail. And that is especially true of small businesses, though it is good to keep in mind that many of today’s corporate behemoths (Microsoft, Facebook, Apple) were once small businesses, too. Among new small businesses, one in five fail in their first year, and half fail by their fifth year. One wonders why entrepreneurs bother with the risks and demands of starting something new when many of them, being capable and energetic, might find comfortable salaried employment at a well-established firm. The answer has to do with risk and reward. Successful entrepreneurship is generally much more lucrative than is a successful career managing someone else’s business: There are not very many billionaires who made their money on salary, but even at the less rarefied levels of business life, an entrepreneur who starts a successful dry cleaner or a prospering coffee shop will generally earn much more than someone who manages a dry cleaner or a coffee shop started by someone else. The upside is great — and, equally important, the downside is not as grim as it could be.   It is amazing what can be accomplished by creative and driven people in an environment characterized by stable and agreed-upon rules. The financial institutions that do most of the business lending are not run by naïfs. When big, sophisticated financial firms such as Goldman Sachs or JP Morgan lend money to a business, they know what they are getting into. (Give or take a subprime mortgage derivative or two — every company is capable of making bad investments.) They know where they sit in the pecking order of creditors and what assets are in play. They have a pretty good idea of what their exposure to loss is and how much they stand to lose or recover if things go wrong — and they know this because the rules generally are clear and well-understood, with generations of precedent and established processes. Some investors even specialize in the debt and assets of companies that are in bankruptcy or on the verge of it, and these distressed-asset investors are another unappreciated part of the vast financial ecosystem that keeps business in business.  We do not have debtors’ prisons (not for business debts, anyway), and we do not maintain arrangements in which entrepreneurs are forever ruined by a business failure. Instead, we have a process that encourages risk-taking and entrepreneurship, and that allows financial institutions, lenders, and investors to make decisions in a stable policy environment under which the rights and obligations of all parties are clearly defined.   Doing violence to those arrangements would impose a great social loss on our people and our economy, even if relatively few of us understood or appreciated it. And we have developed a dangerous new habit of risking just that. We see it in political shenanigans ranging from the thuggish arm-twisting of the Obama administration during negotiation of the GM and Chrysler bailouts (in which the usual rules of creditor priority were upended in the interest of Barack Obama’s political allies) to Mitch McConnell’s recent suggestion, uncharacteristically boneheaded, that bankruptcy procedures be extended to the states, which have put themselves into impossible financial positions by habitually underfunding their pension systems and taking on other unfunded liabilities.  
 About the latter case: There is no such thing as state bankruptcy law in the United States for excellent constitutional and practical reasons; states deal with their creditors under a different set of rules, also longstanding, and creditors and debtors both have the right to negotiate settlements under the rules that governed the agreement when it was made rather than under a new set of rules put into place for political reasons by Senator McConnell and his colleagues. Pulling the rug out from underneath creditors, changing the rules in the middle of the game, is precisely the wrong policy. We have far too much ad-hocracy as it is.  Political actors often seek to intervene on behalf of politically important debtors — and sometimes, though less often, on behalf of creditors — in the belief that they can offer financial relief to an important constituency at no cost to anybody they care about, only “greedy” bankers and the like. What they refuse to acknowledge is that investors and lenders will remember getting screwed and will be forced to alter their calculations to reflect the fact that the rules are not always the rules — they may not be able to do anything about the transaction immediately at hand, but they can certainly take the new reality into account the next time somebody asks them for a loan or an investment. More risk to lenders means less lending or more expensive lending, which means less entrepreneurship, which means a less fruitful and dynamic economy, fewer jobs, lower wages, and diminished tax collections — lost opportunity and lost prosperity. Bankruptcy is one of Chesterton’s fences. Of course there is room for reform. But you should understand what you have, what purpose it serves, and how it works before you knock it down. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					O
				ngoing attempts to tackle COVID-19 have provided conservatives with more opportunities to criticize “Big Tech.” Regrettably, like complaints about Silicon Valley’s alleged anti-conservative bias, criticisms of efforts to clamp down on COVID-19 misinformation and anti-lockdown protests betray a misunderstanding of Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act and include proposals that would result in less online speech.  Governors across the country have issued a range of COVID-19 executive orders, imposing social-distancing guidelines, postponing elections, and mandating businesses closures. The prospect of spending months on end unemployed, unable to socialize, and stuck at home with the kids has understandably prompted widespread anxiety and anger. People all over the world have taken to social-media sites to complain about the orders, propose remedies, initiate protests, and spread conspiracy theories. It was only a matter of time before Big Tech’s content-moderation policies and Section 230 — which protects websites big and small from civil liability for most of the content posted by users — were in the crosshairs. Some of the largest social-media firms took steps to remove content that ran afoul of state social-distancing orders, including protests against the orders themselves. Unfortunately, attacks on Big Tech and Section 230 have revealed misunderstandings of both legislation and the fundamentals of free speech. As COVID-19 spread, Silicon Valley giants amended their content-moderation policies. In March, Google and Alphabet CEO Sundar Pichai published an announcement outlining COVID-19 updates. Pichai noted that YouTube, which Google owns, had removed thousands of misleading COVID-19 videos.  The same month, Twitter broadened its definition of harm in an attempt to combat content that “goes directly against guidance from authoritative sources of global and local public health information.” Twitter’s policy change targets misleading health information rather than the organization of protests, and while users have taken to Twitter to organize such gatherings, it is not best known as a venue for event organization.  
 Facebook, however, is well known as a platform for organizing events. Many Americans who object to stay-at-home orders have used Facebook to organize protests. Facebook has removed event listings promoting gatherings understood to violate state-mandated social-distancing guidelines. In effect, Facebook has eased the enforcement of stay-at-home orders by denying its event-organization software to anti-lockdown protestors. These changes in content-moderation policies have prompted commentary from conservatives that ranges from the misinformed to the outright histrionic.  Among the more bizarre comments are those from Breitbart editor Alex Marlow, who called Facebook’s decision with respect to moderating COVID-19 content “Orwellian,” proving once again that Orwell can always be used as a cudgel in any political debate by those who don’t understand Nineteen Eighty-Four (or anything else George Orwell wrote). Conservative commentator Dan Eberhart also took to Twitter to complain about Facebook, noting, “We have a constitutional right to assembly, and that right doesn’t go away regardless of whether it is actually safe to do so or not.”  Senator Joshua Hawley (R., Mo.), responding to news that Facebook had removed content associated with anti-lockdown protests in California, New Jersey, and Nebraska, asked, “Because free speech is now illegal in America?” Fox News commentator Tucker Carlson has also been critical of content-moderation policies relating to COVID-19, describing as a ban on dissent YouTube’s decision to remove footage of two doctors questioning the severity of COVID-19 and California’s response to the pandemic. These comments all betray a misunderstanding of how free speech is supposed to work in a liberal democracy.  A functional freedom of speech requires freedom of association. The freedom of National Review to decline an op-ed submission is as important a freedom as the freedom of the author to write the op-ed. Similarly, Facebook’s leadership are free to disassociate from content they find unconducive to their business or irresponsible to host, whether it is pornography, beheading videos, or COVID-19 misinformation. For Facebook to make such decisions is not “Orwellian” in the slightest, nor does it impact freedom of speech. Those who wish to spread the content that Facebook bans are still free to do so. Contrary to what Senator Hawley and Mr. Eberhart suggest, Facebook’s content-moderation policies do not harm the freedom of assembly or freedom of speech. The Internet is much more than Silicon Valley’s giants. Facebook and Twitter might be household names, but there are other websites that allow for content sharing. BitChute is a video-sharing site that emerged in response to YouTube’s content-moderation decisions, and the social-media website Gab allows for much of the content banned by Facebook and Twitter. Even if these services didn’t exist, your right to speak would not impose any duties on firms to host your speech. Nor do content-moderation policies reveal a need to amend Section 230. In fact, these debates highlight confusions about Section 230 and illustrate that proposals for reform would curtail online speech.   These confusions have prompted misguided policy proposals. Recently, Deroy Murdock wrote an article for National Review Online stating that Big Tech companies had to make a choice between being public fora or private entities similar to newspapers. These companies must make no such choice, despite what Murdock thinks. Murdock went on to argue that Big Tech companies shouldn’t be allowed to engage in content moderation while also enjoying Section 230 protection. Murdock’s policy proposal reveals a misunderstanding of why Section 230 was necessary. He would like Section 230 protections to be contingent on websites allowing “material of every hue.” Under such a regime, websites would be plunged into a dilemma: either allow “material of every hue” (pornography, footage of animals being crushed to death, racist rhetoric, etc.) and enjoy liability protection, or screen every comment or photo before it goes live in order to avoid lawsuits. Allowing “material of every hue” results in an Internet that the vast majority of users don’t want; screening every piece of content would kill online speech as we know it. Ironically, Murdock’s proposal would result in far less online speech. We’ve been here before. In fact, this dilemma is what spurred Section 230’s creation in the first place. Congress passed Section 230 in 1996 as a way to solve this so-called “moderator’s dilemma.”  In 1991, a federal judge held that the Internet-service provider CompuServe, which did not engage in moderation of the alleged defamatory content at issue, was “the functional equivalent of a more traditional news vendor.” As such, it could not be held liable for user-generated content. In 1995, a New York Supreme Court judge held that, because an Internet-service provider did moderate content, it was the publisher of a user’s content. The dilemma for the burgeoning Internet industry was clear: engage in no content moderation and be considered a distributor, or moderate content and be considered a publisher. Section 230 solved the dilemma by stating that interactive computer services are not the publishers of user-generated content and are free to moderate content in whatever way they desire. Despite what many on the political right seem to think, Section 230 does not distinguish between publishers and platforms, does not say anything about so-called “public forums,” and does not hold that content moderation makes a website such as Facebook the publisher of third-party content. Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, and many others made the prudent business decision not to use the First Amendment as their content-moderation guideline. With billions of people using these companies’ products, it shouldn’t be surprising that their content-moderation policies will sometimes irritate and anger some of their users. But such irritation should not prompt proposals that are contrary to the principles of free speech and risk destroying the Internet of today that — while far from perfect — remains the best venue for speech in history. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he least expected consequence of COVID-19 in the education realm will be the vast expansion of educational choices. Come August/September, and possibly sooner, millions of American parents will have to decide whether to send their children “back to school” in the traditional sense; whether to send them to the same brick-and-mortar school or a different one; whether instead to keep them at home, engaged in “virtual” instruction (and new, often improvised forms of “home schooling”); or whether to opt for a hybrid arrangement that sees them in school some of the time and learning at home (or elsewhere) the rest of the time.  Not all of those alternatives will be available everywhere, of course, and what’s available to a given family may change as schools and districts revise their offerings, adapt to changing circumstances, and perhaps develop new delivery options. States will have to change their rules and tracking systems, too. But the fact remains that millions of families that believed they had a stable (if not necessarily perfect) schooling arrangement for their daughters and sons and saw no reason (or perhaps no opportunity) to make choices will now be able — and very likely forced — to do so. We’ve already seen schools in Denmark and a few other places reopening under very different regimens. If social distancing in the classroom means, for example, that only one third or half as many students as before can be accommodated “in school” at the same time, the rest will remain home, perhaps on alternate days or in split shifts, but in any case with much more of their learning having to occur outside the usual classroom setting. While that arrangement may not be offered as a choice for some families, we’re also seeing — in Denmark and elsewhere — apprehensive parents exercising the option of keeping their kids at home full time even when the schoolhouse doors were open to them.  In the U.S., as schools struggle to resume, some 5 million students already have an underlying condition that deepens their vulnerability, and many more have parents (or others in the household) with such conditions. It’s unimaginable that districts will require them to reenter school buildings, no matter how sanitized and socially distanced. Scads more parents simply won’t take the risk of classroom-based education — nor can I picture a second-grade classroom in which those seven-year-olds are successfully separated from one another at all times. It’s equally unimaginable that parents who opt to keep their little ones at home will be denied other learning opportunities — or prosecuted for violating their state’s attendance law. They will have to be given choices, which means schools and districts will have to deliver instruction in more than one format while flexing a hundred rules and standard practices.  
 That will transform the burdens and responsibilities on schools and districts as we know them, but it will also change the relationship between schools and families. The “one best system,” as education historian David Tyack famously termed it, will become more like a multimedia education-delivery system. Most schools and districts will find this difficult and upsetting, and the unions and other vested interests will push back as best they can, but for parents and kids it opens new opportunities, much of it in the realms of “virtual choices” and “course choices” rather than, as classically defined, choices among brick-and-mortar buildings.  At a minimum, school systems will have to offer some form of full-time on-line instruction to stay-at-home pupils, as most of them have been struggling — with mixed results — to do in recent weeks. They may attempt to do it themselves, perhaps deploying at-risk teachers who also work remotely. They may team up in consortia. They could also outsource it to one or more of the zillion extant for-profit and non-profit vendors of virtual schooling. But why not go further? Once one opts to keep a child at home, why confine her learning opportunities to what’s offered by her district of residence? There will be huge demand to get better or more varied curricula and higher-quality pedagogy or greater flexibility from the next district over or one across the state — or from distant education providers chosen by parents rather than district bureaucrats. And why does it all have to come from the same place? What about getting some of that child’s curriculum from a charter school, a private school, a non-profit (such as Khan Academy), or a specialized for-profit firm, such as Apex Learning? From the YMCA or a summer camp or the public library? Home-based schooling may come to resemble “ordering in” from whatever restaurant or delivery service suits you tonight — and different members of the family may want to order different things from different places. You don’t limit your child’s clothing options to what’s on offer at the nearest Gap, not when Amazon is a click or two away. Why limit learning?    Messy and complex indeed, and getting it to work smoothly will require myriad changes in how school dollars flow, in how “attendance” is defined and measured, in how curricular and graduation requirements are applied, in how student learning is appraised, and in how “accountability” works. States will be as much involved as districts in navigating this new world of education options and the rules that govern it. Parents will need ample information and sources of advice in dealing with it all. The challenges on all sides will be many. But so will the opportunities to do school differently and to adapt one’s schooling to one’s preferences, priorities, and anxieties. Once loosed from the traditional confines, it’s hard to picture the schooling genie ever being shoved back into the old bottle. 

Neil Ferguson is the British academic who created the infamous Imperial College model that warned Boris Johnson that, without an immediate lockdown, the coronavirus would cause 500,000 deaths and swamp the National Health Service. Johnson’s government promptly abandoned its Sweden-like “social distancing” approach, and Ferguson’s model also influenced the U.S. to make lockdown moves with its shocking prediction of over two million Americans dead.  Johan Giesecke, the former chief scientist for the European Center for Disease Control and Prevention, has called Ferguson’s model “the most influential scientific paper” in memory. He also says it was, sadly, “one of the most wrong.” With all of his influence, it’s not surprising British media are making a great deal about Ferguson being forced to resign from the government’s virus advisory board yesterday after revelations he had violated lockdown rules he had championed in order to conduct an affair with a married woman. Ferguson admits he made an “error of judgement and took the wrong course of action.” Ferguson’s hypocritical violation of his beloved lockdown was the least of his errors in judgment. His incompetence and insistence on doomsday models is far worse.  Elon Musk calls Ferguson an “utter tool” who does “absurdly fake science.” Jay Schnitzer, an expert in vascular biology and a former scientific direct of the Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center in San Diego, tells me: “I’m normally reluctant to say this about a scientist, but he dances on the edge of being a publicity-seeking charlatan.”  Indeed, Ferguson’s Imperial College model has been proven wildly inaccurate. To cite just one example, it saw Sweden paying a huge price for no lockdown, with 40,000 COVID deaths by May 1, and 100,000 by June. Sweden now has 2,854 deaths and peaked two weeks ago. As Fraser Nelson, editor of Britain’s Spectator, notes: “Imperial College’s model is wrong by an order of magnitude.” Indeed, Ferguson has been wrong so often that some of his fellow modelers call him “The Master of Disaster.” Ferguson was behind the disputed research that sparked the mass culling of eleven million sheep and cattle during the 2001 outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease. Charlotte Reid, a farmer’s neighbor, recalls: “I remember that appalling time. Sheep were left starving in fields near us. Then came the open air slaughter. The poor animals were panic stricken. It was one of the worst things I’ve witnessed. And all based on a model — if’s but’s and maybe’s.”  In 2002, Ferguson predicted that, by 2080, up to 150,000 people could die from exposure to BSE (mad cow disease) in beef. In the U.K., there were only 177 deaths from BSE.  In 2005, Ferguson predicted that up to 150 million people could be killed from bird flu. In the end, only 282 people died worldwide from the disease between 2003 and 2009. In 2009, a government estimate, based on Ferguson’s advice, said a “reasonable worst-case scenario” was that the swine flu would lead to 65,000 British deaths. In the end, swine flu killed 457 people in the U.K. Last March, Ferguson admitted that his Imperial College model of the COVID-19 disease was based on undocumented, 13-year-old computer code that was intended to be used for a feared influenza pandemic, rather than a coronavirus. Ferguson declined to release his original code so other scientists could check his results. He only released a heavily revised set of code last week, after a six-week delay. So the real scandal is: Why did anyone ever listen to this guy?  Editor’s Note: This post originally claimed that Ferguson had predicted that 150,000 people could die from foot-and-mouth disease. In fact, that figure was Ferguson’s upper-bound estimate of deaths for mad-cow disease by 2080. It has been corrected and we regret the error.  

Yuval Levin has (as he mentioned) outlined one way of thinking about how the federal government should and should not help the states through the current crisis. Robert Inman and David Skeel have laid out another. Both approaches strike me as intelligent ways of helping the states do what they need to do in a national emergency while not wasting federal dollars or rewarding states for irresponsibility; either would be better than what the political process will probably give us.  

In 2012, a Pakistani woman named Walaiha Arafat was accused of desecrating the Koran. Court documents claim that Arafat was found sleeping atop pages of the Islamic scripture, prompting her arrest on blasphemy charges. Arafat was detained for almost 42 months in Central Jail Lahore, a detention facility in the province of Punjab, before being released on bail in what amounted to a rare display of leniency from the nation’s supreme court.  New York treats its blasphemers better than Pakistan does, but neither society seems eager to tolerate those who offend its most basic religious convictions. Since the coronavirus pandemic began, the volunteers for Samaritan’s Purse, an Evangelical relief organization run by the televangelist Franklin Graham, have been the most notable heretics in New York City. After weeks of protest from the city’s diversity clerics, the volunteers are at last collapsing the group’s field hospital, disinfecting its tents, and leaving New York City in apparent disgrace. In two weeks, the volunteers will return home, shunned by the city whose sick they treated free of charge without regard to race, religion, or sexual preference. The city officials who usher them out offer the group nothing but scorn: A statement released by New York City council speaker Corey Johnson instructed Samaritan’s Purse to leave Central Park, calling the group’s presence in the city “an affront to our values of inclusion.” New York is an inclusive city, he says: Get the hell out.  The demonstrations outside the Samaritan’s Purse COVID-19 field hospital have been covered, perhaps too closely. Many of the protesters were clearly disturbed. Their anger at an innocuous group of religious volunteers provided a window into some of the excesses of LGBT politics and the desperation for enemies in a moment in history when enemies are scarce. But the protesters were a small, if vocal, group without much pull. The way in which the presence of Samaritan’s Purse has exercised the organs of government, however — the city council, the mayor’s office, and even the federal government — is another issue entirely. As the volunteers prepare to depart, it is worth pondering what this entire debacle says about the state of religion and culture in New York City.  
 It is now clear — if it wasn’t before — that the leaders of our cultural revolution are not interested in coexisting with their perceived enemies. So appalled were the city’s leaders by the mere presence of volunteers with traditionalist views on marriage and sexuality that they refused their help in the middle of a lethal pandemic. Johnson conceded that the “battle against COVID-19 is still ongoing,” and the city “still needs support” in defeating the virus. Even with lives on the line, Johnson resolved that “a city that values diversity and compassion for all” could not, in effect, defile itself by coexisting with the ideologically unclean. Metaphors abound, but practically speaking, what message are Johnson and New York’s elected officials sending to the observant Jews, Christians, and — yes — Muslims in the city who hold beliefs identical to those espoused by Samaritan’s Purse? One marvels at the abuse of language by protesters and elected officials. State senator Brad Hoylman, for instance, claimed that the city’s mere “association with Franklin Graham and Samaritan’s Purse” inflicted “reputational harm with LGBTQ New Yorkers and the wider public.” The suggestion that Samaritan’s Purse — an organization that brought volunteers to the front lines of a collapsing hospital system at no charge to the city — was somehow inflicting harm on New York was remarkable. The “harm,” here, was forcing LGBTQ New Yorkers to endure the thought that somewhere in the city of New York, someone might have had an opinion about their sex lives.  In this telling, the charity’s offense was requiring its volunteers to affirm the Samaritan’s Purse statement of faith, which contained blasphemous views on LGBT issues. New York City effectively banished Samaritan’s Purse for failing to adhere to its own de fide commitments.  Most striking was Johnson’s decision to defend “inclusion” and “diversity” by excluding those with unfashionable views from the city. This Orwellian sense of “inclusion” recalls Herbert Marcuse’s essay on “repressive tolerance” — a defense of a “liberating tolerance” that requires “intolerance against movements from the Right and toleration of movements from the Left” to facilitate “progress in civilization” (my emphasis). G. K. Chesterton said that the “thought that stops thought” was “the only thought that ought to be stopped.” German political theorists from Karl Loewenstein onward have spoken of streitbare Demokratie: militant democracy, the notion that the liberal (or “inclusive”) order requires taking illiberal (or “exclusive”) action against those who would subvert it. Would-be excluders must themselves be excluded for inclusion’s sake. In a 1968 postscript to “Repressive Tolerance,” Marcuse wrote, There are issues where either there is no “other side” in any more than a formalistic sense, or where “the other side” is demonstrably “regressive” and impedes possible improvement of the human condition. To tolerate propaganda for inhumanity vitiates the goals not only of liberalism but of every progressive political philosophy. The ill-treatment of Samaritan’s Purse and its selfless volunteers demonstrates that officials in New York no longer view the “other side” of the marriage and sexuality debates as anything but obstacles to the “inclusive” society — a goal apparently more precious even than the lives of New York City’s COVID patients. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				s it time to start worrying about inflation? For some observers, the answer is an emphatic yes. They fear the drastic steps policymakers are taking to keep the economy afloat during the COVID-19 crisis are pushing government finances to a tipping point, one where soaring inflation will once again rear its ugly head.  It is true that the stock of marketable treasury securities is likely to reach $21 trillion this year, causing our national debt to exceed the size of the economy. The Federal Reserve, meanwhile, is expected to expand its balance sheet to almost $10 trillion this year as it buys up vast amounts of assets and backstops almost every major market. It is understandable that these extraordinary developments should cause some to worry that inflation is about to surge. Financial markets, however, are telling a very different story. Interest rates on long-term treasury bonds are at record lows, indicating expectations of low inflation over the next decade. Similarly, the value of the dollar against a broad basket of currencies has risen and remains elevated. These and other market indicators suggest that declining rates of inflation lie ahead. For market participants, then, the real threat they see posed by the COVID-19 crisis is the emergence of disinflationary pressures. This outcome may seem counterintuitive given the runup in public debt, but it is a natural consequence of at least three crisis-related developments that significantly raise the demand for treasury securities and other dollar-denominated assets.  Twice Bitten, Super Shy   
 The first one is that the COVID-19 pandemic has spawned a generation of more risk-averse investors. Studies have shown that individuals that experience sharp recessions are more cautious with investments over their lifetimes. They tend to hold fewer stocks in their portfolios and invest more in safe assets like U.S. treasury securities. They also tend to save more overall. Millennials, in particular, have now experienced the Great Recession of 2007-2009 and the COVID-19 recession. These two painful experiences should push them to invest more in safe assets than otherwise would be the case. This increased risk aversion by Millennials, the next big cohort in advanced economies, will add further pressure to the already heightened demand for safe assets coming from an aging Boomer generation, emerging markets, and financial regulations. This existing demand for safe assets is one reason why interest rates on long-term U.S. treasury bonds remain very low despite the large runup in public debt this year. It also helps explain low inflation, since the increased demand for safe assets means less spending. A new generation of more risk-averse investors will add to this already elevated demand for safe assets and create additional disinflationary pressure that will be with us for some time.  Federal Reserve Branch Banking  The second development that should increase disinflationary pressures is that the Fed has taken steps that have permanently increased the demand for dollars abroad. This increased demand for dollars, in turn, creates additional revenue for the U.S. government since it can produce dollars at virtually no cost. The dollars, in turn, can be sold to foreigners for real goods and services. The revenue, called seigniorage, allows the U.S. government to run larger deficits without generating inflation. So how did the Fed pull this off? It did so by opening up its balance sheet to foreign central banks in two steps. First, it expanded who could have access to dollar swap lines from five to fourteen countries. These swap lines allow nations to temporarily swap their currency for dollars. Second, the Fed set up a new facility that allows foreign central banks to temporarily trade U.S. treasury securities they hold for U.S. dollars. The Fed, in short, effectively set up temporary branch offices in central banks around the world by granting them access to its balance sheet.  This access allows foreign central banks to provide dollars to their economies when the demand for dollars spike, as they have during this crisis. Dollars are widely used overseas, even in advanced economies, and its use makes more foreign economies susceptible to financial crises. Banks in Europe, for example, have large dollar liabilities on their books. Consequently, during a financial panic these banks demand more dollars, but the European Central Bank (ECB) cannot create new dollars to help them out. The ECB can, however, temporarily trade euros or U.S. treasuries it owns to the Fed for dollars and, in turn, lend them out to these European banks. This access provides temporary dollar liquidity to distressed banks outside the United States. The Fed provided this same access in the 2008 crisis, but on a smaller scale. The fact that the Fed has opened up and expanded this dollar access to the world sends a strong signal to foreign investors. It tells them that it is okay to hold more dollars in their portfolios since the Fed will reopen its temporary branch offices should another financial crisis arise in the future. The Fed does this to prevent dollar runs abroad from bleeding into the U.S. economy. In so doing, though, it has actually strengthened the demand for dollars abroad and increased the future flow of seigniorage to the U.S. government.   Biggest Kid on the Block Got Stronger  The third development is that the COVID-19 crisis should actually strengthen the role of the U.S. financial system in the global economy and, in turn, further bolster the demand for dollar-denominated assets. This outcome may appear contrary to the financial stress observed over the past few months, but it is likely given the outsized role played by the U.S. financial system and the Fed’s support of it during the crisis. Consider the role the U.S. financial system plays in the global economy. It issues a large amount of dollar-denominated assets to a world craving reserve-currency assets. The figure below, taken from the U.S. Financial Accounts, shows liquid assets exported to foreigners was about $18 trillion at the end of 2019. These assets range from super-safe currency, treasury, and GSE securities to relatively safe repos, commercial paper, and corporate bonds.  As the main supplier of dollar assets to the world, the stability of the U.S. financial system is paramount to investors abroad. This crisis, though initially disruptive to financial activity, should ultimately serve to improve the stability of the U.S. financial system because it prompted the Fed to backstop almost all the major U.S. markets. The Fed also backstopped markets in 2008, but this time the support is much broader and includes repo markets, money markets, commercial paper, municipal securities, commercial mortgage-backed securities, and corporate bonds. The use and expansion of the Fed facilities to backstop markets sends another strong signal to foreign investors that the U.S. financial system will not fail. This will encourage them to hold more dollar-denominated assets issued in America. Put differently, the biggest kid on the financial block just got stronger. To be clear, the U.S. financial system is not the only producer of dollar-denominated assets. The Bank for International Settlements reports there are about $12 trillion of dollar-denominated securities issued outside the United States. The next figure shows that this source of dollar funding combined with those dollar assets issued from the U.S. financial system together total about 30 trillion of relatively liquid dollar assets outside the United States.  For the reasons outlined above, this number is likely to grow over the next decade and further impede any contender to the dollar as reserve currency of the world. It is hard to imagine any other currency scaling up in size enough to compete with the $30 trillion of relatively liquid dollar-denominated assets outside the United States. This dollar monopoly by itself creates self-reinforcing growth toward more dollar use since investors want to hold, all else being equal, assets denominated in the most liquid currency. Economic Implications  These three developments — heightened risk aversion, Fed branch banking, and a stronger Fed backing of the U.S. financial system — should further increase global demand for dollar-denominated assets. Demand was already high for such assets prior to the COVID-19 crisis and explain why President Trump could run such large budget deficits in 2018-2019 without causing inflation or interest rates to rise. While forecasting is fraught with danger, this added demand is likely to persist and exceed the increased issuance of U.S. public debt and other dollar-denominated assets for some time. This understanding is consistent with what financial markets are now telling us. The COVID-19 crisis, in short, has intensified an excess demand problem for the global medium of exchange. This has several implications for the U.S. economy. First, the dollar is likely to stay overvalued and spur ongoing U.S. trade deficits with the rest of the world. Second, the unmet demand for dollar-denominated assets will keep interest rates low and push the U.S. government toward more budget deficits. Finally, this phenomenon will probably create additional disinflationary pressures in the U.S. economy. So, while there are reasons for concern over some of what the Fed is doing, we are far away from inflation rearing its ugly head again. Disinflation is a far more likely outcome over the next decade. Moreover, worrying about inflation now could prove harmful if it causes policymakers to take their focus off keeping the economy afloat while the public-health battle is being fought. We are in the midst of what is likely to be the deepest recession in U.S. history. This recession should be our main worry for now. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				 have precisely zero envy for anyone trying to predict where the COVID-19 pandemic is headed. There’s a ton we don’t know about how quickly the virus spreads under different conditions, what new treatments will appear, how policy will change in the future, and how well the public will practice social distancing during the summer regardless of policy. Even the world’s top epidemiologists cannot be expected to give us more than educated guesses that are based on reasonable, clearly explained assumptions — and that improve as new information comes in.  Some of those guesses can be quite valuable even as they’re quite uncertain. Given the massive funding behind it and the faith placed in it by the now-moribund White House Coronavirus Task Force, I once hoped that the COVID-19 model from the University of Washington Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) would prove to be one such valuable tool. But those hopes have been dashed: The model simply doesn’t work, and the folks behind it are still futzing with its fundamental workings as the pandemic enters its least predictable phase. During this crucial period when the country is reopening, we can have no faith in the model’s output. It shouldn’t be used to inform policymaking decisions at all. This isn’t to slight the scientists who took on such a difficult task; it’s just a realistic assessment of how the project turned out. *    *    * When modeling epidemics, scientists typically try to simulate the way a virus spreads: exponentially at first, because each infected person interacts with many other vulnerable individuals, and then slowing down as the population either gains immunity or takes deliberate steps to reduce transmission. This process can be modeled in very general terms, or by simulating the specific interactions and infections of millions of people as the Imperial College COVID-19 model does. Either way, the result’s utility is limited by the fact that researchers had to make a bunch of assumptions to arrive at it. Exactly how quickly does the disease spread when left unchecked? How much do people reduce their interactions when advised or legally required to practice social distancing? Which types of interactions are most dangerous? Different answers to these questions can yield very different modeling results.  The IHME model was meant to sidestep that issue. Rather than re-creating the underlying processes through which a disease spreads, it looked at what had actually happened in other countries during this pandemic. It “fit a curve” connecting trends in the U.S. with trends in other places, showing us where we’d end up if things worked out the same way as they had for those places.  There were some hiccups almost immediately: Early IHME estimates were of 100,000 to 200,000 deaths, but the number soon dropped to 80,000 and then even lower. As I pointed out at the time, at least some of these revisions were easily justified. The researchers were getting important new data — including death trends from countries whose pandemics had recently peaked and updated information about how many Americans were hospitalized for each death that occurred. Models should change when better information comes in. That’s how they’re calibrated to make better predictions in the future.  
 Unfortunately, it turned out that the model had far deeper problems than incomplete information. One was that, when fitting those curves, it operated under an assumption that states’ curves would generally be symmetrical — that deaths would fall as quickly as they had risen. There is no reason this has to be the case, and indeed, imposing a specific shape like this undermines the entire point of drawing on other places’ experiences to see where we could end up.  Another problem was that the damn thing simply didn’t work. It wasn’t and isn’t some conspiracy to over- or under-predict the toll of COVID-19; it just has not been very accurate. Last month, a group of researchers pointed out that the model was failing to make even the shortest-term predictions accurately at the state level. Its guesses were so far off that even its “95 percent” intervals didn’t include the correct value 70 percent of the time. The group updated its paper a few weeks later, finding that the predictions were no better in later versions of the model (though the accompanying intervals had widened, so they included the correct number far more often). The IHME model’s national-level predictions weren’t quite that bad, but at one point they ticked down to about 60,000. We’re already at 70,000 today. *    *    * We are now entering the least predictable phase of the pandemic. The weather is warming up, some states are officially reopening, and plenty of individuals are venturing out into the world more. Ideally, by this point a model would be well-tested, refined, and ready to face new challenges. Instead, the IHME model was completely overhauled this week, with the death projections doubling in the process.    Remember above, where I mentioned how other models start with an understanding of how a disease spreads and simulate what happens from there? The new version of the IHME model is a “multi-stage hybrid” that works in elements of that approach. And that’s just a part of what one professional modeler calls an “eye-glazing list of changes.” Another of those changes will allow the death rate to fall more slowly than previously assumed. These changes very well may be improvements. Hell, at this point there’s nowhere to go but up. But the old version of the model didn’t work, and trusting the brand-new version at such a crucial time is too much to ask. 

President Trump on Wednesday announced he would not disband the White House coronavirus task force, following confirmation on Tuesday that his administration was considering the option. “I thought we could wind it down sooner,” Trump told reporters. “But I had no idea how popular the task force is until actually yesterday when I started talking about winding down.”  Vice President Mike Pence on Tuesday confirmed reports that officials were considering winding down the activities of the task force within several weeks. Instead, the administration will continue to coordinate health policy while advocating for a partial opening of the U.S. economy, a White House official told the New York Times. “There will be a complete continuity of medical relief operations, led by FEMA, HHS, and CDC, as coordinated by the White House…We recognize there will be medical challenges on the road ahead and we’re fully prepared to continue meeting those challenges head on,” the official said. “At the same time, the White House is engaging in a dual track effort focused on safely reopening the economy,” the official added. “There is…a tremendous risk in Americans not being permitted to work, not being able to support their families and facing mounting unpaid bills…Our job will be to balance continued medical response and preparations while rebuilding our economy and helping Americans safely get back to work.”  Trump on Wednesday labeled the coronavirus an “attack” on the U.S. that dwarfed other attacks in the country’s history.  “We went though the worst attack we’ve ever had on our country,” Trump said. “This is worse than Pearl Harbor. This is worse than than the World Trade Center. There’s never been an attack like this.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Texas attorney general on Wednesday harshly criticized a decision by a Dallas County judge to sentence a woman to prison for opening up her hair salon in defiance of the state’s lockdown order. In a statement, Attorney General Ken Paxton said Shelley Luther was “unjustly jailed” for trying to feed her family and sent a letter to Dallas County State District Judge Eric Moyé calling on him to release her.  “I find it outrageous and out of touch that during this national pandemic, a judge, in a county that actually released hardened criminals for fear of contracting COVID-19, would jail a mother for operating her hair salon in an attempt to put food on her family’s table,” Paxton said in his release. “The trial judge did not need to lock up Shelley Luther. His order is a shameful abuse of judicial discretion, which seems like another political stunt in Dallas. He should release Ms. Luther immediately,” the attorney added. The salon owner was sentenced to seven days behind bars after she refused to apologize for opening her salon. She was told she could either apologize for her “selfish” actions and admit the “error of your ways,” close the salon until Friday and pay a fine — or accept a jail sentence.  “I have to disagree with you, sir, when you say that I’m selfish because feeding my kids is not selfish,” Luther told the judge. “I have hairstylists that are going hungry because they would rather feed their kids. So sir, if you think the law is more important than kids getting fed, then please go ahead with your decision. But I am not going to shut the salon.”  “As a mother, Ms. Luther wanted to feed her children,” Paxton wrote in his letter to the judge. “As a small business owner, she wanted to help her employees feed their children. Needless to say, these are laudable goals that warrant the exercise of enforcement discretion.” Governor Greg Abbot, whose lockdown order Luther defied by opening her salon, said Wednesday that he agreed with his attorney general on the matter and called her sentence an “excessive action” by the judge.  “Jailing Texans for non-compliance with executive orders should always be the last available option,” Abbot said. “Compliance with executive orders during this pandemic is important to ensure public safety; however, surely there are less restrictive means to achieving that goal than jailing a Texas mother.” Texas is set to allow salons, barber shops, and nail parlors to reopen this Friday when the governor’s lockdown order in response to the coronavirus expires.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A researcher at the University of Pittsburgh whose department says he was close to “very significant findings” about Covid-19 was killed in an apparent murder-suicide, police said. Dr. Bing Liu, a 37-year-old research assistant professor at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, was found shot dead in his home on May 2. A second man, later identified as 46-year-old Hao Gu, was also found dead in his car near Liu’s home with an apparent self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head.  Liu’s university department said in a statement that he was an “outstanding” and “prolific” researcher who was close to a breakthrough in studying Covid-19’s infection mechanism through computer models. He had been working at home during the pandemic. “Bing was on the verge of making very significant findings toward understanding the cellular mechanisms that underlie SARS-CoV-2 infection and the cellular basis of the following complications,” the statement reads. “We will make an effort to complete what he started in an effort to pay homage to his scientific excellence.” Neighbors told the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette that they did not hear any gunshots on May 2, and that Liu was not quiet and kept to himself. Ross Township Police have said they have “zero evidence” the killing was related to Liu’s work. The police department said in a statement Thursday that the deaths “were” the result of a lengthy dispute regarding an intimate partner.” Liu was married, but his wife was not home at the time of the shooting. The police added that the case was being passed on to federal authorities, because both men were not U.S. citizens.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

China’s ambassador to the United Nations revealed Wednesday that Beijing will block international investigators from examining the origins of the Wuhan coronavirus until “final victory” over the pandemic has been achieved. “The top priority, for the time being, is to focus on the fight against the pandemic until we win the final victory,” Chen Xu told reporters when asked about the status of the World Health Organization’s requests to study the origins of the virus. The WHO’s representative in China said last week that the Chinese Communist Party has blocked repeated requests from the organization to investigate.  While Xu added that China is not “allergic” to outside probes, he admitted that “for whether or how the invitation will take place, we need to have the right priority setting at this moment, and on the other hand, we need the right atmosphere.” The CCP has been accused of covering up the origins of the virus, with multiple reports detailing the timeline of Beijing’s failures in slowing the initial spread, including one study that found China could have prevented 95 percent of coronavirus infections if it had acted sooner. An intelligence dossier compiled by the Five Eyes intelligence agencies of the United States, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, and the U.K. levels multiple accusations against the Chinese government, including “the suppression and destruction of evidence . . .  the genome sequence not shared publicly, the Shanghai lab closure for ‘rectification’, academic articles subjected to prior review by the Ministry of Science and Technology and data on asymptomatic ‘silent carriers’ kept secret.”   China has countered claims of wrongdoing by claiming it is a “victim” of disinformation and trying to shift the focus to a conspiracy theory that the virus originated in the U.S. “Peddling disinformation and recrimination are by no means prescription for international anti-pandemic cooperation and should be rejected by all,” the Chinese foreign ministry tweeted last week.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A Texas judge sentenced a Dallas hair salon owner to seven days in jail and a $7,000 fine for opening the salon in defiance of lockdown orders, the local CBS affiliate reported. Judge Eric Moye told owner Shelley Luther that although her decision was “selfish,” she could avoid jail time if she apologized and admitted wrongdoing.  Moye said Luther’s statement should make clear “that you now see the error of your ways, and understand that the society cannot function where ones own belief in a concept of ‘liberty’ permits you to flaunt your disdain for the rulings of duly elected officials.” The statement would also include acknowledgement that the “proper way” to challenge a ruling would be to hire a lawyer to make that case. The judge told Shelley Luther she could avoid jail time if she apologized, admitted she was wrong, and agreed to close her hair salon until it was allowed to open. This is her response…@CBSDFW pic.twitter.com/1phdNUsLme — Andrea Lucia (@CBS11Andrea) May 5, 2020  “Judge, I would like to say that I have much respect for this court and laws,” Luther said in response. “I have to disagree with you, sir, when you say that I’m ‘selfish,’ because feeding my kids is not selfish. I have hair stylists that are going hungry because they’d rather feed their kids. So, sir, if you think the law is more important than kids getting fed, then please go ahead with your decision, but I am not going to shut the salon.” Representative Dan Crenshaw (R., Texas) criticized the judge’s ruling.  “These punishments are NOT just,” Crenshaw wrote on Twitter. “They are not reasonable. Small-minded ‘leaders’ across the country have become drunk with power. This must end.” The coronavirus pandemic has forced most U.S. states to implement widespread closures of businesses and schools to mitigate the spread of the pathogen. As a result, 30 million Americans, around 18 percent of the workforce, have filed for unemployment since the start of the pandemic.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Private payrolls dropped by more than 20 million in April as the economy ground to a halt due to lockdown orders that caused businesses to close their doors and hemorrhage employees. U.S. companies lost a total of 20,236,000 jobs last month, according to data released Wednesday by the ADP Research Institute.  The total easily beats the previous record of 834,665 lost jobs in February, 2009 during the Great Recession, but is still less than the 22 million payroll drop economists predicted for April. Since state governments began implementing social distancing measures roughly six weeks ago, more than 30 million people have filed for unemployment benefits. The staggering drop in payrolls is “not a surprise,” said James Bullard, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, but he added that unemployment “can come down under double digits by year end” if economic stimulus measures are able to curb the damage and the spread of the pandemic is controlled.  Services and hospitality businesses were hit particularly hard by the social distancing measures and lockdown orders issued by many governors, with bars, restaurants, and other businesses in the sector cutting 8.6 million jobs. Manufacturing jobs dropped their payrolls by 4.3 million. Businesses with 500 or more employees saw the most losses, eliminating a total of 9 million jobs, while businesses smaller than that slashed 11.3 million positions.  Only two sectors added jobs in April: education added 28,000 positions and company and enterprise management added 6,000. The April jobs report that will be released Friday by the Labor Department is expected to be one of the most dismal ever, although the Trump administration has expressed hope that the economy could recover in the latter half of the year once businesses are allowed to reopen.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Early on in this outbreak, a Russian television station “interviewed” the coronavirus — a guy in a giant spherical virus mask/helmet and with a weird, echo-y voice, declaring he had flown in from Italy but didn’t register until 10 days later. As a deadly-crisis-generating foe, the SARS-CoV-2 virus is a frustrating enemy. It has no real face or voice. It has no headquarters to bomb or raid. It has no henchmen to capture and interrogate for intelligence. It has no persona to mock or disrespect. It cannot be taunted or insulted. It cannot be forced to the bargaining table. It has no particular goals, other than its endless appetite for reproduction. It does not make demands or issue manifestos, other than, “I am a species better equipped to survive on this planet than you are, and I will create the equivalent of suburban sprawl in your bodies and build condominiums in your lungs, because your continued ability to breathe means nothing to me.”  When something terrible happens, human beings look for someone to blame or hold responsible. When this process goes well, it’s called accountability; when this process goes badly, it’s called scapegoating. After 9/11, many of us focused our anger upon Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda. But not all of us. Some Americans chose to focus their anger against their own government. Don’t let anyone tell you that the anti-war movement of the Bush era was spurred by the decision to invade Iraq. By spring 2002, fairly large gatherings in Washington D.C. protested “US and Israeli military aggression and the Bush administration’s assault on democratic rights.” A disturbingly high number of people chose to believe that the attacks happened because of America’s alliance with Israel; the implication was that all the United States needed to do to stop future terror attacks was abandon the Jewish state. New Jersey senator Bob Torricelli focused much of his anger upon the Central Intelligence Agency for not detecting the attacks beforehand; his critics argued the organization was impeded by his own pre-9/11 demands “that placed restrictions on the CIA’s ability to recruit informers who have a criminal history.”  One aspect of the climate-change discussion is that it takes terrible natural phenomena — hurricanes, droughts, floods — and places the responsibility for those terrible disasters upon those who create a lot of carbon emissions — usually people who drive SUVs and eat meat and live the typical middle-class American lifestyle. (Certainly not celebrities, politicians, and powerful people with private jets and or who fly internationally a lot!)   Many of us would argue that the figures most responsible for our current crisis are the Chinese government authorities in Wuhan, Hubei Province, and Beijing for denying the contagiousness of the virus for weeks, threatening and silencing of doctors for telling the truth, keeping reports about the outbreak out of the Wuhan media, letting the potentially infected travel internationally, and not allowing the World Health Organization’s Epidemic Intelligence Service to enter Wuhan for weeks. (This is all separate from the question of whether the virus jumping to humans relates to some sort of mistake at either of the two laboratories in Wuhan researching coronaviruses in bats.) The Chinese government didn’t invent SARS-CoV-2, but their early decisions ensured that by late January, the rest of world would be dealing with an out-of-control global pandemic instead of a localized outbreak that could be contained by a quarantine. But some people find blaming China uncomfortable; either they’ve been conditioned to think of China as a “partner in prosperity,” or they fear any criticism of China, no matter how valid or well-supported, will inherently stir up animus towards Chinese-Americans or Asian-Americans. I suspect that in many cases, people had a longstanding worldview of who was to blame for the ills of the world, and the Chinese government wasn’t on that previous list.  So some of us choose to blame other Americans for the pandemic and its cascading catastrophic problems. President Trump is easy to blame. As one of my colleagues observed, the media is much more focused upon the future risk of coronavirus fatalities in red states than the ongoing accumulation of coronavirus fatalities in nursing homes in blue states. Bernie Sanders continues to denounce “greedy pharmaceutical companies”; he must think that the research on treatments and vaccines are being done by someone else. Sanders also contends that landlords and mortgage companies are being unreasonable for expecting rent and mortgage payments to continue during the pandemic.  Others will prefer to focus their ire white-collar urbanites working from home who are supposedly callous to the suffering of the unemployed. Bill de Blasio makes a handy scapegoat for New York’s uniquely horrific epidemic; he’s made a long list of mistakes, but even the best mayor would probably still be presiding over the most cases in the country. Some on the right contend Nancy Pelosi is worsening the crisis by refusing to reopen the House. Or the media is at fault, for allegedly “hyping” this threat. Or the police are the problem, for enforcing quarantine rules that restrict our rights.   Or we get mad at our fellow citizens for making decisions that strike us as reckless or foolish. The sudden and widespread outbreak of “Karens” is almost as frightening as the outbreak of the virus. We can’t yell at the coronavirus, so we will find someone else to yell at.  

Quite a few campaigners are taking advantage of the current pandemic to argue that it makes their point or provides an excellent opportunity to change society in the way that they would like to see. “Never let a good crisis go to waste,” as the saying goes. Even so, in the course of reading Martin Hutchinson’s excellent article in defense of the small saver (it’s up on the home page today), I was somewhat surprised to see a reference to a piece written in the Financial Times by Gary Cohn, President Trump’s former chief economic adviser. In it, Cohn, a Democrat, wrote that “if we shifted to digital, no one would carry dirty cash or coins or deal with a cheque again.” As scare stories go, that’s not bad. But quite how infectious such grubby money would actually be is up for debate. Writing for the MIT Technology Review in early March, Mike Orcutt noted this: Here’s what we know: Infectious viruses, including other coronavirus varieties, can live on inanimate surfaces (pdf) including metal, paper, and plastic for hours to days. Preliminary research indicates that the novel coronavirus can survive on cardboard for a full day, and on steel and plastic for up to three days. And laboratory-based simulations have shown (pdf) that other kinds of viruses can not only live on banknotes and coins for days but also maintain their infectiousness. But it’s not enough for the germ to survive on an inanimate surface. For virus particles on a dollar bill to infect a human, they must follow the “primary route of infection,” says Joseph Eisenberg, a professor of epidemiology at the University of Michigan. For Covid-19, it appears that people become infected by inhaling particles someone else has coughed or sneezed into the air, or by contacting a virus particle with their hand and then touching their eyes, nose, or mouth. What we don’t know, says Eisenberg, is how capable this virus is of being transmitted to humans from inanimate surfaces of any kind. The authors of a paper published last month by the Bank for International Settlements report (my emphasis added) that: Scientists note that the probability of transmission via banknotes is low when compared with other frequently-touched objects. To date, there are no known cases of Covid-19 transmission via banknotes or coins. Moreover, it is unclear if such transmission is material compared with person-to-person transmission or transmission through other objects or physical proximity. The fact that the virus survives best on non-porous materials, such as plastic or stainless steel, means that debit or credit card terminals or PIN pads could transmit the virus too. The head of the German public health institute notes that “(viral) transmission through banknotes has no particular significance”, as airborne droplets from infected individuals are the main infection risk. . . . The Bank of England has noted that “the risk posed by handling a polymer note is no greater than touching any other common surfaces such as handrails, doorknobs or credit cards” . . . The Bundesbank has advised the public that the risks of transmission through banknotes are minimal and that a sufficient supply of banknotes is guaranteed . . . To put it bluntly, there doesn’t seem to be much to Cohn’s scare story.  He, at least, has a good excuse for spreading it. In the FT article, he discloses that “he is invested in a biometrically-encrypted digital wallet and serve as an adviser to two other fintechs in this area.” He also has a bad one: the idea that people can be scared away from cash, that enabler of evildoers that just happens to be one of the last defenses of privacy and, for that matter, against negative interest rates. Cohn writes that Valdis Dombrovskis, European Commission vice-president for financial services, is trying to help the process along. He recently tweeted “Time to swap your coins for payment cards — safer for containing coronavirus.” The fact that, judging by the BIS report, there little to back up that claim doesn’t seem to bother Dombrovskis, but the EU (which is enthusiastic about the war against cash) is going to do what the EU is going to do. And this isn’t confined to the EU. Cohn: If central banks around the world created digital currencies, each person could have a segregated account. This idea is gathering steam. US Democratic Senator Sherrod Brown initially sought to include digital banking as part of the coronavirus response. He wants the US Federal Reserve to create digital dollar accounts and wallets for all citizens. If that happened, all banking would happen through a digital backbone and wallet. ATMs and bank branches, which are already closing at a rapid rate, would become obsolete. Earnings would deposit directly into an individual’s wallet and be spent directly out of it. What could possibly go wrong? Well, one thing, which Hutchinson sets out in his article, is this: The Fed has reduced rates to zero, and there are strong lobbies seeking to push them below zero, as in Europe and Japan. The main protection against this is the ability to hold cash, which at least offers a safe zero return. That is why Keynesians are trying to move us to an all-electronic payments system, in which the cash alternative would no longer be available . . . Should cash be eliminated, there would be nothing to stop “stimulators” from pushing interest rates to negative 5 percent, wiping out small savings and making speculative real-estate and private-equity investments hugely profitable. That would be inflationary — further damaging savers. Or here is what I wrote in NRODT back in 2016: In a speech last September, Andrew Haldane, the Bank of England’s chief economist, grumbled about the “constraint physical currency imposes” on setting negative interest rates. After considering various ways of dealing with this nuisance, he concluded that an “interesting solution” would be to “maintain the principle of a government-backed currency, but have it issued in an electronic rather than paper form.” This “would allow negative interest rates to be levied on currency easily and speedily.” Translation: Make people hold their cash in electronic form (and thus in banks); they will then have no means of escaping the levy on savings that negative interest rates effectively represent. Before dismissing this as a form of madness that only Europeans could embrace, check out what Harvard’s Kenneth Rogoff has been saying. Writing in the Financial Times in May 2014, he argued that replacing paper money with an electronic alternative “would kill two birds with one stone.” It would strike a blow against crime, and it would free central banks from a bind that has “handcuffed” them since the financial crisis. “At present, if central banks try setting rates too far below zero, people will start bailing out into cash.”   Indeed, they will: To its credit, the central bank of Switzerland, one of the countries now burdened with negative interest rates, has made it clear that it has no plans to junk its thousand-franc bills. It accepts that these are used as a store of value, something that Rogoff, no friend of the saver, might regard as reprehensible but the sensible Swiss do not….  “Hoarding cash may be inconvenient and risky,” wrote Rogoff in a related paper, “but if rates become too negative, it becomes worth it.” He would clearly prefer to see that emergency exit locked and the key thrown away, leaving savers helpless in the face of whatever central bankers (and not only central bankers) might dream up. We have been warned.  

Over at Vox, Kelsey Piper concludes that gain-of-function research in contagious viruses is probably too dangerous to continue: The cost-benefit analysis for pathogens that might kill the people exposed or a handful of others is vastly different from the cost-benefit analysis for pathogens that could cause a pandemic — but our current procedures don’t really account for that. As a result, allowing gain-of-function research means running unacceptable risks with millions of lives. It’s high time to rethink that. Gain-of-function research is when researchers take an existing virus or pathogen and make it more potentially dangerous — either more contagious, more likely to kill a human host, or both. No doubt some Vox readers will interpret the story as a simple Goofus-and-Gallant lesson in gain-of-function research; the Obama administration put a hold on it, and the Trump administration allowed it to continue. The increased attention to gain-of-function research is a good thing. This kind of highly controversial research — banned under the Obama administration after safety incidents demonstrated that lab containment is rarely airtight — began again under the Trump administration, and many scientists and public health researchers think it’s a really bad idea. Our brush with the horrors of a pandemic might force us to reconsider the warnings those experts have been sounding for years. Never mind that the head of the U.S. National Institutes of Health, Frances Collins, signed off on both decisions. NIH had the same bright minds, looking at the same criteria of benefits and potential risks, during both administrations; after three years of determining the best practices, NIH announced the new required safety protocols. There’s no indication that this ever even crossed President Trump’s desk. Scientists a lot smarter than me come down on both sides about whether the potential risks of gain-of-function research outweigh the potential benefits. But it seems logical that if we want scientists to learn the best way to fight contagious and deadly pathogens, they have to study samples of contagious and deadly pathogens. Studying not-so-contagious and not-so-deadly ones, and hoping the lessons learned apply universally, probably isn’t going to be quite as useful. Besides that fact, whatever the United States decides, other countries will pursue research under their own rules — and their own safety standards.  I can imagine some people wondering why anyone would want to be doing this sort of research at all — heading into caves, capturing wild bats and collecting “anal swabs” of bat guano, then studying the viruses within those samples and within the bats in controlled environments. While these actions by scientists might increase the risk of exposure to a new virus, human beings are encountering animals and other potential vectors of infection all around the world, every day.  The world has just been hit by a devastating pandemic. Even if laboratory research is how we got into this mess, laboratory research is the only way we get out of this mess. Sooner or later — hopefully later — someone on this planet is going to catch a new contagious virus. Humanity will be studying viruses for the next century; because viruses are always mutating and evolving, there will never be a lack of viruses to study. However, it is refreshing to see a Vox article quoting Thomas Inglesby, director of the Center for Health Security at Johns Hopkins, declaring that “laboratory systems are not infallible, and even in the greatest laboratories of the world, there are mistakes.” Indeed. I hope everyone who argues that a lab accident in Wuhan is impossible — not merely unlikely, but not within the realm of possibility based upon what we know now — hears him clearly.  

A lot to chew over today: why the drug hydroxychloroquine will prove to be a life-saver for some coronavirus patients and useless or even a life-ender for others; why the country needs to “embrace the suck” and be able to accept, process, and respond to bad news; why we are likely to be forced into a reopening plan that lots of Americans will vehemently dislike; and the 2020 campaign’s forgotten man.  We Need to Stop Expecting a Miracle Pill Part of the frustration in dealing with a really bad situation is a ravenous hunger for magic bullet solutions. One reader wrote in, contending that hydroxychloroquine is effective 100 percent of the time if it’s administered early enough, so why not reopen society and give everyone a prescription for hydroxychloroquine at the first sign of the virus? Chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine actually slow down parts of a patient’s immune system by “interfere with lysosomal activity and autophagy, interact with membrane stability and alter signalling pathways and transcriptional activity, which can result in inhibition of cytokine production and modulation of certain co-stimulatory molecules” — which is a jargon-heavy way of saying it makes your immune system’s cells not work as well together. People might wonder why anyone would want to take a drug that weakens their immune system. Hydroxychloroquine can be an effective drug for lupus, because with lupus, the body’s immune system becomes overactive and starts attacking healthy, normal cells. It is also used to treat arthritis, because in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, their immune system attacks the lining of their joints. With patients suffering from malaria, the parasite actually can send out “messages” that distract the body’s immune system, causing it to attack healthy red blood cells and ignore the real threat: “While the immune system is busy defending the organism against fake danger, the real infection proceeds inside red blood cells, allowing the parasite to multiply unhindered at dizzying speed. By the time the immune system discovers its mistake, precious time has been lost, and the infection is much more difficult to contain.” Hydroxychloroquine effectively calms down the immune system and along the way binds to the malaria parasite, breaking it apart.   The coronavirus identified as SARS-CoV-2 can generate a “cytokine storm” — when the body’s immune system kicks into overdrive and starts attacking healthy cells in important organs. Dr. Randy Cron, an expert on cytokine storms at the University of Alabama at Birmingham, told the New York Times last month that in about 15 percent of coronavirus patients, the body’s defense mechanism of cytokines fight off the invading virus, but then attack multiple organs including the lungs and liver, and may eventually lead to death. As the patient’s body fights its own lungs, fluid gets into the lungs, and the patient dies of acute respiratory distress syndrome.  From this, you can get a sense of how and why hydroxychloroquine might be effective in some circumstances and not others. If the patient’s immune system is strong enough to fight off the coronavirus, but is at risk of going into overdrive and setting off a cytotkine storm, administering the right amount of hydroxychloroquine might put their immune system back in the Goldilocks zone — strong enough to fight off and defeat the virus, but not so strong that it starts attacking vital organs by mistake. It’s also easy to see why we would only want people taking this drug under a doctor’s recommendation and possibly supervision — take the drug too early, and you suppress the body’s immune system just when it needs that system functioning well to fight off the invading virus. Take the drug too late, and the damage to the vital organs can’t be overcome. Tocilizumab is another immunosuppressant drug that is being used in trials to treat the coronavirus. Because President Trump hasn’t mentioned it, you’re hearing almost nothing about it, and no one is writing angry op-eds about it.  In Order to Get Through This, We Need to Be Able to Handle Bad News  “Embrace the suck” is a military slang term meaning, “The situation is bad, but deal with it.” One of the recurring points in discussing this virus over the past — ugh, has it only been three months? It feels like three years — has been American culture’s difficulty in accepting and processing bad news and responding to it. We don’t want the situation to be so terribly bad, so we either flatly insist that the situation can’t be so bad, or we look for any sign that the situation might not be as bad. In January, we saw many inaccurate reassurances that Americans should be more worried about the common flu than this new virus that emerged in Wuhan, China. Back on January 30, former Obama White House health advisor Dr. Ezekiel Emanuel told CNBC: “Everyone in America should take a very big breath, slow down, and stop panicking and being hysterical. We are having a little too much histrionics on this.” (Now Emanuel believes that Americans will not return to large events until “fall 2021 at the earliest.”) And Emanuel was far from alone in his assessment that the coronavirus was not much of a threat.  In reading the debates about the virus and how to handle the ongoing outbreak, you get the sense that some people placed bets early on and are determined to see those early assessments turn out right. Some people insist that because the CDC’s website has the official death count at 39,910 that the more commonly cited numbers from Johns Hopkins or Worldometers must be a widespread, sinister effort to overstate the virus’ toll. Never mind that right there on the CDC website, at the bottom, it says, “data during this period are incomplete because of the lag in time between when the death occurred and when the death certificate is completed, submitted to NCHS and processed for reporting purposes. This delay can range from 1 week to 8 weeks or more, depending on the jurisdiction, age, and cause of death.”  I can’t begrudge someone for recoiling from the thought that more than 71,000 Americans have succumbed to the virus. But that doesn’t mean that a smaller number must be the more accurate one, particularly when the source tells you that the data are incomplete. And for everyone reading this who jumped out of their chair eager to write me about the factors that could be contributing to an undercount or overcount, I wrote about them in the Corner yesterday. Reopening Society with Manageable, but Still Existent, Risk By the way, as much as I enjoy reminding Ezekiel of his terribly wrong early assessments, he’s also willing to tell the New York Times that a functioning American society requires some acceptance of some level of risk: Bazelon: Should we make reopening school the highest priority, even though there are going to be trade-offs, and maybe some increase in deaths? Emanuel: Well, I think as long as teachers can opt in and administrators can opt in and parents can opt in. Maybe I’m crazy, but I think a lot of parents would consider it and be willing to run some risk to themselves. He’s not crazy — or at least not on this particular point. With no enthusiasm, I contend that the United States is going to have to enact some version of the evolving plan laid out by Lanhee Chen, Bob Kocher, Avik Roy, and Bob Wachter; with additional contributions from Mark Dornauer, Gregg Girvan, and Dan Lips. (I keep calling it “the Avik Roy plan” because I know him.) I’m not going to lie to you. This plan stinks. It just happens to stink less than all of the other options. The Avik Roy plan assumes we can’t create a vaccine in the coming year, we can’t test everyone as often as we would like, and that we won’t get a miraculous treatment that mitigates the danger of the virus. You should read the whole thing — a shorter version was in the Wall Street Journal — but here’s probably the most controversial decision:  To start, states and localities should work as quickly as possible to reopen pre-K and K-12 schools. Children have a very low risk of falling seriously ill due to Covid-19, and the majority can and should return to school this academic year. Switzerland, for example, is planning to reopen schools on May 11, based on research showing that school closures were among the least effective measures at reducing European Covid-19 cases. Children who live with the elderly or other at-risk individuals should continue to stay home. Teachers and staff from vulnerable populations should stay home as well, with paid leave. School districts should immediately begin to develop virtual lesson plans for those who must remain home. (Keep in mind, some state government officials are already saying that distance learning may continue at the beginning of the school year in late August and early September.) The plan continues . . . Similarly, we should reopen workplaces to healthy, non-elderly individuals who don’t live with vulnerable people. At-risk individuals with jobs should continue to have opportunities to work from home or to receive paid medical leave. If you’re wondering about whom the plan means when they say “at-risk individuals” . . . Individuals between the ages of 40 and 65 should consider continuing to stay home if they have any underlying conditions that make them more susceptible to death or hospitalization with COVID-19, such as cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, severe asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), kidney failure, severe liver disease, immunodeficiency, and malignant cancer. It is worth noting that a large percentage of the over-40 population has one of these conditions, and so it will be essential to monitor COVID-19 cases over time for evidence that helps us narrow the categories of risk, and also evidence regarding the relationship between positive antibody tests and immunity. That’s a lot of Americans to leave working at home, continuing social distancing, avoiding groups, parties, and strangers more or less indefinitely. But some version of this is probably going to be the least-bad way to establish a sufficiently reopened society and economy, while protecting those most at risk to succumbing to the virus. ADDENDUM: Maybe it’s just me, because I’m hip-deep in medical journals these days, but . . . is anyone else periodically forgetting that Joe Biden is running for president? Like, “Oh yeah, this is a presidential election year, I forgot about that . . .”  

A Trump administration health official said in a whistleblower complaint Tuesday that top officials within the Department of Health and Human Services “pressured” him for years to award contracts based on “political connections and cronyism.” Dr. Rick Bright, former head of the Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) — the government’s top vaccine procurer — was removed from his role on April 20 and reassigned to a narrower role at the National Institutes of Health. Bright, who ran BARDA since 2016, initially said his removal stemmed from “clashes with political leadership” over his resistance to the promotion of anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine as an unproven treatment for coronavirus.  In his full 89-page complaint, Bright points to repeated clashes with his former boss, HHS assistant secretary for preparedness and response Robert Kadlec, whom Bright accuses of pushing him to secure contracts for drugs that were “not meritorious” but were personally linked to him. Bright also says he urged his superiors to take up the offer of a major U.S. manufacturer that offered to produce N-95 masks at theoutset of the pandemic, but was rebuffed. Bright’s lawyers, Debra Katz and Lisa Banks — who also represented Christine Blasey Ford — called Bright’s removal from BARDA “retaliation, plain and simple.” HHS said in a statement Tuesday that Bright’s transfer was for a “critical” role on testing.   “Dr. Bright was transferred to NIH to work on diagnostics testing — critical to combating covid-19 — where he has been entrusted to spend upwards of $1 billion to advance that effort,” HHS spokeswoman Caitlin Oakley stated. “We are deeply disappointed that he has not shown up to work on behalf of the American people and lead on this critical endeavor.” Bright told reporters on a Tuesday call that the Trump administration “was rushing blindly into a potentially dangerous situation” by accepting a donation of 3 million chloroquine pills from Bayer that were produced in India and Pakistan — “facilities that had not been inspected by the FDA.” Current and former HHS officials have pushed back on Bright’s claims, telling Politico that his reassignment was “more than a year in the making,” and that Bright supported the acquisition of tens of millions of doses of the drug he now maligns. “If Bright opposed hydroxychloroquine, he certainly didn’t make that clear from his email — quite the opposite,” said one official, who has seen copies of the internal email exchanges.  Bright included emails in his complaint showing that he preferred a “pilot” program for hydroxychloroquine rather than “a national roll out.” The FDA ultimately issued an authorization for chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine from the national stockpile that is limited to hospitalized coronavirus patients not able to participate in a clinical trial.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A federal judge on Tuesday ruled against the New York Board of Elections’ decision to cancel the state’s Democratic primary election and ordered the state to hold the election next month as planned. The preliminary injunction from Manhattan Federal Court Judge Analisa Torres requires New York to reinstate Democratic candidates on the ballot who were “duly qualified” as of April 26 and hold the election on June 23.  Democratic commissioners of the state Board of Elections canceled the primary election last week, arguing that all candidates had dropped out except former vice president Joe Biden. Former presidential candidate Andrew Yang quickly sued over the decision, saying the move “denies voters the right to vote” and prevents former 2020 candidates like Senator Bernie Sanders from picking up delegates. “They will be deprived of the right to cast a vote for an otherwise qualified candidate and the political views expressed by that candidate,” the judge wrote.  Torres’s decision puts Yang and Sanders back on the ballot along with eight other former contenders for the Democratic nomination. “I’m glad that a federal judge agreed that depriving millions of New Yorkers of the right to vote was wrong,” Yang said of the decision. “I hope that the New York Board of Elections takes from this ruling a newfound appreciation of their role in safeguarding our democracy.” Governor Andrew Cuomo had postponed the primary, which was originally scheduled for April 28, over concerns about spreading the coronavirus. The board took that decision further in canceling the election altogether.  Sanders’s campaign manager Faiz Shakir on Tuesday also praised the judge’s ruling, saying it has “restored basic democracy” in the state. “People in every state should have the right to express their preference in the 2020 Democratic primary,” Shakir said. “We have confidence that New York can hold elections in June in a safe manner that preserves New Yorkers’ right to vote.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

At 3 P.M. New York time, I’ll be having a conversation with Fr. John Maria Devaney, O.P., a Dominican priest and chaplain with the Dominican Healthcare Friars in New York, serving in some of the hospitals serving COVID-19 patients. We’ll talk about his experience these past weeks and faith in these challenging times. This “virus-free”/virtual event is co-sponsored by The Sheen Center for Thought & Culture and the National Review Institute. You can watch on Facebook here or Youtube here.  More details here. “See” you in a bit.  

Colleges can be victimized by hackers who break into their IT systems and then demand money in exchange for opening it back up. In today’s Martin Center article, journalist Matthew Robare looks at this ugly phenomenon. Robare writes: Ransomware is a type of malicious software that, once it infects a computer system, allows attackers to lock out victims until they pay a ransom to regain access. With budgets getting tighter for public and private colleges in the wake of the coronavirus, funding IT security could slip through the cracks. K-12 systems are also vulnerable to these attacks. Computer security experts advise against paying off the attackers, but some have done so. The only solution is better security. Maybe that should be a higher priority than hiring another diversity officer. Robare concludes: As colleges become ever more reliant on the internet and the number of devices on campus increases, providing more ways for malevolent actors to cause chaos, college leaders need to consider how they’ll react in a crisis.  

Senate Republicans expressed skepticism of President Trump’s proposal of a payroll-tax cut for the next coronavirus relief bill, citing litigation protection as a much higher priority. “Right now, not much,” Senate Finance Committee chairman Chuck Grassley (R., Iowa) told Politico when asked what he thought of the president’s proposal. “I’m going to give it due consideration, if I can see a strong group of people who think it’s the right thing to do.”  “The president proposes, we dispose,” added Grassley, whose committee handles federal tax policy. Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell (R., Ky.) said that his caucus believed “if there’s any red line, it’s on litigation,” with top deputy John Thune (R., S.D.) admitting he is “not a particular fan of” Trump’s insistence on capital gains and other tax cuts. “I guess I’m open to being persuaded that it’s something that could be effective. But I think some of the things we’re currently doing are having a bigger impact,” Thune explained, with the Senate’s phase-two CARES Act already creating funds for small businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program. “The payroll tax cut only helps if you’re on the payroll.”  Senator John Cornyn (R., Texas) added that while the push for tax cuts “sounds like the beginning of a negotiation,” it is “imperative” for Republicans to pass liability protection.  Trump, who tried to get the Senate to adopt a payroll tax cut measure in March, told Fox News on Sunday that “we’re not doing anything without a payroll tax cut.” On Tuesday, the president tweeted that “Payroll Taxes, and perhaps Capital Gains Taxes, must be put on the table.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

We have known about the People’s Republic of China’s exploitation of American enterprise for years. The problem is that we have not wanted to confront it. Ever since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001, it has been a relentless and pernicious economic adversary, routinely taking advantage of the greed and weakness of American companies. We should have taken actions previously to address imbalances in our trade relationships, but we didn’t. Now the pandemic has put these issues front and center.  In early December, China knew an infectious virus had been discovered in Wuhan. It was not until December 31 that China reported to the World Health Organization (WHO) that there was a risk of human-to-human transmission of the virus. The WHO failed the world by not publishing this. However, our intelligence services briefed the president on January 3, and eleven times after that throughout January and February about the magnitude of the coronavirus threat. Nothing happened. While the world suffers from health and financial challenges, China has touted its ability to take advantage of the American economy and our weakness in trade. China controls many critical products and components of America’s supply chains. Of U.S. imports, China accounted for 95 percent of ibuprofen, 91 percent of hydrocortisone, and 80 percent of all antibiotics. Our dependence on Chinese medicine has crippled our ability to fight COVID-19 and various illnesses. This must change.  China’s scope of power goes beyond its domination of the production of everyday medications. Its exploitation of intellectual property led me to introduce the SHEET Act to prevent countries such as China from stealing technology and intelligence from educational foreign-exchange programs, a method which illustrates the Communist country’s desire to steal and misuse intellectual property from the U.S. Since China’s addition to the WTO, it has been carefully but fully abusive toward American companies and businesses. The Institute for Supply Management estimates that three-quarters of American companies report supply-chain disruptions in China. Their manipulation goes beyond supply-chains. When Marriott and Delta posted maps showing Taiwan as an independent country, China objected and demanded that they remove these maps from their websites. Sadly, both companies buckled to authoritarian China and changed their maps. As Lenin said, “the capitalists will sell us the ropes we will hang them with.”  
 How can American business and government oppose China’s outsized influence? One way is to create new supply chains and reinforce existing ones with U.S. allies in Asia, and in the Western Hemisphere and Europe. Chinese leaders do not think that our leaders and businesses have the resolve to accept higher costs in a less efficient supply chain for imported products, and we need to call their bluff. Policymakers should create new incentives for businesses to reorient supply chains away from China and disincentives for companies to invest there. A “sovereignty tax” on American investment in China, reflecting the value that U.S. companies derive from U.S. sovereignty but the damage they are doing to our strategic position by investing there, could be an example. It is worth incurring higher costs to be strategically secure.  As the pandemic abates, the U.S. and our allies should clearly and openly call out the abuses that China has perpetrated on the Western world since its admission to the WTO. The mantra of accommodation to China to mollify the PRC and slowly integrate them into existing global trade relationships has failed — or, more precisely, has worked for China but no one else. China’s leaders are repressive, they violate trade norms, and they steal intellectual property. They project hegemonic power wherever they can. We need to develop a partnership with American, European, and Asian businesses and governments to bring China’s exploitation to an end. 

The coronavirus death toll in the U.S. reached 70,110 on Tuesday afternoon. There have been almost 1,200,000 confirmed cases of coronavirus in the country, with 162,000 reported recoveries, since the start of the pandemic. Deaths from coronavirus are projected to continue to increase, although the projections have been hotly debated. Data reviewed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and reported by the New York Times on Monday projected a rate of roughly 3,000 deaths per day through June 1. However, the researcher who developed the model said on Tuesday that the data was not meant to be a prediction.  “I had no role in the process by which that was presented and shown,” researcher Justin Lessler, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins, told the Washington Post. “It was not in any way intended to be a forecast.” A small handful of U.S. states is currently moving to open some of the businesses that were shuttered in response to the pandemic. At the same time, the Trump administration is considering winding down the White House coronavirus task force in the coming weeks as the country moves to a focus on testing and vaccine development.  Amid speculation that a new wave of coronavirus may hit the U.S. again in the fall, Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, emphasized on Tuesday that testing was critical to prevent a second wave of infections.  “Shame on us if we don’t have enough tests by the time this so-called return might occur in the fall and winter,” Fauci told National Geographic.   Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The United Kingdom government scientist who advised Prime Minister Boris Johnson to put Britain on lockdown over the coronavirus outbreak has resigned following news that he violated his own social-distancing guidelines to meet his mistress. Professor Neil Ferguson, 51, had his married mistress over at his house just after he had spent two weeks in quarantine after testing positive for the coronavirus, The Telegraph reported.  Antonia Staats, 38, lives with her husband and children in another part of London and is reportedly in an open marriage. Her two visits to Ferguson’s residence occurred in late March and early April, the second even after she had confided to friends that she suspected her husband had symptoms of coronavirus. “I accept I made an error of judgment and took the wrong course of action. I have therefore stepped back from my involvement in Sage [the government’s Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies],” Ferguson told The Telegraph. “I acted in the belief that I was immune, having tested positive for coronavirus, and completely isolated myself for almost two weeks after developing symptoms,” the epidemiologist continued. “I deeply regret any undermining of the clear messages around the continued need for social distancing to control this devastating epidemic. The Government guidance is unequivocal, and is there to protect all of us.”  Before stepping down, Ferguson was part of the teams that informed and advised the government and Department of Health in particular on how to grapple with the worsening outbreak. His models of the coronavirus suggested that 250,000 people in Britain could die from being infected if social distancing measures were not put in place.  The prime minister, who survived the coronavirus himself, is scheduled to address the nation on Sunday to offer details on how to “unlock the various parts of the UK economy.” Johnson implemented lockdown measures on March 23 and said last week that it is still too early to know when social-distancing measures can be eased. He assured that plans to reopen schools and other public spaces are in the works.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Dr. Anthony Fauci, the head of the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases, dismissed the theory that the coronavirus escaped from a lab in Wuhan, China, in an interview published Monday. “If you look at the evolution of the virus in bats and what’s out there now, [the scientific evidence] is very, very strongly leaning toward this could not have been artificially or deliberately manipulated,” Fauci told National Geographic. “Everything about the stepwise evolution over time strongly indicates that [this virus] evolved in nature and then jumped species.”  While China and the World Health Organization have claimed that the coronavirus initially infected humans at an outdoor market in Wuhan, several U.S. officials have floated the possibility that the coronavirus escaped from a lab. China’s only level-4 virology lab studying highly contagious diseases, the Wuhan Institute of Virology, is located about nine miles from the market where Chinese officials claim the pandemic originated, and U.S. diplomats have warned of safety weaknesses at the Institute in the past. However, if the coronavirus was already naturally present in bats being studied in a lab, “that means it was in the wild, to begin with,” said Fauci. “That’s why I don’t get what they’re talking about [and] why I don’t spend a lot of time going in on this circular argument.” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Sunday claimed that there is “a significant amount of evidence that [the coronavirus] came from that laboratory in Wuhan.” Senator Tom Cotton (R., Ark.) has also said it’s possible that the coronavirus escaped from a Chinese lab.  “This evidence is circumstantial, to be sure, but it all points toward the Wuhan labs,” Cotton wrote in an April op-ed for the Wall Street Journal.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The only thing that can spread faster than a new disease is information. And we’re going to need good information now. The American people led the charge on social distancing and locking down before the government acted. All the data show as much: Commutes, air travel, shopping, and restaurant reservations all began to show dramatic declines in late February, before stay-at-home orders became part of our collective vocabulary. Now, the self-governing American people are leading themselves out, guidelines from the White House and instructions from state governments be damned.  Data from Apple suggest that in Georgia, 60 percent more people were back on the roads this weekend than had been in mid April. California still has non-essential businesses shut, but the cell-phone data show people are still coming out in hard-hit areas of the state. Even in New York, a rainy and miserable April gave way to inviting May sunshine, and people are beginning to go out more. In an ideal world, Americans would be going out confident in the knowledge that infections had declined significantly and a fully operating test-and-trace regime was in place to warn the exposed and quarantine the ill. As it is, neither of those things is true, and state and federal leaders still probably can’t keep the majority of Americans inside much longer. Only fear can do that. A big spike in infections and death may push people back inside despite their desperate desire to get back to normal. But the key words there are “desperate desire”: After being told they had to dramatically reorder their lives to save our health-care system, Americans who see that system surviving the initial surge of COVID-19 cases are more than ready to go out and see each other again. If the government wants to help, its public-health experts need to be appraising us of what’s actually risky and what’s not, where we can mitigate chances of infection and where we cannot. We could surely use regular, scrupulously transparent updates on the development of the scientific community’s thinking about the virus and how to respond to it.   What do public-health experts think of the growing intuition that it doesn’t spread well outside, which is driving people back to the beach? How long does it survive on soft and hard surfaces, really? Should the especially nervous cease disinfecting cardboard boxes delivered to their houses? What about the chilling anecdotes about church choirs and singing congregations? Could churches dramatically curtail risk by going instrumental, or by having virus-negative soloists rather than choirs or congregations do the singing? Can people easily spread the virus while sitting together, but not closely, on a patio or deck? Can larger groups of people who trust each other begin congregating if they follow social-distancing guidelines? Can kids playing with plastic or rubber toys transmit the virus to each other? 
 We don’t yet have a vaccine for the coronavirus, and it seems likely we’ll be waiting for one — and for a true test-trace-and-quarantine regime — for a good long while. In the meantime, it’s time for our elected officials to recognize that Americans are going out into the world again, and that they will perish for lack of good information about how to do so safely. 

Reuters: Beijing faces a wave of anti-China sentiment led by the United States in the aftermath of the pandemic and needs to be prepared in a worst-case scenario for armed confrontation between the two global powers, according to people familiar with the report’s content, who declined to be identified given the sensitivity of the matter. The report was drawn up by the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), a think tank affiliated with the Ministry of State Security, China’s top intelligence body. No doubt, the Chinese government deserves every denunciation, sanction, snub, and consequence that it gets as a result of how it handled the outbreak of the coronavirus. Grassroots outrage, throughout the world, will drive that “anti-China sentiment” and push policies in directions opposed to Beijing. But if the past few months have taught us anything, it is that a lot of powerful people in the West really want to minimize the disruption to existing Chinese relationships overseas.  Before the outbreak, Joe Biden insisted, “they’re not bad folks, folks. But guess what, they’re not competition for us.” Former Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz called China an American ally and shrugged that his company is not in “a position to proactively effect social and political change” in China. America, sure, but not China. Mike Bloomberg insists the Chinese Communist Party listens to the public, and the news organization that bears his name buried reports that could embarrass Chinese leaders. Even now, Bill Gates argues China did a lot of things right when the outbreak started and investigating China’s handling of the virus early on is a waste of time. The editor of The Lancet medical journal happily appeared on Chinese state-run media, declaring, “China isn’t responsible for this pandemic.” American media institutions regularly repeat the implausible claims of Chinese state media with bizarre credulity. Politico helpfully informs us on Twitter, “Trump is getting roasted on Chinese Twitter for his virus response” — without mentioning that Chinese social media is monitored and censored.  Just about every corner of corporate America built its long-term strategies on access to the billion Chinese in that country’s market, and basically reorganized themselves and their entire corporate culture to ensure that no little matter like concentration camps or brutal crackdowns in Hong Kong could disrupt their good relationship with officials in Beijing. A lot of elites in the West and around the world invested their fortunes and their reputations on staying on the good side of Xi Jinping.  If there is going to be a future American or Western conflict with China — militarily, proxy war, through espionage, or ideological like the Cold War — it will be one where the majority of the leaders in the West are, at best, conscientious objectors. Or they may simply decide that they prefer Beijing’s side.  

Perhaps we shouldn’t be surprised to see poll results suggesting significant numbers of Americans think the official numbers for the death toll are overestimating or underestimating the real number of fatalities from the coronavirus. Each side has at least one compelling argument in their favor. For the overcount side, some jurisdictions are counting “suspected” coronavirus deaths in their official counts. At one point, the state of Pennsylvania removed 200 “probable” deaths from their tally, about as close as any state official will ever come to resurrecting the dead. Separately, it is fair to wonder if the deaths of those, say, 85 or older with preexisting health issues really ought to be counted alongside those (thankfully rarer) victims dying in their thirties. Did the virus really kill that person? Or was it mostly driven by the preexisting heart disease, diabetes, lifelong smoking habit, and so on?  For the undercount side, the overall total of American deaths from all causes has skyrocketed since the virus hit, and that increase is considerably higher than the official number of coronavirus deaths. That jump probably reflects a combination of other factors — such as people avoiding hospitals for fear of catching the virus may be slower to call for help with signs of a heart attack or stroke — and a number of undercounted deaths. (With so many people stuck at home, it’s not a surge of car accidents.) Today, New York announced more than 1,700 previously undisclosed coronavirus deaths in nursing homes around the state. Yesterday, those people every bit as dead, but not in the official count. We have factors leading to overcount, and factors leading to undercount, but those factors probably don’t balance out equally.  One of the reasons the death count has turned into such a point of controversy is that it has turned into a proxy argument about reopening society. Pointing to a high death toll is seen as an inherent argument against loosening any of the rules about lockdowns, business closures, and social distancing.  What if I told you . . . that there is going to be a heartbreakingly high death toll from the coronavirus and its consequences, no matter what path we choose from here on out? And that the choice before elected officials, business leaders, and ordinary citizens is not to find the option that won’t increase the number of deaths, but that will increase the number of deaths the slowest? The United States has been enduring between 1,153 and 2,683 deaths per day since April 1. There are 26 days left in May. If we have only 1,000 deaths per day from now until June 1, we’re going to hit the painful threshold of 100,000 deaths by the end of the month. If we have 1,500 deaths per day from now until June 1, we’re going to have about 109,000 deaths by the end of May.   If we have 2,000 deaths per day from now until June 1, we’re going to have about 122,000 deaths by the end of May. That Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health model that created such a stir in the past twenty-four hours warned the United States could be suffering more than 3,000 deaths each day by the end of the month. The closer each day is to that tally, the closer we get to ending May with 150,000 or so deaths. Hopefully, the death rate will start to steadily and continuously decline soon. (A lot of weeks, there is a cyclical decline of reported deaths on the weekends.) Remdesivir is going to help some. Blood plasma therapy might be another good avenue of treatment. The Food and Drug Administration says that as of April 19, there are 72 active trials of therapeutic agents and another 211 development programs for therapeutic agents in the planning stages. Our doctors and nurses know how to fight this better. But as we open society, the number of infections is inevitably going to increase. It doesn’t help that some not-so-sharp observers point to charts of the number of cases and number of deaths continuously climbing to support whatever argument they want to make. While many who catch SARS-CoV-2 will recover, they will still be counted in the case total; “cases” and “active cases” are different measurements. “Total number of cases” is always going to go up until there’s a vaccine or herd immunity, and then it will level off. Meanwhile, the death toll is only going to go up, unless the State of Pennsylvania really does discover the power to resurrect the dead.  

The Trump administration on Tuesday revealed it is considering a capital gains tax cut as well as other tax-cut proposals as part of a future coronavirus relief bill. President Trump and his allies are also pushing for liability protection for businesses affected by the coronavirus pandemic. “Well run States should not be bailing out poorly run States, using CoronaVirus as the excuse!” the president wrote on Twitter. “The elimination of Sanctuary Cities, Payroll Taxes, and perhaps Capital Gains Taxes, must be put on the table. Also lawsuit indemnification & business deductions for restaurants & rent.”  Many Senate Republicans have pushed back on plans to enact additional rounds of government spending to combat the economic damage wrought by coronavirus. The four relief bills that have already been passed have allocated roughly $3 trillion in support for businesses and direct checks to Americans. “‘No more spending’ has really become the rallying cry of the right,” Stephen Moore, president of the Committee to Unleash Prosperity, told the New York Times. “We’ve done the spending, it didn’t work, and now we need to try something else. There is going to be civil war in Congress over this.”  Senator Josh Hawley (R., Mo.) on Tuesday defended his push for more spending to offset the effects of the pandemic. “The concerns we have about deficit spending now are going to look like a walk in the park,” Hawley told CBS. “Bold action now to get people to jobs back is not wasteful spending; it’s critical.”  U.S. unemployment has reached 18 percent, or 30 million people, since the pandemic forced mass closures of businesses and schools across the country.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

I’ve been emailing with Ari Schulman, the editor of the New Atlantis, and he made a comment that I thought was worth (with his permission) quoting: We just do not know enough about Covid to make reliable general conclusions from a single country. And for any general conclusion we could reach, we can come up with many counterexamples. The Times had a great writeup of this yesterday. If you want to say that Covid spares warm-weather regions, that does hold up as a broad trend — but there are plenty of counterexamples. If you want to say that countries that don’t do official lockdowns turn out fine, there are indeed plenty of examples besides Sweden. But then there are also Italy, Spain, Iran, New York. If you want to say that these variations must be explained by different strains, so that anywhere that hasn’t already been badly hit won’t be — well, that makes a certain amount of sense (it seems hard to imagine Montana taking off at this point). But it also gets into epicyclic territory until it’s backed by actual genetic analysis, and there are counterexamples too (Russia, Turkey, the resurgence in Singapore). It’s a choose-your-own-adventure game. The number of unknowns about Covid, and the number of parameters across which it varies markedly, are astonishing. The main difference I see between analyses right now is whether they view this situation as basically clearcut — here, look at the back of my envelope, I’ll explain it to you — or as deeply murky, a terrible conundrum.  

The Trump administration is considering dissolving the White House coronavirus task force within several weeks, the New York Times reported Tuesday. Olivia Troye, a senior adviser to Vice President Mike Pence, has told officials on the task force to expect the group to complete its activities in the coming weeks. “We’re having conversations about that,” Pence told reporters on Tuesday.  A Trump administration official told the Times that much of the country would then move towards Phase 1 of the president’s guidelines to reopen the economy, focusing more on developing a coronavirus vaccine and mass testing, as well as therapeutics. However, Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, on Tuesday denied reports that the task force would be dismantled.  “That’s not true, I’ve been in every task force meeting, and that’s not what they are doing,” Fauci told CBS. The task force, led by Pence, has been at the forefront of the U.S. response to the coronavirus pandemic, presenting daily briefings on the pandemic from the White House. A task force briefing scheduled for Saturday was canceled, and the group did not convene at all on Monday. President Trump frequently used the task force briefings to provide extended question-and-answer sessions to the press. However, last week several of Trump’s advisers presented him with internal campaign polls showing rival Joe Biden with solid leads in swing states, in an effort to convince the president to reduce his presence at the briefings. The president’s average approval ratings have slipped to 43 percent as of Tuesday from a high of 47 percent in mid-March, according to RealClearPolitics.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Here is a new ad from the anti-Trump Lincoln Project: 📺 Mourning In America pic.twitter.com/djkH0ySCqo — The Lincoln Project (@ProjectLincoln) May 4, 2020  The spot plays off of Ronald Reagan’s famous 1984 campaign ad, “It’s morning again in America.” Even by partisan standards, the commercial is exceptionally dishonest. There a slew of issues you can criticize Donald Trump over — including his initial coronavirus rhetoric — but the notion that the president had spurred the death, unemployment, and economic turmoil we’re experiencing over coronavirus is just mendacious. By almost any standard, the economy was in strong shape before COVID-19, a disease that has ravaged almost every Western nation no matter who was in charge. The ad itself insinuates that Trump both ruined the economy and didn’t close it quickly enough to stop coronavirus.  That’s fine, I suppose. Political ads have never been known for honesty. What’s really disagreeable about the spot, though, is that it maligns the American people as a group of desperate and hopeless subjects sitting around waiting for their government to rescue them. This isn’t merely a preposterous misreading of today’s situation, its message is the antithesis of Reaganism. You don’t need to adulate the 40th president to know that his ads, and his personal inclination, celebrated the exceptional capacity of the American people to overcome adversity. A Reagan ad might have been patriotic, uplifting, and a bit fogyish by modern standards, but it would never have cynically painted us as a dreary, powerless, and self-pitying nation. 

Brian Riedl has a series of striking charts about our fiscal outlook. These estimates assume no new “stimulus money” and an economy that reopens at the beginning of the summer:  Riedl estimates a budget deficit of $4.275 trillion in 2020, and $2.19 trillion next year. This year’s deficit is estimated at 19.3 percent of GDP, which is nearly double the peak deficits of the Great Recession, and second only to the deficits during World War II.  What I find most striking about these charts, apart from the scale of the COVID-19 response, is the fact that they illustrate that we were already on serious high-deficit track in spite of the strong economy for the last five years. For all those who thinks there is nothing to worry about because interest rates are low, I would say that still translates into a massive amount of interest payments. Riedl calculates: “Borrowing $3T: When rates are 3%, this will cost $90B per year. At 4%, $120B/yr, etc. . . . Just 3 months of debt bring permanent costs to budget & taxpayers.” He adds: “The $8T *total* pandemic cost that I estimate (at even 3% rates) is $240B/yr forever squeezed from other priorities.”   These charts also show that the COVID-19 responses were mostly about throwing as much money, any money, at the problem as we could without many thoughts wasted on our fiscal health. So I guess we should all be prepared for part two of the great austerity debate when this is all over. Once our debt-to-GDP ratio is at such a heightened level that it is adversely and significantly impacting our economic growth potential (through heightened long-term interest rates, higher tax rates, and a general constraint on counter-cyclical fiscal policies), no level of economic growth (real or fictional) will be able to get us out of this mess. This will leave us with two options: Cut spending like there is no tomorrow, or massive tax hikes, likely in the form of new taxes. The work of Alberto Alesina and others has shown that this won’t effectively reduce our debt ratio and will hurt growth further, worsening our debt-to-GDP ratio. Not pretty.  

Senator Ben Sasse (R., Neb.) is urging that Phase Four of federal legislation responding to the COVID-19 outbreak should include protections for Americans with disabilities, whom he says are likely to be disadvantaged by policies to ration limited health-care supplies. “In a shocking number of states, Americans with disabilities can be sent to the back of the line for ventilators. That’s abhorrent,” Sasse said in a statement this morning. “Human dignity matters, and disabilities like Down syndrome don’t undermine the right to life. Congress can’t re-write state laws, but we can regulate the Strategic National Stockpile of ventilators. As Congress takes up Phase Four legislation, we have a moral obligation to prevent discrimination against people with disabilities.”  To that end, Sasse has drafted model legislation that would block states from receiving Strategic National Stockpile resources if they have policies in place to discriminate on the basis of disability when using those resources. His legislation is called the “Ending Qualifications that are Unjust for Access to Lifesaving Care Act,” or the EQUAL Care Act, and it is based on an investigation last month by the Center for Public Integrity, which determined that policies to ration limited health-care resources often disadvantage individuals with disabilities, specifically when it comes to distributing a limited number of ventilators. A recent Pew survey found that Americans are split on the most appropriate way to allocate medical care to sick patients when there is a shortage of equipment or supplies. In particular, respondents disagreed over which patients should be given access to a ventilator when there is a shortage. Fifty percent of respondents said ventilators should go to “patients who are most in need at the moment,” while 45 percent said they should be given to “patients who doctors think are most likely to recover with treatment.” More likely than not, policies implemented along the latter guideline would end up privileging those who are young and healthy, keeping ventilators from the elderly, those with preexisting conditions, and the disabled.  

Scientists at the Los Alamos National Laboratory published a study on Thursday that indicates the now-prevalent strain of coronavirus is a more contagious version of the pathogen first reported in Wuhan, China. The study, which is not yet peer-reviewed, was published on BioRxiv, a website used by medical researchers to speed up collaboration on studies and potential treatments of coronavirus. Scientists at the Los Alamos lab, run by the U.S. Department of Energy, collaborated with researchers at Duke University and the University of Sheffield in England.  The researchers concluded that a mutation of coronavirus that occurred sometime in early February in Europe made the pathogen more contagious, such that the mutated strain rapidly migrated to the East Coast of the U.S. and has been the dominant strain of coronavirus worldwide since March. Most worldwide research on a vaccine has focused on earlier versions of coronavirus that lack the new mutation, the Los Angeles Times noted. The authors of the Los Alamos study wrote that they felt an “urgent need for an early warning” that the now-dominant strain of coronavirus had mutated, which would compel vaccine developers to study that strain in order to produce effective treatments. “The story is worrying, as we see a mutated form of the virus very rapidly emerging, and over the month of March becoming the dominant pandemic form,” study leader Bette Korber, a computational biologist at Los Alamos, wrote in a Facebook post. “When viruses with this mutation enter a population, they rapidly begin to take over the local epidemic, thus they are more transmissible.”  Researchers in the U.S. and around the world are racing to find a vaccine for the pathogen, which has infected over 3,600,000 and killed over 250,000 worldwide. The pandemic has caused many of the world’s nations to close businesses and schools, with several, including the U.S., imposing travel restrictions on the entry of foreign citizens.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Warren Buffett lives for financial turmoil. The so-called Oracle of Omaha famously took large positions in Goldman Sachs and General Electric during the 2008 financial crisis, and went on a buying spree during the turbulent recovery. “A climate of fear is our best friend,” he explained in his 2010 investor letter, because market turmoil can lead to the undervaluation of strong companies. When everyone is selling, even the best stocks fall precipitously. Investors should capitalize on these rare opportunities, Buffett believes: “When it’s raining gold, reach for a bucket, not a thimble.”  But during the massive sell-off in March, Buffett sat on the sideline. While investors waited for the familiar headline announcing a blockbuster Berkshire Hathaway deal, the investment firm sold more stock than it purchased, building up $137 billion in cash. Berkshire’s inactivity is a result of the Federal Reserve’s emergency-lending programs, which propped up asset markets and precluded the kind of undervaluation that Buffett seeks out. “There was a period right before the Fed acted” when companies asked Buffett for capital, he said, but “after the Fed acted, a number of them were able to get money in the public market frankly at terms we wouldn’t have given.” The Fed’s programs staved off a severe collapse, and turned the shortest bear market in history into a rally. Buffett praised Fed chair Jay Powell on Saturday for his forceful action, ranking him alongside Paul Volcker as one of the best central-bank helmsmen in modern history.  But Powell’s actions come with downside. Lending to corporations could lead to the emergence of “zombie” firms — inefficient companies relying on cheap credit as life support. The Fed’s lending facilities allow some risky firms to fund their operations even if they’re losing money. That’s bad news for the economy, because zombies eat up capital and workers that should go to better businesses. The “zombie” phenomenon emerged after the 1992 Japanese financial crisis. In the 1980s, Japan appeared poised to overtake the U.S. as the world’s largest economy. So rapid was the rise of its high-tech manufacturing sector that economists called it the “Japanese miracle.” Thinking the country’s sky-high growth rates would last forever, investors piled in Japanese assets, prodded by Japan’s state-managed banking system. In the early ’90s, the house of cards came crashing down: Stocks fell by 60 percent, with real estate suffering similar losses.  
 This financial collapse impaired the collateral held by Japanese banks, corporations, and households, threatening the foundation of the country’s economy. Though the bursting of the bubble represented a return to reasonable valuations, Japanese authorities had their hands tied: If they didn’t intervene to bolster the financial system, economic catastrophe would follow. They thus pushed banks to roll-over nonperforming loans in order to fend off “public criticism that banks were worsening the recession by denying credit to needy corporations,” as Takeo Hoshi and Anil Kashyap explained in a 2006 paper. Regulators “encouraged the banks to increase their lending to small and medium sized firms to ease the apparent ‘credit crunch.’” These policy decisions led to the ensuing “lost decades” of near-zero economic growth in Japan.  Now, in response to the coronavirus, the Fed has followed Japan’s lead. By backing corporate-credit markets, the Fed incentivized investors to capitalize companies suffering from the global economic collapse. Boeing, which had negotiated a $60 billion congressional rescue package in March, ended up raising $25 billion from the private markets and withdrawing its request for government assistance. Seeing that they could simply unload bonds to the Fed if the economic outlook soured, investors lined up to provide capital to Boeing and other companies that were facing default just weeks ago. In a functioning market, Boeing would pay a hefty premium for loans. A global halt in travel, coupled with the costly 737 Max debacle, has severely weakened its operations. If enough Boeings obtain capital at below-market rates, we could see a zombie apocalypse in the U.S. corporate sector. In such a scenario, inefficient businesses surviving on life support would put a drag on GDP growth for years to come. As Hoshi and Kashyap outline, zombies raise the cost of capital for productive firms, decreasing innovation and reducing economic growth. They also depress prices by fueling overproduction, and drive up wages as central-bank largesse subsidizes labor costs.  Fears of a zombie apocalypse may not come to fruition. If the coronavirus shock ends in the next few months, the Fed might succeed in quickly unwinding its balance sheet, and the Fed’s corporate-lending facilities remain limited in scope and scale; the riskiest businesses will still have to tap private markets to stay alive. But a protracted economic shock could put more capital in the hands of weak businesses, especially if Powell expands the new lending facilities to include more junk-rated companies. Policymakers must strike a balance between staving off a deep recession and permanently hindering economic competition. 

New York on Tuesday announced 1,700 previously undisclosed suspected coronavirus deaths that occurred at nursing homes and adult care facilities. The new data from Governor Andrew Cuomo’s administration, which includes people who passed away before a lab test could confirm they had coronavirus, brings the state’s death toll from the virus to at least 4,813 since the beginning of March. That number does not include nursing home residents who were transferred to hospital before they died, causing the actual toll of the virus on nursing homes to remain fuzzy.  Several nursing homes in New York City and Long Island were hit particularly hard, with some facilities in the metro area doubling and tripling their official death tolls. Veterans homes were also hit hard, three veterans homes in Queens, Long Island, and Westchester reporting a total of 108 resident deaths. The report comes after critics expressed skepticism about the official death tallies from coronavirus at nursing homes compared to rising death rates among the elderly residents. “You violate, you commit fraud, that is a criminal offense, period. So they can be prosecuted criminally for fraud on any of these reporting numbers,” Governor Cuomo said Friday in remarks directed at nursing homes.  The disparity appeared to come from the inability of facilities to confirm suspected cases of coronavirus before residents passed away.  At least 98 residents of Isabella Geriatric Center in Washington Heights, Manhattan are suspected to have died of coronavirus, but the facility was reporting only 13 confirmed deaths before updating the total on Friday to 64 confirmed and suspected deaths from the virus. “Isabella, like all other nursing homes in New York City, initially had limited access to widespread and consistent in-house testing to quickly diagnose our residents and staff. This hampered our ability to identify those who were infected and asymptomatic, despite our efforts to swiftly separate anyone who presented symptoms,” said Audrey Waters, a spokeswoman for Isabella. Cuomo has faced criticism for his policies aimed at fighting the virus in nursing homes, including from former New York governor George Pataki, who called them a “disaster.” The former governor and others criticized the lack of enough personal protective equipment for caretakers working in nursing homes as well as Cuomo’s state regulation requiring nursing homes to take in recovering coronavirus patients.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

A central goal of the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) was the prevention of mass layoffs and firm bankruptcies though the injection of liquidity to companies affected. One would think that the way to get the most benefit out of the program is for it to distribute more of the funds to places hit to hardest. But this new paper uses data on the distribution of PPP loans and high-frequency micro-level employment data to look at the distribution of PPP loans and finds that the funds didn’t flow to where the economic shock was greatest: We find no evidence that funds flowed to areas that were more adversely affected by the economic effects of the pandemic, as measured by declines in hours worked or business shutdowns. If anything, we find some suggestive evidence that funds flowed to areas less hard hit. And: PPP loans were disproportionately allocated to areas least affected by the crisis: fifteen percent of establishments in the regions most affected by declines in hours worked and business shutdowns received PPP funding; in contrast, thirty percent of all establishments received PPP funding in the least affected regions. I assume that this has to do with the way the program was designed and the fact that every firm tried to apply, whether they needed it at the time or not, out of fear that the funds would run out when they actually needed it. Bigger and better organized firms probably had a leg up, since many banks would only lend at first to firms they were already doing business with. But the data highlight the role played by the banks in the less than desirable distribution of funds: Lender heterogeneity in PPP participation appears to be one reason why we find a weak correlation between economic declines and PPP lending. We find significant heterogeneity across banks in terms of disbursing PPP funds, which does not only reflect differences in underlying loan demand. For example, because of an asset cap restriction in place since 2018, Wells Fargo disbursed a significantly smaller portion of PPP loans relative to their market share of small business loans. . . . We construct a new measure of geographic exposure of regions to banks that over or underperformed in terms of PPP allocation relative to their share of small business lending. States with higher exposure to banks that performed well in terms of bank PPP exposure also saw higher levels of PPP lending. Apparently, the second round of PPP funds already is going out really fast. The sad truth is that the program was and is never going to cut it. Money going to large firms, small firms not having any luck getting through banks to apply, long waiting periods once having applied, and now new data showing the fund aren’t even going to the most affected areas mean it is time to try something else. It is the perfect time to plug Arnold Kling’s idea, which we wrote up in this paper. It is simple: Extend a line for credit to everyone with a checking account in the US. It is repayable, which allows the program to be entirely flexible about how and what the money is used for. It allows companies and people to defer using the line of credit as long as they don’t need it, instead of companies applying for a loan dependently of one’s needs just out of fear that the program’s fund will run out.  Finally, people shouldn’t judge this idea by the fact that it is repayable and contrast it with PPP, which in theory allows for forgiveness. The truth is that, because of the generosity of unemployment benefits, many firms will have a hard time retaining their employees and will end up having to repay their PPP loans. No solution can help businesses if the economy stays on ice for many months longer. But this is a good start and less chaotic solution.  


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					O
				n April 14, I asked if we were finally turning the corner on the COVID-19 crisis. Deaths were holding steady, and experts said we were at or near the peak. “In the coming week or two,” I prayed, “we’ll hopefully see deaths decline.” I further guesstimated that “mass lockdowns can last at most about a month longer, until mid May.”  One out of two ain’t bad, I guess, especially when the one you got wrong was the one you set up with “hopefully.” Deaths have not come down even three weeks after I wrote, but there are many signs the lockdowns are starting to give way. And it’s anyone’s guess what will happen next. Hopefully, policymakers and the public will get back to something resembling normal in a deliberate and intelligent way. Hopefully, we’re capable of controlling this thing without the extreme measures we’ve resorted to these past couple of months. And hopefully, the economy will bounce back quickly. On the death front, we’ve seen 70,000 and are still adding about 2,000 a day. A tentative internal document from the Centers for Disease Control leaked yesterday; it projected that the daily number could rise to 3,000 or so over the next month. Also yesterday, the University of Washington radically overhauled its much-watched and much-criticized model, roughly doubling its first-wave death projection to 135,000 in the process. I’m still wishing for the numbers to start falling, but we absolutely cannot count on that happening, even if we continue current policy.  
 Meanwhile, many Americans, myself very much included, are getting sick of this. Cabin fever is setting in. The outdoors are warming up and beckoning. The economic damage of idling businesses is mounting — and the hopes of a fast bounceback are fading, with the Congressional Budget Office predicting that we could see 9.5 percent unemployment at the end of 2021. Doctors, hospitals, and individual patients have been choosing to postpone important medical care. Opioid overdoses may be rising. All this creates a lot of pressure to get to the next step, and rightly so. As a result, some states are pushing forward with plans to reopen. And, as first noted at Forbes, data from Apple devices suggest that people are going out a little more — not as much as they were before all this went down, but a noticeable rise from a few weeks back:  So, the COVID situation is only holding steady, and the lockdown strategy we used to get to this point is becoming untenable. What now? On the bright side, we’ve learned some things that can inform our efforts as we reopen. The virus doesn’t seem to spread much outside, fortunately, and there’s some evidence that kids don’t spread it much either. We’ve long known that the elderly and sick are the most vulnerable, and that viruses spread more easily in dense environments. These facts should allow us to target our efforts where they’ll do the most good: Reopen the outdoors, let the kids go back to school in the fall with some restrictions, advise the vulnerable to keep themselves safe, and be very cautious about crowded indoor environments such as meat-packing plants, offices, and nursing homes. Have different policies in different jurisdictions, because there’s no reason every rural county needs to be locked down as tightly as New York City.   We’ve also ramped up some alternative means of controlling the virus, though not as much as one might hope. Testing has roughly doubled in the past two weeks, but we could still use a lot more tests — and faster tests — if we want to identify new outbreaks promptly, frequently check people in high-risk occupations, etc. (As the economist Paul Romer has pointed out, the $25 billion Congress has ponied up for testing is less than the U.S. spends on soda each year.) Google and Apple are still working to enable apps that notify phone users when they’ve been in contact with a sick person. We could also stand to hire a lot more people to trace the contacts of those known to be infected so that they can quarantine. Or we could hold out for a deus ex machina. Most drug treatments have proven mildly helpful at best, but an Israeli team just announced it has developed a COVID-19 antibody that neutralizes the virus. We also might get a vaccine sooner than the 12- to 18-month timeframe many predicted before, though even if that pans out, the rollout will be slow and won’t begin for months.  There’s no good option here. We can’t keep locking everything down, yet there’s zero guarantee that we can control COVID-19’s deadly spread through other means. Hopefully, things will work out. 

It used to be that proponents of “flattening the curve” acknowledged that we weren’t going to vanquish the virus and would have to learn to live with more limited spread, but as I write today, that has changed over the last two months.   

Happy Cinco de Mayo. When this thing is all over, we need to have a two-week festival of all the holidays we’ve been forced to celebrate under limited circumstances. On the menu today: some blunt talk about death projections, why even fatality rates that seem really low will still add up to many deaths before herd immunity is reached, and why the American media shouldn’t trust Russian boasts on the coronavirus or any other topic.  The Death Projections Are Not Promising The big story this morning is a study by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, used in a draft government report, that projects the United States will have 200,000 cases of coronavirus infection per day by June 1, “a staggering jump that would be accompanied by more than 3,000 deaths each day.” The White House and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention insisted it was a draft report and not officially endorsed, even though the report has the CDC logo on it. Those 200,000-cases-per-day and 3,000 deaths-per-day sound like a lot more than where we are now, but it isn’t that far away. Our daily deaths have gone past 2,400 several times in the past few weeks. A common cry at the beginning of this outbreak, from those who deemed the threat overstated, was that the flu killed 80,000 Americans per year. (It turns out that number is a debatable estimate as well. The CDC takes the reported rate of hospitalization, extrapolates that out to the entire U.S. population, and calculates the total deaths and non-hospitalization cases from that sum.) As of this writing, we’re almost at 70,000 deaths; it will probably surpass that threshold by the time you read this. We’re going to hit 80,000 deaths sometime in the next few days if we’re unlucky and next week if we’re lucky. If you don’t like a particular model or doubt its assumptions, fine. It shouldn’t really alter the broad conclusion: This is a really bad public-health crisis, and even if we’re past the worst, we’re a long way from out of the woods. On Face the Nation this past weekend, former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb warned Americans to expect numbers along these lines: SCOTT GOTTLIEB: I think when you look out to the end of June, it’s probably the case that we’re going to get above a hundred thousand deaths nationally. I think the concerning thing here is that we’re looking at the prospect that this may be a persistent spread, that while the doubling time has come down dramatically to about twenty-five days. So, the amount of days it takes for the epidemic to double in size is about twenty-five now, from day– days or less than a week at the outset of this epidemic. We may be facing the prospect that twenty thousand, thirty thousand new cases a day diagnosed becomes a new normal and a thousand or more deaths becomes a new normal as well. Right now, we’re seeing, for about thirty days now, about thirty thousand cases a day and two thousand deaths a day. And if you factor in that we’re probably diagnosing only one in ten infections — MARGARET BRENNAN: Mm-Hm. SCOTT GOTTLIEB: — those thirty thousand cases are really three hundred thousand cases. It’s worth noting that our number of cases has steadily increased, even with almost all of the country in various states of quarantine and lockdown over the past seven, now going on eight weeks. Gottleib noted, “while mitigation didn’t fail, I think it’s fair to say that it didn’t work as well as we expected. We expected that we would start seeing more significant declines in new cases and deaths around the nation at this point. And we’re just not seeing that.”  This doesn’t mean social distancing and all of our other measures are useless. But it appears that between America’s essential workers, people going to the supermarket and picking up take-out food, going to the pharmacy or needed medical treatments, and other necessary violations of the social distancing ideal — and yes, some unnecessary ones — SARS-CoV-2 is still spreading around at a frustratingly persistent rate. With parts of the country gradually and partially reopening, we should expect the virus to spread at least a little further and a little faster. As the numbers get worse in the coming weeks, you’re going to hear a lot of people who oppose reopening insisting that various states are being reckless and those who are demanding an end to the full lockdown are being selfish. As I’ve tried to emphasize over the past few weeks, most Americans wanted to help protect others from the virus, and they’ve been willing to pay a terrible price, mostly economically, to do so. They also delayed their own medical treatment for non-life-threatening conditions, put off vaccinating their kids, and stayed out of hospitals so much that some are furloughing staff. They’ve accepted a catastrophic hit to their jobs and businesses and life savings. They’ve accepted a de facto suspension of their children’s education, or at least accepted a barely acceptable substitute. Our food supply chains are starting to buckle under the strain.    Medically, the best possible response to the virus might be to keep Americans in their houses and apartments for months upon months. But that’s just not physically, economically, socially, or psychologically possible.   I frequently hear people insisting that the most-frequently cited death rate figures for the virus are useless, because we don’t know how many people have the virus and are asymptomatic. (We’re probably undercounting the deaths, too; our overall mortality figures are jumping outside the normal range.) Here’s a simple but dark way of looking at it: We have 250 million adults in the United States. Some medical experts think we can achieve herd immunity with as little as 60 percent having the virus, some think it’s more like 82 percent. If we only need 60 percent of Americans to catch it to achieve herd immunity, we’re talking about 150 million American adults. One-tenth of one percent of that sum is 150,000 people. For every tenth of a percentage point in the fatality rate, count 150,000 dead Americans. The University of Bonn researchers studied the outbreak in the region of Heinsberg and calculated the fatality rate of 0.37 percent.  A .37 percent fatality rate, applied over 150 million Americans, calculates out to 555,000 fatalities. Hey, Remember When Russia Was Supposed to Be a Coronavirus Success Story? We can gripe about how the U.S. government has responded to this virus, but not many countries have handled this particularly well. The European countries have had way more deaths per capita. Back on March 21, CNN reported, with way too much credulity, “does Russia have coronavirus under control? According to information released by Russian officials, Putin’s strategy seems to have worked.” By early April, it became clear that the Russian government, with its far-reaching surveillance, top-of-the-line propaganda, and extensive authoritarian powers . . . was in about as much trouble as our free societies. “We have a lot of problems, and we don’t have much to brag about, nor reason to, and we certainly can’t relax,” Putin told senior officials April 13 in a televised video conference. “We are not past the peak of the epidemic, not even in Moscow.” Today, “Russia now has the world’s second-fastest rate of new infections behind the United States. It is the seventh most-affected country in terms of infections, having surpassed China, Turkey and Iran last week.” ADDENDUM: If you’ve been enjoying ESPN’s The Last Dance, chronicling the life of Michael Jordan and the rise and reign of the Chicago Bulls, you’re probably wondering, “who could ever defend the late Jerry Krause, the Bulls’ general manager for the Jordan era and the designated villain of this epic sports story?  The answer is Philadelphia Inquirer columnist Mike Sielski, who points out that Krause did make a lot of good decisions in the draft and free agency, and who makes an all-too-convenient villain in ESPN’s storyline. As entertaining as The Last Dance is, a lot of it amounts to the greatest basketball player of all time, the charming guy who had commercials of children singing how they wanted to be like Mike, taking on a guy who looks like the Penguin from Batman comics and who always seems to be scowling. Sielski astutely observes, “Aside from a token compliment here or there from Kerr or Bulls owner Jerry Reinsdorf, no one is standing up for Krause in the documentary: no family member, no colleague, no one. There is something cheap, unseemly, and quite telling about the inclination to continue bullying a man who isn’t around to defend himself.”  

California has borrowed nearly $350 million in federal funding to pay for surging unemployment claims amid the coronavirus pandemic, the first state to do so. A Treasury Department spokesman told the Wall Street Journal on Monday that the state had already begun to access its pre-approved $10 billion loan for paying unemployment through the end of July. Loans of up to $12.6 billion for Illinois and up to $1.1 billion for Connecticut have also been approved, but neither state has begun to use the funding.  The loans are designed to help assist states pay rising numbers of regular unemployment benefits, while the extra $600 weekly payments that the Senate passed as part of its $2.2 trillion CARES Act in March are funded separately. The Department of Labor reported last week that 3.8 million Americans filed new jobless claims, bringing the total since the start of the pandemic to 30 million, approximately 18 percent of the total work force. California has seen roughly 3.7 million new claims since mid-March, and its unemployment trust fund has spent over $1 billion since the end of February, when it had $3.1 billion on hand. The Journal found that nearly half of U.S. states had their unemployment-fund balance fall at twice the typical rate from February through mid-April. This is not the first time that California has accessed federal funding, for which it does not need the approval of Congress, to survive economic downturns. The state borrowed nearly $11 billion in unemployment funding from the federal government after the 2007-2009 recession, and only finished paying it back in 2018.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The researcher who developed a model predicting a steep surge in the country’s coronavirus cases and deaths has said that he was not aware that his work, which “was not in any way intended to be a forecast,” had been drafted into a government report. The data, first reported on Monday, warned that the U.S. would spike to 200,000 new cases and 3,000 deaths per day by June 1 — increases of 700 percent and 70 percent respectively. It was compiled into an interagency report and leaked first to the New York Times. In response to the Times report, the White House emphasized that the model was not developed by its coronavirus task force and therefore had not received the administration’s approval.  “This is not a White House document, nor has it been presented to the Coronavirus Task Force or gone through interagency vetting. This data is not reflective of any of the modeling done by the task force, or data that the task force has analyzed,” the White House said in a statement Monday. Justin Lessler, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins and the creator of the model, reinforced the government’s claim that the data was taken out of context. He explained that the report was a draft and delivered as a work-in-progress to officials within the Federal Emergency Management Agency. “I had no role in the process by which that was presented and shown,” Lessler told the Washington Post. “It was not in any way intended to be a forecast.”   Lessler added that the projections depended largely on the government’s ability to reopen the country safely. “There are reopening scenarios where it could get out of control very quickly,” he admitted. While he didn’t address the specific figures, Former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb appeared to endorse the model’s prediction of an increase in deaths and cases as state economies begin to reopen. “While the model’s assumptions are unclear, and therefore its estimates uncertain, we should expect cases to rise as we re-open aspects of economy,” Gottlieb wrote.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

We will be in a fight against the coronavirus for months, if not years, and yet it is time to declare mission accomplished on one very important goal. The lockdowns of much of the country were undertaken “to flatten the curve” and largely to prevent the hospital system from being overwhelmed. It was a near-run thing in New York and New Jersey, but the dikes held, thanks to the incredible sacrifices of front-line health-care workers.  Now, the rhetoric around the shutdowns has shifted, and not very subtly — flattening the curve and saving the hospitals are “out,” and not allowing any additional cases to emerge is “in.” It’s difficult to remember, but flattening the curve was never supposed to be about eradicating the disease. A piece by the progressive website Vox featured a widely circulated version of the flattening-the-curve graph and noted that shutdown measures “aren’t so much about preventing illness, but rather slowing down the rate at which people get sick.” A viral Medium piece published in mid-March famously called the period of lockdowns to squelch the disease “the Hammer” and the subsequent period of living with it “the Dance.” The article didn’t deny the seriousness of the disease; if anything, it was alarmist. Yet, by the standards of the current debate, the piece is unacceptably lax.  
 “The time needed for the Hammer,” it said, “is weeks, not months.” After that, it predicted, “our lives will go back close to normal.” And it contemplated living in a fuzzy realm of tradeoffs between important goals — or, as it put it, “a dance of measures between getting our lives back on track and spreading the disease, one of the economy vs. health care.”  Such an acknowledgment of the need to strike a balance between the economy and public health is now considered tantamount to murder. It’s become a trope that pro-opening Republicans want to get people killed. A column in the New York Times was headlined “How Republicans Became the Party of Death.” A Guardian piece opined, “‘Trump is Killing His Own Supporters’ — Even White House Insiders Know It.” But the curve has been flattened. As former Food and Drug Administration commissioner Scott Gottlieb notes, the time of doubling of cases nationally has increased to 25 days.  An analysis by Sean Trende of RealClearPolitics shows most states below their peak cases. There are some states — for instance, Minnesota, Virginia, Delaware, Iowa, and Indiana — that are still around their peaks. But others such as Alaska, Montana, Idaho, Hawaii, Louisiana, Michigan, and Oklahoma passed their peaks weeks ago.  Not too long ago, the Republican who supposedly most wanted to get people killed was Governor Ron DeSantis of Florida. In announcing his reopening plan, he recalled all the dire projections of what would befall Florida because he was supposedly late in issuing a stay-at-home order, effective April 3. Yet, Florida is coming out of this phase of the epidemic vastly better off than Louisiana, Massachusetts, and New York. About 40 percent of its hospital beds have been available at any given time. In retrospect, there was wisdom in Governor DeSantis’s letting municipalities and counties take the initiative in a big, diverse state. Besides which, people are capable of making their own decisions. They decided to stay at home before the state formally told them to. According to a Wall Street Journal report, the movements of people began declining in mid-March, well before the statewide stay-at-home order.  The reverse is also true. If they are still afraid of the virus, people aren’t going to return to normal whether their states are formally open or not. In a better world, the lockdowns wouldn’t have merely avoided the worst, but would have crushed the spread of the disease. That hasn’t happened. We will be engaged in a Dance for some time, even if one faction in our national life only ever wants to wield a Hammer. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					B
				attle: Los Angeles, a sci-fi action flick released in 2011, depicted what would happen if the U.S. Marines at Camp Pendleton had to respond to a sudden alien invasion. Though the film wasn’t terribly original, it was fun. (A diverse band of Marines and civilians, led by Aaron Eckhart and his perfect chin, fleeing and fighting their way through a hastily evacuated Los Angeles while dodging alien drones, could hardly not be fun.) And there was one sly bit of social commentary tucked in: On the news channels shown throughout the movie, the stock tickers kept running at the bottom of the screen, showing that the Dow Jones Industrial Average was down roughly 4,847 points in response to the fact that aliens were taking over the world’s coastal cities. Bad news for humanity, and think of the toll on your 401(k)!  Like the Internet commentators who offer habitual gripes during an alien invasion in a Mitchell and Webb sketch, some people cannot change their mental habits, even in a severe crisis. And the global pandemic of SARS-CoV-2 is a bit like an alien invasion. Green spheres with little red spikes have landed, and they are floating around, invisible to the naked eye, trying to sneak into our lungs. They’re more threatening to some of us than to others, but no one is immune, besides (thankfully) most children and those who have already fought off an infection. Our best scientists are developing ways to mitigate the invasion’s damage, but we haven’t yet found an unstoppable superweapon or an impenetrable shield. Some corners of our media world have done an excellent job covering this invasion; others, not so much. We’ve seen journalists offer confident early predictions that the coronavirus would be less dangerous than the seasonal flu, journalists insist that the public should not wear masks before insisting that it should, and journalists continue to take Chinese government statements on the pandemic at face value. Even worse, some media have continued to give their audiences the equivalent of the stock numbers — obsessing over whether it was racist to use the label “Wuhan virus,” relentlessly covering reporters’ fights with the president, giving us in-depth coverage, dissection, and criticism of Chris Cuomo’s coronavirus diagnosis and recovery, informing us of the latest virus-related celebrity controversies.  In short, this crisis has revealed that our largest and most influential media institutions are well-prepared to cover some stories but are barely able to cover others. Events in New York City, Washington D.C., and Los Angeles are covered the most, because the most media institutions are based there. Covering a story like the unprecedented disruptions to our food-supply chain requires paying attention to what’s going on in places such as Pasco, Wash., Logansport, Ind., and Waterloo, Iowa. The national media is much more interested in celebrity chefs than in where and how we produce the food we eat. Cable-news networks really like covering a politician’s latest pronouncement and then having a roundtable of commentators argue about what he said. This is relatively cheap, easy, and quick. Donald Trump has been a godsend to cable news, because he’s always saying or tweeting something outrageous, and it is easy to find talking heads willing to declare his daily statements or actions the best or worst thing ever. American media institutions love stories about big personalities, and stories with binary conflicts, because those stories have an instinctual, visceral appeal for viewers.   Of course, not all issues can be adequately explained and explored in a binary, personality-centric template. The coronavirus is not Kim Kardashian, Michael Avenatti, Elon Musk, Diamond and Silk, or Colin Kaepernick. But that hasn’t stopped the media from attempting to fit a square peg into a round hole. It’s telling how quickly the coverage of the pandemic began to focus upon Dr. Anthony Fauci, and how little time it took for pollsters to begin asking about Fauci’s “approval rating,” a metric which, insofar as he’s not an elected official, doesn’t matter at all. Ditto that for the past month, much of the coverage of the coronavirus has tried to boil it down to a clash between those who “believe in science” and want to continue ongoing lockdowns, quarantines, and business closures on one hand, and those “anti-science” dunderheads who want various steps taken to reopen the economy and society. 
 Almost anyone who isn’t blinded by ideology can see that the choice between public health and the economy is a false one; we must protect both, as best we can, which is not so well. Keeping all nonessential businesses closed indefinitely will continue to have ruinous economic costs; reopening everything will rapidly spread the coronavirus, the precise outcome that the shutdowns were meant to prevent. Policymakers are going to have to muddle through with careful and gradual re-openings of society. But a roundtable of wonky health experts concluding, “This is complicated, state governments are probably going to make mistakes, and a lot of people will be dissatisfied no matter what” does not make for particularly entertaining television — particularly given an audience that’s been conditioned for a few decades to expect every issue to be settled by a Team Red pundit and a Team Blue pundit going at it like a pair of Rock ’Em Sock ’Em Robots.   This isn’t entirely the fault of dim news producers, executives, and reporters. The American news media evolves in response to audience demands. The rise of the Internet meant people didn’t feel as much need to subscribe to a newspaper. They developed the expectation that news should be provided to them for free, on demand, in an easily digestible way at all times. That expectation in turn meant that much more of news institutions’ revenue had to come from advertising, which meant that the audiences had to be huge, which meant that the stories had to have as wide and simple an appeal as possible. And here we are.   Before the Internet, when a newspaper was sold, the only way a publisher knew what sections and stories got read the most was from commissioning reader surveys or reading letters to the editor. Once the Internet came along, every publisher could see exactly how many people read each article and feature, and it simply didn’t make sense to continue to invest resources in the sections that attracted the least readers, even if the coverage in those sections was an invaluable public service. To one extent or another, outlets all had an incentive to dumb things down and pitch as much of their coverage as possible to the lowest common denominator. This is an obvious problem, because what you need to know and what you want to know are not always the same, particularly when the news of the day is bad and upsetting. Right now, the public’s need for good, accurate, reliable information on the virus is particularly vital, and the news media has done at best a hit-or-miss job satisfying it. Mainstream outlets adapted to the Trump presidency by becoming mono-focused on the president and preparing to cover every bizarre off-the-cuff utterance and raging tweet with a full-court press. They’ve been doing that for so long that when something more important came around for them to do, they couldn’t do it. They kept right on fact-checking the president without bothering to fact-check the Chinese government’s propaganda.  They’ve made sure that the stock tickers remain on our screens, but they haven’t done much to help the fight against the aliens storming our beaches. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					I
				n mid-April, as the coronavirus gripped New York City, Brian Lehrer of WNYC hosted a call-in segment for listeners who had struggled with addiction. Simone, from Brooklyn, who attended Narcotics Anonymous, told Lehrer that she was initially “skeptical” of Zoom meetings but that they were working well for her. Vilma, of the Bronx, said working from home gave her a sense of control over eating that she never had before. Three other callers were managing well, including Stuart, who was now getting extra methadone take-home bottles, because of COVID-19 accommodations, but felt no urge to drink more than one per day, as prescribed.  Judging from the show’s tagline, “For those of you struggling with addiction, mandated social isolation is particularly cruel,” the producers clearly expected something other than these upbeat testimonials. Some of my colleagues have a similarly grim, and similarly misplaced, view, predicting that a pandemic of mental illness will follow the coronavirus pandemic. A former surgeon general, Dr. David Satcher, has called for a “government taskforce on coronavirus-based trauma.” And a consortium of mental-health groups has requested a whopping $10 billion from Congress to address the impending “mental health and addiction crisis,” an amount almost twice the 2020 budget request of the federal Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). As a psychiatrist, I am skeptical that a national crisis of mental illness is looming. Researchers have long known that most people are resilient in the face of crisis and do not succumb to psychopathology. Vulnerable individuals are likely to be those who suffer a relapse of a preexisting mental-health disorder or who experience an exacerbation of current symptoms of depression or anxiety. The stimulus bill enacted at the end of March included $425 million for emergency mental-health and substance-abuse problems, suicide prevention, and community mental-health centers. In view of the chronic underfunding of our public mental-health-care system, the increased expenditure is welcome.  In an interesting historical footnote, psychiatrists have recorded cases of temporary psychosis among a subset of patients infected with the influenza virus. (President Woodrow Wilson suffered cognitive deterioration due to viral encephalitis from the Spanish flu.) In addition, researchers have observed a correlation between season of birth and the development of psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia and bipolar illness later in life. These developments, of course, are biological in nature and unrelated to fear surrounding infectious outbreaks. Still, there is — and will continue to be — a vast amount of psychic pain. A heavy pall of uncertainty is upon us. When will we feel safe from this brazen virus, when will a vaccine or treatments arrive, and will we see a resurgence of the virus after it has receded? Polls reveal that between 40 percent and more than half of Americans feel that corona-related stress is “hurting their mental health.” The Washington Post recently reported that, compared with last April, “texts to federal government mental health hotline [are] up roughly 1,000 percent.” Sales of alcohol and cannabis have spiked.   We need to think clearly about whose needs are best met by mental-health professionals and whose suffering should be “treated” in other ways. 
 Under lockdown, basic mental hygiene will suffice for most: Get out of your pajamas each morning, keep a routine, and get ample sleep and exercise. Also connect, connect, and (virtually) connect with family and friends, and help others do the same. A bracing dose of Stoic philosophy is also in order, to remind us that “life is what our thoughts make of it,” as Marcus Aurelius understood. Some need more than good advice to endure the pandemic, however. Mandated isolation can be an anxiety-provoking trial. To soften or avert a “social recession,” as former surgeon general Vivek Murthy recently called it in The Atlantic, neighbors must engage with isolated elderly or disabled people and assure them that they matter and belong and that they won’t go without material reserves.  Also, workers and businesspeople are reeling from the economic devastation. More than 30 million people have filed for unemployment since the third week in March. A Pew poll conducted March 19–24 found, unsurprisingly, that people with lower incomes and those whose jobs or incomes have been cut are experiencing the highest levels of “psychological distress.” In a variety of contexts, economic crises, including the Great Depression of the 1930s and recessions, have been linked with an increase in suicide and depression.    The solution for the alienated and the financially unstable isn’t mental-health experts. It is neighbors, community, and money. When embattled, most people are sustained by their families and communities, and those need to remain upright. Careful and gradual commercial awakening is essential, but until desperate people can work, both they and the economy must be given money, along the lines of the stimulus package: payments to individuals, unemployment benefits, small-business support, and paycheck-protection aid.  This is a terrible time for many Americans. But the extent and depth of despair — and the power to contain it — depend less on the ministrations of therapists and psychiatrists and more on the rest of us. It depends on governments to keep the financial lifeblood circulating and on neighbors and communities to keep the civic fabric strong. The more we medicalize normal and temporary reactions to a crisis and outsource its management to professionals, the more we risk diluting the felt obligations of those sheltering institutions.  Individuals, too, have a responsibility. Hard as it may be, it helps when we shape our perception of adversity as a challenge to surmount and then make it a personal mission to do so. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					D
				uring this entire epidemic, and the response to it, there is a growing tension between front-line doctors and scientific researchers, between people who must use and master numbers in their jobs and university statisticians and modelers, and between the public in general and its credentialed experts.   Fact and Theory  In a nutshell, the divide reflects the ancient opposition between empiricism and abstraction — or more charitably common sense and practical application versus scientific knowledge. When the two are combined and balanced, then knowledge advances. When they are not, both are deprived of the wisdom of the other.  Unfortunately, in the present crisis, we have listened more to the university modeler than to a numbers-crunching accountant. The latter may not understand Banach manifolds, but he at least knows you cannot rely on basic equations and formulas if your denominator is inaccurate and your numerator is sometimes equally unreliable. 
 It seems a simple matter that the small number of those testing positive for the virus simply could not represent all those who are infected with the contagion. Yet such obviousness did not stop modelers, experts, and political advisers from authoritatively lecturing America on the lethality and spread of COVID-19. Internet coronavirus-meters feign scientific accuracy with their hourly streams of precise data. But those without degrees wondered why such metrics even listed China, whose data is fanciful, or why the number of  “cases” is listed when it hinges entirely on the hit-and-miss and idiosyncratic testing of various states and nations.  Throughout this crisis, there has been a litany of arrogance and ignorance. The FDA early on made a hubristic and disastrous decision to monopolize testing. Neither the WHO nor the CDC could get their stories straight on the wisdom or folly of wearing masks.  There were so many expert lectures on how the virus was transmitted that many listeners shrugged and decided that researchers knew far less than those who cleaned and scrubbed for a living. It required neither a CIA analyst nor geneticist to conclude that China lied about the virus and kept lying about its lying. So the public found little initial expertise from experts.    Sorta, Kinda Our experts weekly bickered over allowing patients to try off-label pharmaceuticals. Vaccinations would be impossible for 18 months, for one year, for six months, for 18 months. . . . They apparently did not object to the sending of the infected into nursing homes. They could never decide whether to demonize or canonize the Swedish model, and so they modulated their analysis on its daily death tally from the virus. Was infection taking place outside? Rarely, but apparently frequently enough to require masks. Were 2 million of us going to die? Or 300,000? Or 200,000? Or 100,000 — yes or no? Or maybe when we hit 60,000 deaths, the eventual total would be 63,000? And when we hit 63,000, it would be 67,000? And so on? Was the virus most infectious on surfaces, as droplets, or as aerosols? All or none? Were ventilators the key to preventing deaths, or did they often ensure them? Did warmer weather retard viral transmission? We were told both yes and no — and maybe sorta. Don’t dare take Advil — or use either Advil or Tylenol? Were deaths to the virus over- or under-counted? We were told both.  Do not compare any aspect of this virus to annual influenza strains — unless experts do that all the time. But nothing really is known about the coronavirus, or for that matter the flu either, given that how we count its cases and its deaths seems even hazier even than how we game the coronavirus — at least if the point now is to drive annual flu deaths down, and COVID-19 lethality up. Could you be reinfected by the virus? Again yes, and then again no. Did antibodies provide immunity? Of course — but don’t count on it. Were kids immune, or asymptomatic carriers, or vulnerable, or not carriers at all? Smoking was bad during the pandemic, but nicotine was good, or both bad or both good? Just as often, the public was told nothing about what they felt was most curious. Why exactly did our three largest states — California, Texas, and Florida — have so few virus deaths per 1 million population? Was the cause state policy, earlier infection, poor statistical reporting, population density, weather — or just luck? Why did the coronavirus take off in a fashion that MERS, SARS, and West Nile Fever never had? What are the respective relationships, if any, of the Wuhan wet market or its Level 4 virology lab to the outbreak? Were the culprits snakes, bats, pangolins, lab technicians, or . . . ? And why exactly did the CDC partially fund a Chinese Level 4 virology lab?  Soon a reliable antidote, a vaccination, and the exact genesis of the virus will be discovered by university and corporate-related scientists. But how their discoveries should be used most effectively among the population will be determined by others — most likely far more pragmatic doctors, nurses, and hospital staff members in the field who treat terribly sick and infectious patients. To the degree that governors listened solely to academics and experts, they usually erred; to the degree they collated advice from those in all walks of life, they did not.  Science without humility and without the constant audit of experience, pragmatism, and common sense remains a parlor game. We should have known that from experience. We should have had experts who expressed modesty about what they did not know, while leaving the snark, the sneering, and the haughtiness to those who might have had some reason to express it. Competence can sometimes excuse the egotism of experts. But the combination of arrogance and ignorance is fatal to them.    Us vs. Him Engineers and scientists did much to ensure the success of the D-Day operation, by inventing artificial “Mulberry” harbors, running a novel fuel pipeline under the English Channel (“PLUTO”), and creating an array of specially engineered and adapted armored vehicles to deal with German defenses (“Hobart’s funnies”). That said, the chief innovation that allowed the Americans to break out of the hedgerows behind Omaha Beach was the ad hoc welding of metal spikes (many scavenged from German “hedgehog” steel beach defenses) to the fronts of Sherman M4 tanks by adaptive front-line soldiers. The subsequent “rhinos,” or modified Shermans — adaptations that no D-Day planners and engineers had envisioned — then plowed through the mounds and overgrowth of the bocage. Fighter pilots cannot design planes, but engineers cannot either without the practical input of pilots. Much of the advance of classical scholarship came from the systematization of learning and credentialing. In the 19th century, Ph.D. programs in classical philology, peer-reviewed scholarship, and a scientific method of assessing manuscripts, compiling lexica, and establishing authoritative texts of major authors allowed the creation of entirely new disciplines, such as papyrology, numismatics, epigraphy, and prosopography. All that said, perhaps the three greatest breakthroughs in classical scholarship of the 19th and 20th centuries were the result of either “amateurs” or eccentrics. Some were without formal classical educations. Others were idiosyncratic philologists working in fields outside their formal disciplines or indeed in areas they mostly created ex nihilo. The wealthy dilettante and retired German banker Heinrich Schliemann was many things, not all of them reputable. But for all his misconceptions and sometimes destructive restorations and misguided archaeological approaches, he was a pragmatist and the first to ground the Homeric epics within the physical landscapes of a real Troy and Mycenae. Milman Parry was a brilliant young linguist, but he is now known for his freelancing research with Serbo-Croatian oral bards in the badlands of the Balkans. His landmark contribution was showing how it was imminently possible and indeed likely that the monumental Homeric epics were not written but composed orally — by a mostly illiterate poet’s use of formulas, modular phrases, and longer, repeating type scenes. Parry more or less invented the entire field of Homeric oral poetry. And he did so in a unique and largely eccentric fashion. It was conventional academic wisdom up until the early 1950s that whatever Linear B was — the strange, undeciphered syllabic script found on clay tablets excavated from the Mycenean palaces — it could not be Greek. After all, the familiar Greek alphabet first appeared nearly 400 years later through borrowing and adapting Phoenician scripts in the late ninth century b.c. Moreover, the monumental Mycenean palaces, infrastructure, social organization, and art were so different from later Greek civilization of the emerging city-state of the late ninth century b.c. that it seemed impossible that the earlier Myceneans could have resembled Greek-speakers. To believe that heresy was to imagine an earlier, but lost, Greek script — and an alien, more Near Eastern–like prior vanished civilization that was nonetheless still Greek, one that might have been the kernel for orally transmitted Greek mythological tales set during the Dark Ages of long-ago supernatural heroes and gods. Such views were considered heterodox, at least until architect and former cryptologist Michael Ventris deciphered Linear B. With some help from others, he proved that it was an early form of the Greek language. Then, with the eclipse of Mycenean civilization in the cataclysms of the 13th and twelfth centuries b.c., Linear B had perished and thus was apparently unknown by later Greeks emerging from the Dark Ages.  Early Greeks, it turned out, had all along created monumental Mycenean palaces and then scattered after their destruction. They gradually forgot about them during the long centuries of the impoverished Dark Age. And yet finally Greeks reemerged in recorded history, as the same Greek-speakers but with a different script and a different social and political organization, the polis, at the beginning of Western civilization. The mavericks Schliemann, Parry, and Ventris were sometimes written off as dilettantes or strange academic birds. Often, they were snubbed; all died either tragically young or painfully. Many of their theories are still constantly questioned and have been rightly modified. Nonetheless, they all approached scientific questions largely through their own prior practical expertise — banking and business, living among bards and transcribing oral song-making in remote southern Europe, and cryptology. Most contemporary credentialed philologists either lacked the experience or imagination of the three, who nonetheless were often wise enough to enlist academic experts to hone their discoveries. They had more regard for the experts they refuted than the refuted did for them.   Credentialed Incredibility One of the most depressing aspects of the coronavirus epidemic has been the failure of the credentialed class — the alphabetic transnational and federal health organizations, the university modelers, the professional associations, and their media enablers. Their collective lapse was largely due to hubris and the assumption that titles and credentials meant they had no need to accept input and criticism from those far more engaged in the physical world — they saw no need to say, “At this time, I confess we are as confused as you are.” In sum, the ER doctors, the nurses, and the public in general all eagerly welcomed the research of the experts. But the reverse — in which experts would listen to those with firsthand experience — was not true. The asymmetrical result is that we all have paid a terrible price in misjudging the perfidy of China; the rot within the World Health Organization; the origins, transmission, infectiousness, and lethality of the virus; and the most effective, cost-to-benefit response to the epidemic in terms of saving lives lost to the infection versus the likely even more lives lost through the response. The problem was not just that we were supposed to accept expert, scientific, loud gospel on Monday, which grew muted and doubtful on Tuesday, and in near silence became impossible on Wednesday. In addition, our experts learned nothing and forgot nothing, and so repeated their entire cycle of credentialed haughtiness on Thursday. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he governor of Texas says museums there “can” open again, but some are dragging their feet. The Houston Museum of Fine Arts, the Menil Collection, the Dallas Museum of Art, the Kimbell Art Museum, Amon Carter Museum, the Museum of Modern Art in Fort Worth, and the big museums in San Antonio want weeks, maybe even months more, before they start serving the public again.  They’re waiting for all the experts, every last one of them, and everyone’s Ouija board to agree that opening is totally, absolutely safe, but life doesn’t work that way. Life’s a risky business, but they’re catering to all the alumni of Safe Space U among their staff. Where’s the Alamo spirit? “We’ll reopen when and if it seems safe to reopen incrementally,” Contemporary Austin announced. “When and if?” Do they think they might stay closed until there’s not a coronavirus left on the planet? If they do, they’re no longer a public institution. Rather, they are an art warehouse and don’t deserve a not-for-profit tax exemption. The Kimbell, a museum I adore, is “carefully considering when and how we may begin to reopen,” as if they’re planning something as elaborate as a moon launch. “Fort Worth, we have a problem,” and it’s navel-gazing. The McNay in San Antonio, another lovely museum, sent me some poetic blather about its 66 years of providing “beauty, solace, healing, and transformation through art.” Its leaders understand that, “now more than ever, art museums around the world will play an integral role in the recovery of our communities from these unprecedented times.” So it’s formed an internal task force, which means it’ll open, oh, when I discover a Texas-size oil gusher in my Vermont back yard. Weeks ago, I started hearing from curator and director friends that they don’t expect their museums to open until late summer. I wrote about this, calling it crazy. “We’ll reopen when and if it seems safe to reopen incrementally.” I’m not a psychiatrist, but I detect a bit of a smug, punitive, Puritan streak, like the governors who close their state beaches, even though no one has gotten coronavirus surfing, tanning, or building sand castles.   My previous two stories examined how the National Endowment for the Arts, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and the Institute for Museums and Library Services are spending $200 million in COVID-19 relief money. I suggested some ideas and wrote about what I thought was effective and ineffective.  
 In reading of Texas museums’ foot-dragging about reopening, I’d suggest one more idea, or a simple question for grant applicants: “Tell us what you need to reopen to the public by June 1.” A one-page application with a one-page budget. It’s a good use for NEA’s money, and it preserves jobs. The best, quickest way to keep people in the arts working is reopening our museums. If a supermarket paying its people $12 an hour can safely operate, so can museums whose directors, curators, and PR and fundraising flacks make multiples more. The chance of dying from coronavirus in Texas is about as great as getting trampled in a cattle drive at the Neiman Marcus perfume counter.  Texas — which, by the way, never totally shuttered its economy and trashed its tax base — has seen 782 Chinese coronavirus deaths in a population of 30 million people. That’s three deaths per 100,000 people, and it has three of the ten biggest cities in the country. Half of the fatalities were nursing-home residents. That’s far less than in every country in Europe. It’s less than in almost all the states that put their economies, tax base, hospitals, and small businesses in ICU. Museums have had six weeks to plan to reopen. It’s not rocket science. What have the directors and building superintendents been doing since March 15? “We are working through various reopening scenarios,” Agustin Arteaga said. He’s the director of the Dallas Museum of Art. This isn’t the Normandy invasion. We can’t live in a sanitized bubble. Museums should take reasonable, not extreme, steps to raise hygiene standards. Among their target audiences are the 98 percent of the public we now know have no ill effects from COVID-19 infection or who feel nothing more than cold-like symptoms. We’re at a point where we can make reasonable accommodations for the vulnerable, but we’ve already done the most extraordinary and, I’d say, the most reckless steps, like gutting the national economy when COVID-19 is mostly a New York and nursing-home crisis. Once our open-to-the-public, not-for-profit places take reasonable safety precautions, it’s up to the vulnerable to judge how much risk they want in their lives. Crazy, universal confinement diktats can’t continue. We’ll destroy the tax base that pays for social programs and permanently destroy millions of jobs. Some people will need to stay home and enjoy the very good online programming that the Houston MFA and other places have developed. The Texas museums range from the very big — the Houston MFA — to the very small, such as the Menil in Houston and the Blanton in Austin. For each, the safety issues are the same. The differences are mostly in magnitude. The Houston MFA is dealing with multiple public entrances, for instance, though the big museums can easily open only one entrance. Unfortunately, Harris County, where the Houston museums are located, has a new 29-year-old county executive, a Bernie Sanders spawn, and she’s incompetent, clueless, and extreme. Governor Abbott has overruled her dumbest edicts, but there she is. . . . The Houston museums have to deal with her.   The hygiene protocols are already done by European museums with initiative and imagination. There’s no need to reinvent the wheel. I know the big American museums are corporate now, stifling, timid, and bureaucratic. They’ll want to hire expensive consultants to tell them what common sense would advise, and common sense is free. I found a sensible protocol that the royal museum system in Belgium is using. It’ll reopen in a few days. It’s online. These steps were clear weeks ago and take no more than a few days to implement, with some Texas-style hustle. They’re straightforward and easy to implement. Install plexiglass screens protecting visitor-services staff and take credit cards instead of cash. Offer Purell at the front door — hell, there are probably donors who’d endow dispensing stations. I know people who’ve endowed closets and urinals. Oh, and do something clever. Slap “Wash Your Hands or Else” on Warhol’s “Mao,” who looks like he was a tidy person, mass murderer though he was when it came to dissenters. He meant business, and there are plenty of dopes in America now who’ll take China’s word on anything.  Don’t use “Che,” whatever you do. He’s so grungy he’d need to go through a car wash to clean up. Limit visitor numbers, suspend group tours, sanitize audio-tour gizmos after each use, offer masks, and establish special hours for the vulnerable, which supermarkets have managed to conceive and implement. Guards are already trained to monitor people’s movements in the galleries. A day’s additional training is needed. There’s camera surveillance. HVAC systems keep air as clean as air can get. The back-of-house staff need to do their social distancing. If other back-of-house accommodations are necessary, like rearranging workplace seating, I’d propose doing them after the museum reopens. These aren’t the public’s concern. I think people will come, in small numbers at first, but they’ll come, and they’ll behave the right way. The public’s done well, whether in badly hit New York, which needed to quarantine, or barely dinged Vermont, where people followed the rules, too. The public has taken personal responsibility, with tens of millions making enormous financial sacrifices as well as compromising their own health care by forgoing all kinds of surgeries, treatments for cancer, screenings, check-ups, and vaccinations. New York museums need to do more, since about half of the U.S. COVID-19 deaths — that’s 50 percent — are in the New York area, with 5 percent of the country’s population. The Met, whose financial model assumes millions of admission-paying visitors, will need the kind of strict, extreme visitor-per-square-yard limits that will blow a big hole in its budget. This is a perfect chance for museums to do something truly radical, or truly reactionary. Just open permanent-collection galleries first. American and British museums have climbed on a rotating exhibition treadmill over the past 20 years, seeking crowds and forgetting their collections. The quietest spaces at the Met, the Art Institute of Chicago, and the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston are the Old Masters galleries. Since museums are going to feel broke for the next few years, they need to exploit their collections, which, after all, are the things that made them icons of learning, pleasure, and civic pride in the first place. Most of a museum’s staff is office-bound as they’ve grown more bureaucratic. Staggering working hours is a silly idea. Museums, by the way, can’t make policies driven by the most neurotic among the staff. If some people are too frightened to work, that’s too bad. They need to deplete their accumulated sick and vacation time under the covers, then find jobs that indulge their standards, or seek a disability pension for mental impairment.  Museums are not-for-profits, which means they serve the public. They exist as places open to the public. If museums in Brussels, Berlin, and Rome can reopen, if the Uffizi is happy to reopen, then certainly museums in Dallas, Houston, and San Antonio can. Even the Forbidden City in China is reopening. The big museums have a special obligation to open now to assuage the fear incessantly and unconscionably peddled by gleeful doom-mongers, fear that’s paralyzing society. They need to lead by example.  Staying closed insults the 30 million Americans who don’t have jobs as well as the Americans who supply our food, staff our hospitals, keep our drugstores open, and man our essential factories. There’s more than a whiff of snobbery in the delay, delay, delay crowd. “Oh, it’s fine for them to go to work . . . they’re the servant class . . . but I’m too precious for that.” Well, Texas museum munchkins, put your teddy bears away and get out of your Little Red Riding Hood pajamas. It’s time to get back to work. If you can’t figure it out, I’ll chip in for a couple of cashiers from Kroger’s to show you how. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					O
				ver the past two decades, dissatisfaction with American higher education has grown at a steady clip. The main two complaints are that it’s too expensive and too radicalized. But despite wide-ranging debate over reform, no one has devised a way to make the four-year college degree incidental to the attainment of middle-class status. The game seems rigged.  Many higher-ed observers, such as the late Clay Christensen, have welcomed the prospect of “disruption” in the industry for some time. Among conservatives such as Tucker Carlson, the COVID-19 pandemic has raised hopes that the moment for that disruption has at last arrived. But there are good reasons to think we could come out of the COVID-19 crisis, especially if it drags on well beyond next fall, with a worsened higher-education system. First of all, the vast American labor market appears to be unable to function without a broadly accepted system of credentialization, and Civil Rights law alone guarantees higher education’s near-stranglehold on that system. A large employer that conducts dozens of job searches over several years, and hires only a token number of minorities, is guilty until proven innocent in the eyes of many anti-discrimination advocates. But if that employer can cite advanced degrees as its main hiring guideline, it can protect itself from legal liability. Unless COVID-19 somehow produces an equally legitimate alternative way of disbursing professional credentials, most of the public will continue to see college as the most reliable path toward economic independence. Higher education also provides associational benefits. Many view campus social life as one of its more trivial appeals or even a cause of its irredeemable decadence. But in addition to the enormous financial benefit alumni provide to their alma maters, the experience of four years at a residential college tends to result in many lifelong friendships. College may well be more effective at forging social bonds than most other institutions through which the average American adult passes. Conservatives who purport to care about the fragility of our social fabric should not overlook the possibility that disrupting higher education could further weaken it. Online education, which seems likely to expand amid COVID-19 fears, creates a much more purely transactional relationship between school and student. It offers far fewer social benefits than traditional classroom-based learning at a four-year residential school.   Lastly, the threat of consolidation looms large over the industry. One of the ways in which the American higher-education system seems distinctively American is in its decentralized character. We have elite schools, large public universities, and scores of small private institutions that have been around for over a century. Prior to COVID-19, higher-education observers and stakeholders were increasingly worried that a projected decrease in graduating high-school seniors would force a wave of school closures. The debate in higher-ed circles was not about whether the threat of demographic decline was real, but rather about how many schools would be affected and when. The wave had already begun to hit in states with a significant concentration of small private schools such as Massachusetts. If COVID-19 produces a drop in international students and an increase in deferrals, the pace of closures seems likely to accelerate. 
 Conservatives might hope that this trend will result in a higher-education landscape that is, broadly speaking, less conducive to left-wing indoctrination, but they are likely to be disappointed. Some of the small liberal-arts colleges at the greatest risk of closure are “Great Books” schools. Many are Christian schools. COVID-19 is not formidable enough to compel wealthy Ivy League schools to depart from the progressive status quo. Hopes that state legislatures will somehow impose a measure of sanity on public-university systems have not been realized. Still more vain are hopes that fiscal constraints could make higher education both cheaper and more accommodating to conservative ideas. Recent years of reduced state aid and increased fiscal anxiety have coincided with the proliferation of grievance-studies professors and the campus speech wars. And public colleges and universities, because they tend to enjoy extremely strong support among state politicians, will never experience as much restructuring as budgetary logic demands in any event.  Thus, the more small private colleges we see closing, the more centralization we’ll see in higher education. In K–12 public education, there’s widespread appreciation of the benefits of decentralization. We lament the decline of parochial schools and support the expansion of charter schools. Most small private colleges are nationally obscure but considered vital in their communities and regions. A higher-education system composed exclusively of massive public universities and the Ivy League is not one we’re likely to be happy with. 

Chinese state media slammed U.S. secretary of state Mike Pompeo on Monday after Pompeo repeated allegations that the coronavirus accidentally escaped from a lab in Wuhan. Pompeo is “one of the worst secretaries of the state in American history,” the Xinhua state news agency said in an article that was translated by the Wall Street Journal. The similarly state-run Global Times wrote in an editorial, “Pompeo is indulging in a solo performance that has failed to adhere to the professional standards expected of a chief diplomat. His claims are not supported by scientists or reliable intelligence.”  China’s state broadcaster CCTV broadcast a commentary segment entitled “Evil Pompeo is wantonly spewing poison and spreading lies.” “The so-called ‘virus leaked from a Wuhan lab’ hype is a complete and utter lie,” CCTV stated in a translation by Qatari government-owned Al Jazeera. “American politicians are rushing to shift the blame, cheat votes and suppress China when their own domestic anti-epidemic efforts are a mess.” Chinese state media have repeatedly criticized Pompeo, who took a hard line against China even before the coronavirus pandemic.  “I can tell you that there is a significant amount of evidence that [the coronavirus] came from that laboratory in Wuhan,” Pompeo said in a Sunday appearance on ABC’s This Week. Pompeo was referring to the Wuhan Institute of Virology, which studies coronaviruses.  World Health Organization adviser Jamie Metzl told National Review in an interview that it was “likely” that the coronavirus did indeed escape from a lab in Wuhan, although the allegation has not yet been confirmed. China has so far refused to allow WHO representatives to participate in an investigation of the coronavirus’s origins. U.S. intelligence agencies have concluded that China attempted to cover up the spread of coronavirus during the initial stages of the pandemic, in order to stock up on medical supplies before other nations.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

There’s bad uses of history, and then there’s Max Boot’s uncommonly silly Washington Post column on Sunday defending the Chinese Communist Party by comparing it to Kansas in 1918. Consider Boot’s central argument against the United States imposing any consequences on the Chinese regime for its extensive and lengthy coverup and obstruction of research on the coronavirus: The 1918 influenza epidemic, which killed 50 million to 100 million people around the world, is now known as the “Spanish flu.” But it actually started in Haskell County, Kan., and it was spread around the world by U.S. soldiers initially infected at Camp Funston in Kansas. It should be known as the “American flu” or “Kansas flu.” The influenza became a global pandemic in no small part because U.S. officials failed to warn their own citizens — or the world. . . . So should the nations of the world have punished the United States and demanded reparations for its role in spreading one of the most destructive diseases in history? That would seem to be the logic of the China hawks who demand that China be punished because the novel coronavirus originated there. . . . The United States would be better advised to focus on . . . genuine abuses rather than playing the pandemic blame game — lest other nations start demanding reparations for the 1918 flu. Reparations for 1918? Hoo boy. There’s a lot wrong here; let’s go one at a time. First, Boot glosses over the considerable historical debate over where the 1918 outbreak began. The Kansas theory was largely popularized by John Barry, in his 2004 book The Great Influenza. While Barry conceded that there was no direct evidence connecting the January 1918 outbreak in an isolated, rural Kansas county to the U.S. Army base at Camp Funston, he advanced an apparently persuasive argument that Haskell County had “the first recorded instance anywhere in the world of an outbreak of influenza so unusual that a physician warned public health officials.” A decade later, however, working from newly unearthed records, Canadian historian Mark Humphries pinpointed an earlier origin — China’s Shanxi province: Humphries finds archival evidence that a respiratory illness that struck northern China in November 1917 was identified a year later by Chinese health officials as identical to the Spanish flu. He also found medical records indicating that more than 3,000 of the 25,000 Chinese Labor Corps workers who were transported across Canada en route to Europe starting in 1917 ended up in medical quarantine, many with flu-like symptoms. . . . Humphries discovered that a British legation official in China wrote that the disease was actually influenza, in a 1918 report. . . . At the time of the outbreak, British and French officials were forming the Chinese Labor Corps, which eventually shipped some 94,000 laborers from northern China to southern England and France during the [First World War]. . . . The Chinese laborers arrived in southern England by January 1918 and were sent to France, where the Chinese Hospital at Noyelles-sur-Mer recorded hundreds of their deaths from respiratory illness. Humphries concluded that this allowed him to trace “an unbroken epidemiological chain from the interior of China to the battlefields of Europe,” whereas, “although Barry was correct to conclude that flu was first reported in the civilian population at Haskell, it is unlikely that it was the origin site for the 1918 virus given the clear existence of another severe wave three months earlier which was reported across US Army hospitals.” Humphries’s study convinced some historians to abandon Barry’s thesis: “This is about as close to a smoking gun as a historian is going to get,” says historian James Higgins, who lectures at Lehigh University [and] has researched the 1918 spread of the pandemic in the United States. “These records answer a lot of questions about the pandemic.” The debate continues; there are still experts who stand by virologist John Oxford’s theory of a French point of origin. Even Barry, however, says today that the origins are uncertain and “my own feeling is probably more likely in China.” Second, by suggesting that the U.S. government might owe “reparations” for sending Americans abroad in 1918, Boot completely ignores both the geopolitical and the medical contexts of the era. No matter what news arrived from Kansas, the absolute last thing that Georges Clemenceau would ever have requested in the spring of 1918 was a halt to shipping American soldiers to France. The French and British had bled their nations white fighting the Germans, who — finally freed of the need to devote huge numbers of troops to the Russian and Italian fronts — launched a massive offensive in March designed to be a knockout blow. With the manpower of the European combatants virtually exhausted — the same reason for shipping in Chinese labor — the arrival of a million Americans over the course of 1918 was seen as providential. The Americans played a key supporting role in stopping the German spring offensive, which was finally brought to an end by an outbreak of the Spanish flu among the German army, incapacitating nearly half a million men in June 1918. Americans played an even more important role in the Entente’s fall offensive that ended the war. France and Britain would have hazarded any risk of disease to keep the doughboys coming “over there.”  
 Moreover, morale-driven press censorship was at least as extensive in Britain, France, and Germany in 1918 as it was in the United States. The reason why news came from Spain was precisely that Spain was neutral in the war. The lack of honest public reckoning with the pandemic was pervasive and hardly limited to the United States.  The medical context was also quite different. Penicillin, the first antibiotic, was not discovered until 1928. The influenza virus was first isolated in 1933; until then, it was not known whether influenza was caused by a virus or by a bacterium. The first direct studies of the 1918 virus were not conducted until the 1990s. The virus could be fought with masks and social distancing, but the medicine of the day was defenseless to stop its spread or protect its victims. And in a world that had lived with pervasive death from infectious disease since the dawn of human history, nobody in 1918 thought in terms of the kinds of lockdowns we are experiencing today — even if the pandemic hadn’t erupted in the middle of a global war. Third, judging from Boot’s use of “Kansas flu” and his Twitter feed, he seems to think he can score some sort of tribal points by going after Kansas, apparently because it’s secretary of state Mike Pompeo’s home state: The 1918 influenza which killed more than 50 million started in Pompeo’s home state of Kansas and spread around the world because of US negligence and lies. So by Pompeo’s logic should America have been held responsible? In @PostOpinions: https://t.co/PRUAnspKS7 https://t.co/6xm5bQklHU — Max Boot (@MaxBoot) May 3, 2020  The 1918 “Spanish flu” actually started in Kansas and became a global pandemic, killing at least 50M, in no small part because U.S. officials failed to warn the world. Many, in fact, lied.  So should the nations of the world demand reparations from US?https://t.co/PRUAnspKS7 — Max Boot (@MaxBoot) May 3, 2020  “Paid the world”? Did anyone seek reparations from the United States for launching the Great Influenza (misnamed the Spanish flu) of 1918? It started in Kansas. https://t.co/QYjXY4sNNH — Max Boot (@MaxBoot) March 31, 2020  The problem with the U.S. response to the 1918 pandemic, however, was federal, and not the fault of Kansas. Indeed, Barry’s thesis of a Kansas origin was based heavily on a timely alarm raised by a local Kansas doctor. Boot himself quotes Joshua Zeitz in Politico, who cites instead the actions of federal officials: “The U.S. Surgeon General, Rupert Blue, assured Americans that ‘there is no cause for alarm if precautions are observed.’ . . . Colonel Philipp Doane, who led health and safety at the military shipyards where the disease first spread, dismissed the ‘so-called Spanish influenza’ as ‘nothing more or less than the old-fashioned grippe.’” Boot leaves off the inconvenient place where Zeitz goes next: “Woodrow Wilson, who mobilized a formidable public relations effort to generate popula[r] support for the war, said nothing.”  Woodrow Wilson was the father of progressivism in the Democratic Party, and the Patient Zero for many of today’s progressive ideas. Wilson, a Ph.D. political scientist and university president, began the Democrats’ romance with academia and with government by unelected “experts.” He coined the idea of an evolving, “living constitution” that “is accountable to Darwin, not to Newton” and laid both the intellectual and the political foundations of the politically insulated administrative state that treated public oversight as “a clumsy nuisance, a rustic handling delicate machinery.” The roster of Wilson’s sins against America is a lengthy one, but the domestic toll of his policies in the 1918 pandemic response surely merits a place on the list. That has nothing to do with Haskell County, Kans. It’s not just that Wilson said nothing and did virtually nothing to help the response; as Zeitz, Barry, and others properly note, it was not expected in 1918 that the federal government would play a leading role in public-health responses other than through its ability to quarantine people at the border. In Barry’s words: When the United States entered the war, Woodrow Wilson demanded that “the spirit of ruthless brutality . . . enter into the very fibre of national life.” So he created the Committee on Public Information, which was inspired by an adviser who wrote, “Truth and falsehood are arbitrary terms. . . . The force of an idea lies in its inspirational value. It matters very little if it is true or false.” At Wilson’s urging, Congress passed the Sedition Act, making it punishable with 20 years in prison to “utter, print, write or publish any disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive language about the form of government of the United State . . . or to urge, incite, or advocate any curtailment of production in this country of any thing or things . . . necessary or essential to the prosecution of the war.” Government posters and advertisements urged people to report to the Justice Department anyone “who spreads pessimistic stories . . . cries for peace, or belittles our effort to win the war.” This led to active censorship, such as Wilson’s Justice Department threatening a Wisconsin newspaper with prosecution for accurate reporting on the pandemic. It also played a large role in encouraging local as well as federal public-health officials to tell outright lies about the Spanish flu. That was a policy directed from bureaus in Washington, not cattle farms in Kansas. Fourth, in attempting to deflect consequences from the Chinese regime, Boot isn’t content to mangle century-old history; he’s also downplaying what happened this year. He frames a “whatabout Trump” parallel for Xi Jinping’s regime by talking only in terms of delays in locking down Wuhan. This ignores the extensive pattern of Chinese misconduct. Chinese officials knowingly peddled the false claim that the virus could not spread person to person. These claims were duly parroted by the World Health Organization. In January, even sophisticated Western experts such as Dr. Anthony Fauci were “unclear” on how contagious the virus might be, uncertainty that Fauci now says was based on Chinese “misinformation right from the beginning.” Chinese officials arrested whistleblowing doctors, ordered a halt to testing and the destruction of samples, and refused to provide a sample of the virus for Western researchers to study. These were all practical obstacles to research and public-health responses even by governments (not only our own) inclined to be skeptical of official Chinese pronouncements. Meanwhile, 5 million people left Wuhan, and hundreds of thousands of people entered the United States from China before the Trump administration restricted travel at the end of January. Given recent reevaluations of how early the virus was spreading, it now looks as if we knew too late to shut the proverbial barn door.   These are not a reason to let American leaders, from Trump on down, off the hook for their own subsequent actions. But neither is “whatabout Trump” a valid excuse for defending the Chinese Communist Party and whitewashing the very real effect that its actions have had on America and the world. Boot asks plaintively: “Rather than seeking to punish China for a disease that has killed at least 4,633 of its citizens and cost it billions of dollars — isn’t that punishment enough? — the United States should cooperate with Beijing in developing a vaccine and cure.” He never asks whether Beijing can be trusted to do so.  Moreover, there are serious reasons to believe that China’s responsibility runs deeper: that the virus was loosed on the population owing to laxity at the viral-research labs in Wuhan, effectively a viral Chernobyl. Boot scoffs at the “unlikely event that the outbreak was the result of a lab accident,” but the timeline as we now know it makes it implausible to accept the official Chinese explanation that the virus jumped from animals to humans at a wet market in Wuhan. Even the Washington Post “fact check” that Boot cites concedes that a “Jan. 24 analysis published in the Lancet found that three of the first four cases — including the first known case — did not have market links. Daniel R. Lucey, a pandemics expert at Georgetown University, put it simply: ‘In my opinion, the virus came into the market before it came out of the market.’” That leaves Boot without a theory of what did happen. Jim Geraghty has traced the extensive circumstantial evidence to believe that the labs were studying the virus and that an accidental release is the simplest explanation of what happened; I won’t rehash all of Jim’s reporting, but you can start here, here, and here. Boot claims that the Wuhan-lab-accident theory is simply a matter of Trump citing “secret evidence,” an ironic contention sandwiched between Boot’s citation of “warnings of the U.S. intelligence community starting in early January” and “New York Times reports that the White House is pressuring intelligence agencies” — both assertions made without a single identified source. In fact, the director of national intelligence confirmed on the record — in the very statement that Boot cites — that “the IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan.” And for what it’s worth, if you’re banking on unnamed sources in the intelligence community, “a senior intelligence official” reportedly told Jerry Dunleavy of the Washington Examiner: “A majority of the U.S. Intelligence Community’s 17 spy agencies believe the coronavirus likely originated with an accidental lab escape from a laboratory in Wuhan, China. . . . The official also noted dissenting agencies remain open to the theory.” The Chinese government has, of course, obstructed inquiry into the origins in Wuhan, so for now all we can do is extrapolate from the best available evidence.  Regardless of whether the virus entered the general population in Wuhan from sloppy lab procedures, wet-market bat sales, or some other mechanism, the record of the Chinese Communist Party cannot so easily be minimized. Wuhan, we’re not in Kansas anymore. 

John Fund and Joel Hay think its approach to COVID-19 is paying off, even though it has a higher death rate per million people than its neighbors; Nick Frankovich disagrees. I lean toward the second side of the argument. I’ll add two points. First: To say that Swedes can “go about their day in a largely normal fashion,” as Fund and Hay say, seems like an overstatement: Sweden’s bars, hotels and restaurants are facing a huge drop in business, despite being allowed to remain open during the pandemic, according to the country’s business minister, Ibrahim Baylan. He told a news conference that many restaurants, hotels and bars were struggling – with a 50% average drop in demand. This has risen to 90% in areas typically popular with tourists. Second: The perspective Fund and Hay take on the mortality rate is open to question. They say the rate is higher than that of the U.S. only because it has an older population. But that seems less like a defense of Sweden’s policy than a reason for it to have hesitated to adopt that policy. There’s one additional argument in defense of the policy: namely, that Sweden has front-loaded its deaths rather than increased their number. But whether that trade-off turns out to have been wise will depend on what treatments and vaccines we eventually have, and when we have them.  Update: See also this story from last week: “Sweden had no lockdown but its economy is expected to suffer just as badly as its European neighbors.” Update 2: I inadvertently mischaracterized Fund and Hay, saying they had not made the front-loading argument; they had, and I have fixed the reference.  

Has the British government forgotten how to spell the word “men”? There is emerging evidence to suggest that #coronavirus may be having a disproportionate impact on some ethnic groups, as well as certain genders. We're launching a review into the factors impacting health outcomes to address health inequalities. Find out more 👇 @PHE_uk — Department of Health and Social Care (@DHSCgovuk) May 4, 2020  In all seriousness, obscuring the truth — in this case, that there are two biological genders: male and female — during a public-health emergency is as dangerous as it is stupid.  

A Chinese intelligence report warned President Xi Jinping and other Communist Party leaders that Beijing is facing the highest level of hostility since the 1989 Tiananmen Square protest, sources with knowledge of the report told Reuters. The report, composed by the China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations (CICIR), a state-backed think tank associated with China’s top intelligence body, reportedly warned Xi last month that the country needed to prepare for a “worst-case scenario” amid heightening tensions with the U.S. over the origins of coronavirus. Reuters did not view a copy of the report, but was briefed on its contents — which reportedly included calls for China to ramp up its military in case of conflict.  CICIR’s findings included a shift in public perception about China’s influence among Western nations, as well as fears that China’s ambitious Belt and Road infrastructure investment project could face stronger resistance. U.S. State Department spokeswoman Morgan Ortagus did not comment directly on the report to Reuters, but warned that the CCP was abdicating its “special responsibility” to be transparent about Covid-19’s epicenter in Wuhan. “Beijing’s efforts to silence scientists, journalists, and citizens and spread disinformation exacerbated the dangers of this health crisis,” she said. Beijing’s lies and disinformation following the discovery of coronavirus have been well documented, including the December gagging of Wuhan laboratories that discovered the novel outbreak was related the deadly SARS virus of 2002-2003.   “They didn’t make the virus available to anyone,” former FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb told National Review in April.  “. . . They didn’t make the live virus available. The United States eventually got the live virus, but they got it weeks later than they otherwise could have, and that delayed development of diagnostic tests.” China has also engaged in a propaganda war to boost its image in the face of international criticism, including advocating local governments to praise Beijing for its handling of the outbreak, while simultaneously stoking conspiracy theories that the virus came from the U.S. The Trump administration has ramped up efforts in response, with Secretary of State Mike Pompeo citing undisclosed intelligence on Sunday to state “there’s enormous evidence” the virus escaped from a Wuhan lab. “Personally, I think they made a horrible mistake, and they didn’t want to admit it,” Trump responded.  “We wanted to go in, but they didn’t want us there. They made a mistake, they tried to cover it, like a fire,” President Trump said Sunday night. “. . . They couldn’t put out the fire.” Other officials are “turbocharging” efforts to incentivize companies to decouple “essential” supply chains from China, after the Department of Homeland Security found in a new report that China “intentionally concealed the severity” of the initial coronavirus outbreak in order to stock up on medical supplies.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Sweden ranks seventh on the list of countries with most COVID-19 fatalities per capita. (I exclude microstates with populations under 100,000.) The six countries with more fatalities per capita are all in Western Europe. (I include the United Kingdom.) The fatality rate in the Netherlands is only slightly higher than in Sweden, but since April 1 it’s grown faster in the latter. Sweden appears to be on track to move up from seventh to sixth place before long.  The United States should learn from Sweden’s response to the pandemic, John Fund and Joel Hay argue in their most recent article at NRO. They think that the lesson we should take away is that Sweden’s response has been a success and is a model that other countries should follow: Go light on social-distancing restrictions, reopen schools, bars, restaurants, and gyms yesterday, and aim for herd immunity. Arguments for lifting any given lockdown can be made. At this point in the pandemic, however, Sweden’s experience no longer clearly supports them. Granted, the landscape may look different a year from now. We’re still trying to see through the fog. Fund and Hay tout Sweden’s relatively low number of COVID-19 cases per capita, but that figure alone isn’t meaningful unless we know how many Swedes have been tested. In any case, if Swedish policymakers are aiming for herd immunity, they should want the infection rate to be higher, not lower. Twelve percent of Swedes who have tested positive have died. That figure is high — in the United States, for example, the percentage is 7 — and so perhaps Sweden is overcounting deaths related to COVID-19. But perhaps not. We don’t know. In Sweden as elsewhere, COVID-19 is most fatal to the elderly. Pointing out that Swedes (average lifespan, 83 years) live longer on average than Americans do (79) and that more than half of Sweden’s COVID-19 fatalities have been in nursing homes, Fund and Hay imply that in Sweden the population that has died from the virus is on average a little older than in the United States. They may be right about that, although they don’t produce the statistics that would enable us to make the comparison. “On an age-adjusted basis,” they write, “Sweden has done significantly better than the U.S” when we measure “deaths per million.”  Has it? By how much? To quantify it, we would have to weight deaths by age, but what would be the formula? Should there be a single bright line, such as age 80? The death of someone older than that would count as equal to three-fifths the death of someone younger? Whatever formula we came up with would, I hope, provoke strong moral objections, including some from me. If we’re going to imply that you should interpret fatality figures on an “age-adjusted basis,” we need to spell out what we mean, and we need to be specific.  

The latest effort from abortion providers to stop states from restricting abortion during the COVID-19 outbreak is an especially troubling one: In Arkansas, the American Civil Liberties Union and the state’s lone abortion clinic have sued to block a policy that would require women to obtain a negative coronavirus test before getting an abortion.  “Delaying abortion care across the board for a COVID-19 test is especially unwarranted in view of Arkansas’s otherwise permissive approach to letting individuals mix and mingle in restaurants and gyms without negative COVID tests,” the lawsuit states. It also notes that “women who cannot obtain access” to a COVID-19 test are “entirely barred . . . from exercising their constitutional right to receive pre-viability abortion care in Arkansas.” The previous week, the Eighth Circuit Court of Appeals had upheld the Arkansas policy that included elective abortions among the non-essential procedures that the state limited during the COVID-19 response in order to prevent the spread of disease and conserve medical equipment. This lawsuit is a new low for abortion-rights advocates, who now have spent the last two months consistently taking state officials to court for including abortion among the many procedures restricted during the outbreak. Not only do abortion providers — who claim to be offering health care to women — apparently believe that they ought to be exempted from the regulations applied to health-care professionals, but they also appear willing to risk contributing to the spread of a potentially fatal disease simply to continue profiting from abortions.  

The New York City Police Benevolent Association, the city’s largest police union, released a statement Monday arguing that officers should not be tasked with enforcing social distancing ordinances. “The NYPD needs to get cops out of the social distancing enforcement business altogether,” PBA president Patrick Lynch said in a statement. “As the weather heats up & the pandemic continues to unravel our social fabric, police officers should be allowed to focus on our core public safety mission. If we don’t, the city will fall apart before our eyes.”  The city’s police force has been hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic, with over 4,000 officers testing positive for the illness and 30 dead over the course of the outbreak. In early April, almost 20 percent of the entire 36,000-strong police force was on sick leave for coronavirus or other illnesses. Enforcing social distancing in the city is made exceedingly difficult by the city’s density and residents’ reliance on public transport. NYPD commissioner Dermot Shea said Monday that police issued about 70 summonses over the weekend for violations of social distancing regulations. “This is a great experiment we’re living through here,” Shea told reporters at a press conference. “Really never seen this before in a city of 8.6 million people trying to keep everyone inside.”  The NYPD on Saturday arrested three people in a group violating social distancing measures, and video of the altercation was shared in local media. The force also faced criticism after allowing mourners to gather at the funeral of an ultra-Orthodox rabbi in Brooklyn. After more mourners gathered than were initially predicted, police were forced to break up the funeral.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Both came out today via the National Bureau of Economic Research, and they’re available here and here. The upshot is that lockdowns reduce the spread of COVID-19, though the studies have their limits. The first paper looks at two different data sets, one of countries and one of U.S. states. In the country-level analysis, the authors are able to separate out various components of lockdowns to estimate which policies had which effects. (As I’ve said before, I’m skeptical of this kind of thing since the policies rolled out so quickly everywhere.) Here are the main results; in reading the following, note that the numbers can be roughly interpreted as percentages (e.g., 0.05 would correspond to about 5 percent): The policies most strongly and statistically significantly associated with slowing the [daily] growth rate of . . . confirmed cases in order of magnitude of impact were public transport closures (-0.09 . . .), enforced workplace closures (-0.0784 . . .), limited domestic travel ([-0.065] . . .), and restrictions on international travel (-0.0639 . . .). School closures . . . and limits on public events . . . are negatively related to growth rates of confirmed cases but were not found to be statistically significant. Note, however, that this measures confirmed cases, which depend heavily on testing. The results for deaths are generally not statistically significant, perhaps because of “our short sample and long lags between implementation . . . and effects on death rate.” For U.S. states, the paper focuses on stay-at-home orders, so it doesn’t distinguish among the various specific restrictions they entail. Once again, the results are strong for case growth — “a state’s own policy was associated with a reduction of the growth rate of 16.9 log points [i.e., in the ballpark of 17 percent]” — but not deaths. The paper further finds “spillover” effects among states, where a state’s own trends depend, in large part, on what other states are doing. This paper also looks at effects on the economy. Interestingly, it finds that the economic damage has been mostly national in scope, not limited to states that enacted stay-at-home orders — though it is predictably concentrated among industries that were shut down or whose workers can’t telecommute. On to the next paper, whose main analysis is a similar dive into case and death growth in U.S. states — but which adds that some states benefit more than others from locking down. Here’s part of the abstract, which sums things up nicely: This study explores the impact of SIPOs [shelter-in-place orders] on health, with particular attention to heterogeneity in their impacts. First, using daily state-level social distancing data from SafeGraph . . . we document that adoption of a SIPO was associated with a 5 to 10 percent increase in the rate at which state residents remained in their homes full-time. Then, using daily state-level coronavirus case data collected by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we find that approximately three weeks following the adoption of a SIPO, cumulative COVID-19 cases fell by 44 percent. Event-study analyses confirm common COVID-19 case trends in the week prior to SIPO adoption and show that SIPO-induced case reductions grew larger over time. However, this average effect masks important heterogeneity across states — early adopters and high population density states appear to reap larger benefits from their SIPOs. Finally, we find that statewide SIPOs were associated with a reduction in coronavirus-related deaths, but estimated mortality effects were imprecisely estimated. The findings here are broadly similar; the results for case growth are strong, and while these authors do find a result for deaths, they concede it’s “imprecisely estimated.” And the addition that places with high population density benefit more from shutdowns is important. As I wrote the other day, the key question now isn’t so much whether lockdowns work but what we do next, because this can’t go on much longer whether it’s working or not. But for future reference, we need to figure out how effective these policies are, and it’s nice to see some early work on that question.  

California governor Gavin Newsom’s executive order closing the beaches of Orange County, Calif., is what you get when you govern by Twitter: A news photo showing a crowded Orange County beach makes the social-media rounds, provoking the predictable outrage storm; Governor Newsom, rather than investigate, issues an executive order to placate the social-media circus; that executive order is based on powers that the governor does not enjoy, and the Democratic governor singles out the historically Republican cities of Orange County.  It is not even clear that there was a real problem for Newsom to solve. One photograph did indeed show an Orange County beach looking like spring break; other photographs showed a much more dispersed and socially distanced crowd. Without taking a deep dive into the very interesting online discussion of the characteristics of telephoto lenses (the Orange County Register photo is getting something like the Dan Rather treatment; it was not doctored, but it also does not tell the full story), making big public-policy decisions based on a single photograph and on the social-media reaction to that photograph is a poor way to proceed. Orange County is, in reality, faring better than much of California in the epidemic: As of this writing, it has suffered 52 COVID-19 deaths out of a population of more than 3 million, substantially fewer than nearby counties such as Riverside and San Bernardino, even though those have smaller populations. Orange County seems to have been doing reasonably well without any heavy-handed diktats from Newsom. The parks in question include, as a lawsuit against Newsom’s order points out, those under the control of the cities in question, Huntington Beach and Dana Point. (National Review Institute trustee David L. Bahnsen is involved in that lawsuit.)  We would like to see scrupulous compliance with social-distancing practices. We also believe that people are more likely to accept the legitimacy of those rules when the decisions governing them are made in a way that is reasonable and democratic rather than unreasoning and autocratic, when decisions are made at the local level and respect the genuine diversity among our communities, and when those entrusted with the extraordinary authority of emergency powers are not themselves acting out of hysteria or in response to hysteria.  
 We very strongly suspect that having figures such as Chicago mayor Lori Lightfoot bellowing at teenagers, “We will take you to jail — period” probably does more harm than good. The hectoring and bullying style that has too often accompanied the implementation of social distancing inspires more defiance than the rules themselves do. And such threats bring with them an obvious problem: Make good on them and you are endangering lives with the enforced closeness of arrest and jail; fail to make good on them and the credibility of local government is eroded. Best not to put yourself into such a bind to begin with. There will be some noncompliance, but a domineering approach is likely to make that problem worse rather than better.  We also believe with the National Recreation and Park Association that parks and other outdoor spaces can be used safely and responsibly. As NRPA puts it: “We believe that many parks, trails and open spaces can continue to be used in a safe manner that allows people to enjoy the mental and physical health benefits these spaces provide. In all instances, we recommend people follow local, state and national ordinances and guidelines regarding the use of these spaces and recognize that these vary from community to community.” In big, diverse states such as California and Texas, it is far more sensible to push these decisions to the municipal level to the extent that doing so is possible. There is every reason to believe that the authorities in Orange County are competent to see to the health and hygiene policies of Orange County and its public places. And what is true of Orange County is true of many other communities around the country. It is precisely at difficult times such as these that cool heads and a light touch are needed — and those have been lacking in too many states and cities. There is a difference between social distancing and house arrest, and Governor Newsom owes it to his constituents to stay on the right side of that line. 

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is projecting the U.S. coronavirus daily death toll to reach about 3,000 people by June 1, with 200,000 new cases per day by the same date, the New York Times reported on Monday. The projections were compiled into charts currently used by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.  “There remains a large number of counties whose burden continues to grow,” the CDC warned in the documents. “This is not a White House document nor has it been presented to the task force or gone through interagency vetting,” read a statement from the White House commenting on the report. “This data is not reflective of any of the modeling done by the Coronavirus Task Force or data that the task force has analyzed. The President’s phased guidelines to open up America again are a scientific-driven approach that the top health and infectious disease experts in the federal government agreed with.” President Trump predicted on Sunday that the U.S. would see thousands of additional deaths from the disease.  “We’re going to lose anywhere from 75, 80, to 100,000 people,” Trump said in a virtual town hall on Fox News. “That’s a horrible thing. We shouldn’t lose one person over this.” At the end of March, Dr. Deborah Birx, response coordinator for the White House coronavirus task force, predicted a similar death toll of at least 100,000 even with Americans following social distancing guidelines.  However, the president also stated that he believes the country will have a vaccine for coronavirus by the end of 2020. The White House has initiated “Operation Warp Speed,” a coordinated effort by various elements in pharmaceutical industries, the military, and government agencies to speed development of a vaccine. There are currently over 1,100,000 confirmed coronavirus cases in the U.S. and close to 68,000 deaths, with 19,000 deaths in New York City alone. U.S. unemployment has shot to 18 percent of the workforce, or about 30 million people, following mass closures of businesses to enforce social distancing measures. Several states with lower numbers of coronavirus cases, such as Georgia and Colorado, are gradually reopening businesses that were shut because of the pandemic.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

United Kingdom health ministers are weighing a plan to create “immunity passports” for workers, which would use coronavirus testing and facial recognition to certify someone’s identity and indicate whether they have already had the virus and can safely return to the workplace. The tech firm Onfido, which specializes in identity verification through facial biometrics, has presented the British government with detailed plans for the passports, the company said. The company said it has the capacity to implement a system within months, which is said could be the “linchpin of the new normality.”  “An immunity passport is a presentable proof of immunity. It is designed to help an individual prove that they have been tested and that their test result belongs to them, but without having to share any personal information,” Onfido CEO and co-founder Husayn Kassai said in a statement. “We’re in talks with governments and employers to make this process as fast, secure and simple as possible. Our technology is used to tie a physical human being to their digital identity using just a photo of their ID and a selfie video. Once this is bound to a test result, the digital certificate could be displayed similar to a smartphone boarding pass,” Kassai said of the company’s proposal. The health passports could use either antigen testing, which indicates whether a person has coronavirus currently, or antibody testing, which indicates if someone has already had the virus. Onfido’s technology would be embedded in another company’s application to verify identity. A selfie photo would be matched with the person’s government ID picture and linked to a coronavirus test, the result of which their employer would be able to see when they go in to work.   The immunity passport proposal, which is still in the early stages of discussion within the UK government, has raised concerns among critics about data security and privacy. Prime Minister Boris Johnson, who survived the coronavirus himself after being moved to the ICU briefly, is scheduled to address the nation on Sunday to offer details on how to “unlock the various parts of the UK economy.” Johnson said last week that it is still too early to know when social distancing measures will be able to be lifted, but he assured that plans to reopen schools and other public spaces soon are in the works.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Justice Department is pushing back against Virginia Governor Ralph Northam’s stay at home order, arguing that churches have been unfairly affected. The DOJ filed a statement of interest on Sunday in federal court in support of a Chincoteague, Virginia church that sued the state after its pastor was issued a criminal citation for holding a service with 16 people, six more than Northam’s order allows. Meanwhile, other establishments such as liquor stores and law offices are allowed to hold gatherings of more than ten people.  “The United States believes that the church has set forth a strong case that the Orders, by exempting other activities permitting similar opportunities for in-person gatherings of more than 10 individuals, while at the same time prohibiting churches from gathering in groups of more than 10 — even with social distancing measures and other precautions — has impermissibly interfered with the church’s free exercise of religion,” the DOJ wrote in a court filing. “Unless the Commonwealth can prove that its disparate treatment of religious gatherings is justified by a compelling reason and is pursued through the least restrictive means, this disparate treatment violates the Free Exercise Clause, and the Orders may not be enforced against the church,” the Justice Department added. Lighthouse Fellowship Church requested a temporary restraining order against the Democratic governor as well as an injunction to suspend enforcement of the order after the church’s pastor, Kevin Wilson, was served a summons carrying the possibility of a year in jail or a $2,500 fine.   U.S. District Court Judge Arenda Allen denied the church’s request, ruling that “in incidental disruption of normal practice does not convert the Governor’s broadly applicable Orders into a substantial burden on Plaintiff’s right to practice its religion.” The exception to the 10 person limit for some businesses “is essential to prevent joblessness at a time when people desperately need to retain their incomes and healthcare, and at a time when unemployment is drastically rising,” the judge added. Virginia Solicitor General Toby Heytens, representing Northam, argued in a preliminary response filed Sunday evening that the governor’s stay at home order did not “operate in the manner the plaintiff and the federal government describe.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

American clothing company J. Crew filed for bankruptcy protection on Monday, the first major retailer to do so during the coronavirus pandemic. Crew’s parent company, Chinos Holdings, filed for Chapter 11 protection in federal bankruptcy court for the Eastern District of Virginia after its board reached a decision on Sunday night, following weeks of negotiations over how to handle the company’s overhanging debt. The retailer will restructure by converting $1.65 billion of its debt into equity for its lenders, including the investment firm Anchorage Capital Group — effectively a change of ownership.  “Throughout this process, we will continue to provide our customers with the exceptional merchandise and service they expect from us, and we will continue all day-to-day operations, albeit under these extraordinary COVID-19-related circumstances,” CEO Jan Singer said in a statement. “As we look to reopen our stores as quickly and safely as possible, this comprehensive financial restructuring should enable our business and brands to thrive for years to come.” In 2011, the retailer was acquired by private equity firms TPG Capital and Leonard Green & Partners in a $3 billion leveraged buyout, while it carried a debt burden of $1.7 billion. With the pandemic closing hundreds of its locations and stock plunges halting J. Crew’s plan to raise funds by taking its Madewell label public, the company was forced to react. As a result of the coronavirus, retailers have seen a record drop in sales, which contracted nearly nine percent in March, as U.S. gross domestic product fell 4.8 percent in the first quarter of 2020, the worst rate since 2008. The Labor Department has recorded 26.5 million new jobless claims — approximately 16 percent of the country’s labor force — since the shutdowns began in March.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Mike Allen’s Axios AM newsletter, today: “Governors, mayors and other local officials have gotten the best reviews — for acting swiftly to head off worse outcomes, or simply for letting science guide responses under intense political pressure… Lori Lightfoot, Chicago mayor (D): She wins praise for focusing on the outbreak at the county jail and hammering the stay-at-home message.” Man, life is so much easier when you’re a Democrat. Back on April 11: Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot, a Democrat, defended a haircut she received recently despite salons and barbershops shutting down under the state’s stay-at-home order. Lightfoot was criticized for her actions after previously stating in one of her public service announcements that “getting your roots done is not essential,” according to the Chicago Tribune. The controversy began when the stylist posted photos with the mayor on Facebook last weekend, thanking her for her hard work and saying she had the “pleasure of giving Mayor Lightfoot a hair trim.” The stylist was wearing a mask and gloves, the mayor said in defense of her haircut during a press conference earlier this week. “I’m the public face of this city. I’m on national media and I’m out in the public eye.” New York governor Andrew Cuomo made the list, too — even though New York State required nursing homes to readmit residents sent to hospitals with the coronavirus and accept new patients as long as they are deemed “medically stable.” The state wanted to expand hospital capacity, and envisioned moving elderly patients out of hospitals to free up beds for incoming patients. Of course, that brings recovering and still potentially contagious patients into buildings with lots of vulnerable elderly. Cuomo added that it’s not the state’s job to provide the nursing homes with personal protective equipment.  Cuomo also declared that those who had been laid off, and who were still waiting for the state to provide unemployment benefits, should “take a job as an essential worker.” Many in western New York said they’ve been waiting more than a month after applying for unemployment benefits.  

The Trump administration is stepping up an effort to reduce dependence on Chinese manufacturing following the coronavirus pandemic, including possible new incentives for companies to shift supply chains, such as tax benefits and subsidies. “We’ve been working on [reducing the reliance of our supply chains in China] over the last few years but we are now turbocharging that initiative,” Keith Krach, undersecretary for Economic Growth, Energy and the Environment at the U.S. State Department, told Reuters, adding that the focus was on “the critical areas” and “bottlenecks.”  Measures involving the Commerce Department, State, and other federal agencies are being explored to determine which supply chains are “essential” and how they could be decoupled from China. Sources said that one such proposal involves the creation of a trade network of “trusted partners” called the “Economic Prosperity Network” that would not include China. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said last week that the U.S. was working with Australia, India, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea, and Vietnam to “move the global economy forward,” including how to “restructure … supply chains to prevent something like this from ever happening again.” The Department of Homeland Security found in a new report that China “intentionally concealed the severity” of the initial coronavirus outbreak in order to stock up on medical supplies.   “This moment is a perfect storm; the pandemic has crystallized all the worries that people have had about doing business with China,” one senior U.S. official told Reuters. “All the money that people think they made by making deals with China before, now they’ve been eclipsed many fold by the economic damage.” An April survey conducted by the American Chamber of Commerce in China and the American Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai found that one in five firms said coronavirus would accelerate decoupling from China, while over half — 52 percent — said it was too early to tell what would happen to their long-term supply chain strategy.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

May the Fourth be with you. On the menu today: a chat with a top hospital scientific director about the potentials and limitations of testing and masks, the Department of Homeland Security confirms some more of our suspicions about the Chinese government, some elected leaders experience a surprise outbreak of humility, and relishing ESPN’s two-hour mental vacations to the 1990s.  What Testing and Masks Can and Can’t Do for Us I recently had a chance to pick the brain of a scientific director from one of the top ten hospitals in the United States, who has been briefing powerful decision makers since the coronavirus epidemic began. This director didn’t want to be quoted by name, lest his assessments cause headaches for his institution. I asked him what the biggest misperceptions about the ongoing pandemic are, and he offered some important points for those who think that America needs to be locked into this semi-shut-down status quo until a nationwide frequent testing regime is in place. “Politicians and other decision makers like university presidents — who are just politicians of another stripe — are a highly risk-averse species,” this scientific director told me. “If they can avoid making a tough decision, they will, and as long as they think that if we test enough people, we can identify and quarantine everyone who is infected and make the problem go away.”   As he sees it, there are two problems with tests that are largely being overlooked. “One is that they’re only as good as the sample being collected. The technology is as close to perfect as you’re going to get in a diagnostic test. But if you don’t sample where the virus is, the test result will be a false negative. A recent scientific paper that has not yet been peer-reviewed concluded that the real-life sensitivity of tests where persons were collecting their own samples was down around 60 percent, which is pretty much unacceptable when testing for a contagious disease. It turns out, and this is no surprise, that you can’t rely on people to stick a swab far enough up their nose or down their throat to get a useful specimen.” He added, “the second problem is that the test is only a one-time snapshot, and it doesn’t mean that a person isn’t going to be contagious tomorrow, or even later today. That has serious policy implications and may be the only way to get people to understand that we can’t bring the risk down to zero.”  From where I sit, demanding “We need more testing!” has turned into a comfortable dodge for elected officials and opinion leaders. As laid out last week, just about every company capable of producing tests is looking at ways to expand and speed up production of tests; by the end of the month, America’s producers think they’ll be making 1.6 million to 2 million per day. The Defense Production Act has already been invoked to ensure that Puritan Medical Products in Maine “will quickly establish a new manufacturing facility capable of doubling its current monthly output of 20 million to 40 million swabs.”  The federal government does not have a magic button to press to increase production to 5 million new tests a day. The rate of production is limited by the access to supplies, raw materials, reagents, manufacturing equipment, and trained workers. Before the outbreak, we had more than 157 million Americans in the workforce. Even if we could produce 5 million tests a day, that unreachable-for-a-while threshold would mean testing every American once a month. Clearly, we want to test some Americans more than others; medical personnel working on patients and those working in nursing homes are a higher priority than someone living in an area with few cases, or those working at home and minimizing their contact with others.  This medical director also has doubts that masks will be as effective as some lawmakers hope. “Go out to the supermarket or the hardware store or wherever else people are being instructed to wear a mask or other facial covering, and you’ll see about half of them have pulled the mask down off their nose because it’s uncomfortable to breathe,” he said. “That totally defeats the purpose. There are people spending stupid amounts of money to buy N95s, and then wear them with big gaps around their mouth because they don’t take the time to learn how to use them properly — and they keep using them, even after they’re physically broken down and can’t seal properly. If I wanted to be one of those Karen scolds, I could get my [thrills] all day lecturing those folks, but since this is the epidemiologic equivalent of TSA Security Theater, and the typical American puts personal comfort and convenience first, it’s not worth doing. Then again, I’m not one of those persons who gets their [thrills] bossing others around.” For what it’s worth — which is not much — my perspective is for most of the public, imperfect or partial protection is better than no protection. Imagine that you came across a burning building and hear someone crying for help inside. Because you’re a brave and noble person, you choose to run inside to rescue that person. As you’re about to run in, someone hands you a bandana and says, “use this, so you don’t collapse from smoke inhalation!” But another person says, “No, the smoke particles are too fine! The bandana won’t do much good!” Even if the bandana only improves your odds a little, you’re going to wear it, because you want every little advantage you can get. If wearing a mask lessens the chance you’ll get the virus, why not? DHS: Boy, China Imported a Lot of Medical Equipment in January The Associated Press reports on a Department of Homeland Security analysis paper, concluding the Chinese government downplayed the severity of the outbreak so that they could buy up medical supplies: Not classified but marked “for official use only,” the DHS analysis states that, while downplaying the severity of the coronavirus, China increased imports and decreased exports of medical supplies. It attempted to cover up doing so by “denying there were export restrictions and obfuscating and delaying provision of its trade data,” the analysis states. The report also says China held off informing the World Health Organization that the coronavirus “was a contagion” for much of January so it could order medical supplies from abroad — and that its imports of face masks and surgical gowns and gloves increased sharply. Those conclusions are based on the 95 percent probability that China’s changes in imports and export behavior were not within normal range, according to the report.  As much as I have enjoyed researching and exploring the possibility of a lab accident being the trigger that fired off this pandemic, that question is unlikely to ever be answered satisfactorily and is somewhat moot. Once Chinese authorities knew they had a contagious virus, they did everything possible to protect themselves and nothing to protect the rest of the world — with 430,000 air passengers traveling from China to the United States from New Year’s Eve to April 4.   Our Humbled Leaders  I’m not sure where the “never apologize” philosophy came from — probably someone deeply insecure, who sees admission of any fault or weakness as fatal — but we are seeing some surprising humility from certain leaders. Dr. Anne Schuchat, the number two official at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, told the Associated Press, “The extensive travel from Europe, once Europe was having outbreaks, really accelerated our importations and the rapid spread. I think the timing of our travel alerts should have been earlier.” Ohio governor Mike DeWine said this week that his state’s order requiring the wearing of masks in public “was just a bridge too far. People were not going to accept the government telling them what to do.”  And Vice President Mike Pence said he realized he made a mistake not wearing a mask while visiting the Mayo Clinic: “I didn’t think it was necessary, but I should have worn a mask at the Mayo Clinic and I wore it when I visited the ventilator plant in Indiana” two days later, Pence said at a Fox News virtual town hall on Sunday, nodding sheepishly. This is uncharted territory. People are going to make mistakes. Most of these decisions involve competing values, and in many cases, there may be no “good” answer, just “less bad” ones. The most important thing is to keep steering ourselves closest to the best answer. ADDENDA: Like Matthew Continetti, I’ve been enjoying the ESPN documentary series The Last Dance — surprised how much I enjoyed it, since I’m not a huge NBA or Chicago Bulls fan. Watching last night, I realized how much of the series is about the era, not just the greatest player of all time or the team. A news report from Michael Jordan’s rookie season noted he was “more popular than a Cabbage Patch Doll.” The era of these Bulls was when the ’80s turned into the 1990s — and Continetti puts his finger on why two-hour vacations in those past decade seem like such a balm at this time: The end of History was short-lived. After 9/11, Krauthammer took to calling the 1990s not an end but a “holiday from history.” What a pleasant holiday it was. And how large a part Michael Jordan played in it. I can’t be the only child of the Reagan years for whom memories of Stormin’ Norman Schwarzkopf, Bill Clinton and Gennifer Flowers, and H. Ross Perot are intermixed with recollections of Bulls Starter Jackets, pairs of Air Jordan sneakers, All-Star Weekend, and NBA Inside Stuff with Ahmad Rashad on Saturday mornings. To watch The Last Dance is to revisit America before the fall of the World Trade Center, before Afghanistan and Iraq, before the global financial crisis, Syria, Ukraine, and the rise of China. It was a stronger, more self-confident place. And a naive and superficial one.  

President Donald Trump stated that he is “very confident” the U.S. will discover a coronavirus vaccine in the next seven months, following news that his administration has organized a “Manhattan Program-esque” project to fast-track development. “We are very confident that we’re going to have a vaccine at the end of the year, by the end of the year,” Trump told Fox News during a town hall on Sunday night. “We think we’re going to have a vaccine by the end of this year. We’re pushing very hard.”  Bloomberg reported last week that the Trump administration is starting “Operation Warp Speed” to combine the efforts of the private and public sectors to enhance research. Pharmaceutical companies, the government, and the military are pooling their efforts, with the goal of 300 million vaccine doses available for Americans by the start of 2021. Experts have been bearish on the prospects of a vaccine in 2020, with most predicting twelve to 18 months before one is widely available to the public. Trump acknowledged the skeptics, admitting that “the doctors would say, ‘Well you shouldn’t say that.’ But I’ll say what I think.” “I think we’re going to have a vaccine much sooner rather than later,” the president said. “. . . This country needs a vaccine, and you’re going to have it by the end of the year.”   There are dozens of vaccines in development around the world, with researchers in Oxford among the most promising groups. Last month, researchers at the National Institutes of Health’s Rocky Mountain Laboratory in Montana administered single doses of the Oxford vaccine to six rhesus macaque monkeys, who after 28 days were healthy despite being exposed to heavy quantities of the virus that sickened the control group. Oxford University researcher John Bell, who is leading the project, revealed on NBC’s Meet the Press Sunday that his team thinks the vaccine’s ability to generate “strong antibody responses is probably going to be OK,” but said the verdict was still out on whether it would be a safe treatment. “We’re pretty sure we’ll get a signal by June about whether this works or not,” Bell stated. EXCLUSIVE: Sir John of Oxford University says “we’re pretty sure we’ll get a signal by June about whether this works or not.” #MTP #IfItsSunday “This is likely to be a seasonal coronavirus vaccine.” pic.twitter.com/UWxWzsWljm — Meet the Press (@MeetThePress) May 3, 2020   Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

China hid the scope of the country’s coronavirus outbreak as well as information on how contagious the illness is in order to have time to stock up on medical supplies, according to an intelligence report from the Department of Homeland Security. The Chinese government “intentionally concealed the severity” of the outbreak in January and neglected for weeks to inform the World Health Organization that the virus was contagious, the four-page May 1 document marked “for official use only” states.  Meanwhile, China was increasing imports and decreasing exports of medical supplies as the outbreak worsened within its borders. In January, China increased imports of face masks, surgical gloves, and surgical gowns while lowering exports of surgical gloves, surgical gowns, face masks, ventilators, and other medical supplies. “We further assess the Chinese Government attempted to hide its actions by denying there were export restrictions and obfuscating and delaying provision of its trade data,” the intelligence report stated. The report comes as the Trump administration has become more critical of China’s early response to the outbreak, accusing Beijing of deliberately stifling information about the outbreak and preventing the rest of the world from being able to prepare in time. “We can confirm that the Chinese Communist Party did all that it could to make sure that the world didn’t learn in a timely fashion about what was taking place. There’s lots of evidence of that,” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Sunday.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

We began the month of May, at the top of a Friday morning, with a necessary interview with the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee about a graphic sexual-assault allegation. The questioning, of course, came after a set-up that included the unholy litany of accusations against the current president of the United States.  The Biden interview came a few days after a post-midnight tweet from the president ridiculing a number of media personalities in cruel ways, including the cohost and spouse interviewing Biden that morning. And before that tweet was another from the president announcing that he would be attending Mass virtually at St. Patrick’s Cathedral the next morning, on Sunday. The cardinal celebrating Mass acknowledged the president, which predictably incited some anger. The comments on YouTube during Mass brought out some of the typical politics in people, but as I saw more than 20,000 people watching, I couldn’t help but pray that miracles were happening. Perhaps a late-night presidential tweet led to little seeds of encounter with God, even through a screen, and brought people closer to Mass than most had experienced in the month of April. I normally work overtime to not let life or even a column revolve around tweets, especially presidential ones, but I think that those two offer a critical chance for national reflection. We’ve had our lives upended in many ways these past weeks and months now. And that includes Donald Trump and Joe Biden. Coronavirus has become the priority. Even if we are trying to live as normally as possible, the kids not being in school, the work meetings via Zoom calls, the masks we wear in a world of too many figurative masks anyway, expose the reality. Many of us know that things won’t be the same as before even as we are beginning to reemerge in various places from quarantine. And yet, whatever the truth are to allegations, you get the sense, too, that the same-old is just about to rear its head again — we are going to fall into the same old politics, which, even when it had some good as its end, seemed to bring out the worst in so many of us.  That Sunday Mass at St. Patrick’s, with so many people tuned in, gives me some hope. Hope that seeds are being planted. You’ve got to wonder when a few days later the president is back behaving badly on Twitter, though. But God can work in delayed reflections, too. And miracles can happen. A tweet even from a president isn’t the biggest thing in the world, needless to say, but we desperately need of some change of tone with respect to virtue.  During that Mass, Cardinal Dolan preached about the Gospel reading for the day, about the road to Emmaus. That’s the road Christians are meant to be on always. Walking with Jesus, recognizing God present in His creations, even when we can’t be present for His Presence in the sacraments of the Church.  
 Both Donald Trump and Joe Biden talk about Christianity. Joe Biden professes, of course, to be Catholic, despite his position on abortion, the killing of the innocent unborn. Donald Trump said at the March for Life this January that everyone is made in the image and likeness of God. Even those he tweets about? Even those in the media? Even Nancy Pelosi and “Sleepy Joe”? These are not moral equivalents, to be sure, but how do we look to our fellow man, really? This has an impact on how policy affects the human person. What this coronavirus time should be reminding us is that we are all equally vulnerable. Yes, maybe some of us are more vulnerable than others to COVID-19, but it will be something — we are all mortal beings with an unknown end date. While some know death is coming sooner rather than later. Are we ready? Can virtue be seen in our lives? Do we treat people with respect and defend life? I think we have to do both. Don’t we want to do both? Will this time draw us together, instead of more violently apart, to do what we have been saying we’ve been doing — loving our neighbor, protecting the vulnerable innocent? Let’s do it for real — whether it be the noble service of politics or the gift of family or community or any human life.  I don’t know whether Joe Biden is guilty or not, but I do know we need to restart our culture on virtue. We are all sinners, but a society that values goodness and decency would be one that flushes so many poisons out of our system. Now we need a reboot. We probably can’t expect it from politics and those with the loudest microphones, but we can demand it by the choices we make and the conversations we engage and the way we live our lives. May all these virtual encounters with faith and “thoughts and prayers” bear real fruit. As we reopen, let it be a Beatitudinal reset — a start in the virtues. This column is based on one available through Andrews McMeel Universal’s Newspaper Enterprise Association. 

Spring is in the air, and it is increasingly found in the confident step of the people of Sweden. With a death rate significantly lower than that of France, Spain, the U.K., Belgium, Italy, and other European Union countries, Swedes can enjoy the spring without panic or fears of reigniting a new epidemic as they go about their day in a largely normal fashion.  Dr. Mike Ryan, the executive director of the World Health Organization’s Emergencies Program, says: “I think if we are to reach a new normal, I think in many ways Sweden represents a future model — if we wish to get back to a society in which we don’t have lockdowns.” The Swedish ambassador to the U.S., Karin Ulrika Olofsdotter, says: “We could reach herd immunity in the capital” of Stockholm as early as sometime in May. That would dramatically limit spread of the virus. A month ago, we first wrote about Sweden’s approach, which we said “relies more on calibrated precautions and isolating only the most vulnerable than on imposing a full lockdown.”  
 A fortunate constellation of circumstances ensured that Dr. Anders Tegnell, the chief epidemiologist of Sweden, was in charge of that country’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, despite the misgivings of many Swedish politicians and foreign observers. Tegnell heroically bucked the conventional wisdom of every other nation and carefully examined the insubstantial evidence that social-isolation controls would help reduce COVID-19 deaths over the full course of the virus.  As Tegnell told NPR in early April: “I’m not sure that there is a scientific consensus on, really, about anything when it comes to this new coronavirus, basically because we don’t have much evidence for any kind of measures we are taking.” Well, a month later we now know more. Myth No. 1: Sweden’s policy was not carefully thought out or well considered.
The number of cases in Sweden and other countries is still rising, but in Sweden one-third of intensive-care beds remain empty. Tegnell has looked at other nations that are loosening their lockdowns. “To me it looks like a lot of the exit strategies that are being discussed look very much like what Sweden is already doing,” he told Canada’s Globe & Mail. Tegnell and his colleagues recognized that the decision to shut down a country was not solely a medical decision based only on the virus The economic costs and health impacts caused by lockdowns are enormous, they realized, so they factored into their analysis the broader societal effects of any restrictions. The saw, for instance, that there is no evidence that children easily transmit the virus. Tegnell told NPR: We look at other consequences for public health, like closing schools. That causes enormous problems, not least for the health of the children. I mean, children that already are disadvantaged, if you close down the schools, this is the one good thing they have sometimes in life. This is where they get their food. This is where they get their social context. So closing schools is not a good thing. Jan Albert, a professor in the Department of Microbiology, Tumor, and Cell Biology at Sweden’s Karolinska Institute, told CNN that strict lockdowns “only serve to flatten the curve, and flattening the curve doesn’t mean that cases disappear — they are just moved in time.” He added: “And as long as the health-care system reasonably can cope with and give good care to the ones that need care, it’s not clear that having the cases later in time is better.” Myth No. 2: Sweden did much worse than the U.S. or other countries in managing COVID-19 cases and deaths.
Sweden has about 2,200 reported COVID-19 cases per million population. This is lower than the number in the U.S. (3,053 per million), the U.K., France, Spain, Italy, and also lower than in many other EU countries. It’s slightly above the number in Germany, which has been hailed for its approach to the virus.  Sweden has 265 reported COVID-19 deaths per million population. That is somewhat higher than in the U.S. (204 per million) but lower than the number in many other EU countries.  Tegnell admits that his country failed to contain the initial outbreak in crowded senior homes. “Something like 50 percent of our death toll comes from the rather small population living in care homes,” he said. “We know that we have had a problem with the elderly homes, this has been a discussion for years.” As elsewhere, Swedish COVID-19 deaths are overwhelmingly among the frail elderly and those with serious chronic disease. Over half of Swedish deaths are in nursing homes. Of those who died, 90 percent were over 70 and half were over 86, with just 1 percent younger than 50.  It is ironic that half of the Swedish deaths are in people over the age of 86. Life expectancy in Sweden is 83, whereas it’s 79 in the U.S., so it isn’t surprising that there are relatively more frail elderly in Sweden. Out of every 100,000 births, about 10,000 more Swedes are still alive at age 85 than Americans are, so Sweden’s slightly higher COVID-19 death rate, compared with ours, mostly reflects the fact that a larger percentage of Swedes live well past 79. So, on an age-adjusted basis, Sweden has done significantly better than the U.S. in terms of both cases per million and deaths per million — and with no lockdowns.  Myth No. 3: Sweden’s relatively low number of intensive-care beds would spell disaster for its response to the virus.
Initially, the main justification for the global lockdowns was that they were necessary to prevent a crush of patients from overwhelming hospital intensive-care units. But Sweden has shown that shutting down the economy and essentially imprisoning the young and healthy are not necessary to avoid ICU overcrowding. Despite no lockdowns and few social-isolation controls other than proper spacing in restaurants and a ban on gatherings of more than 50 people, the Swedish hospital system never experienced anything remotely like the crush of ICU patients in Italy, Spain, and New York City. Sweden’s ICU COVID-19 patient census (updated nationwide daily) peaked in early April, with about 50 new admissions daily. Now it is gradually declining to about 35 new ICU cases a day. Unlike its Nordic neighbors and everywhere else, Sweden doesn’t have to worry about when to reintroduce its “vulnerable” isolated population to social mixing and risk their exposure to the virus. That has been already happening naturally and has generated a defensive reservoir of population viral resistance to COVID-19 that puts it — just like SARS, MERS, and the seasonal flu — in Sweden’s rearview mirror.  Sweden doesn’t have to worry about when and how to end social isolation. They don’t have to decide who to keep locked down and who to let out. They don’t have to get into civil-liberty arguments over involuntary restrictions or whether to fine people for not wearing masks and gloves. Of course, Sweden paid a price during the pandemic. But whatever price the Swedes paid for their COVID-19 policy, they will tell you it was worth it. And it is easy to figure out that price. They never cratered their economy or blocked nonemergency surgeries. They had more deaths than their Nordic neighbors, but nothing even close to the 650 deaths per million the U.S. suffered during the 1968 Hong Kong flu, a pandemic that was handled with few social-isolation controls and no lockdowns. Now many countries and U.S. states are beginning to follow Sweden’s lead. But California and other states continue to pile up isolation-induced health costs and blow gigantic holes in their budgets with lockdowns that, nationwide, have generated more than 30 million newly unemployed.  John Fund is a columnist for National Review and has reported frequently from Sweden. Joel Hay is a professor in the department of Pharmaceutical Economics and Policy at the University of Southern California; the author of more than 600 peer-reviewed scientific articles and reports, he has collaborated with the Swedish Institute for Health Economics for nearly 40 years. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he dating conventions b.c. and a.d. were early victims of cultural vandalism at the hands of those who cannot bear the thought of C. or D., and they were replaced with b.c.e. (“Before Common Era”) and c.e. (“Common Era”), leaving history bisected by the same apparently unmentionable Event but the Event itself unspoken. The 2020 presidential election can be divided with the same convention, having been launched in the now misty distance of history b.c.e. — Before Coronavirus Epidemic — a very different time from the present.  Republicans in May c.e. are worried. Trump’s poll numbers are down, and that does not seem to be the result of Trump’s Trumping his way through a press briefing and spit-balling daft ideas about mainlining Lysol or giving the old lungs a good scrubbing down with Clorox. Democrats are worried, too, having apparently just realized that Joe Biden is, was, and always shall be, Joe Biden. May is a mess. What is October going to look like?  Barring some new dramatic development, Trump’s argument for himself going into the election is going to be, roughly: “Things were going great thanks to my policies, and then we suffered a setback from an unforeseeable and unpreventable epidemic originating in China, which I have been calling a threat for years. Thanks to my deft management, the horrible worst-case scenarios we all heard about never came to pass, we minimized the economic fallout to the extent that doing so was reasonably possible, and we positioned ourselves for a rapid recovery.” If we take the Congressional Budget Office forecasts of April 24 as a guide, the second quarter is going to be an economic horror show, with real GDP crashing by 11.8 percent. For perspective, that crater will be deeper than the biggest quarterly decline in recorded U.S. economic history. How did that play out in presidential politics? It’s complicated. That earlier record-setting quarterly decline happened in 1958, during the presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower, and the economy bounced back rapidly, growing just under 10 percent in the third and fourth quarters of that year. By the time the election of 1960 rolled around, the economy was back in the dumps, and Ike wasn’t on the ticket. But, even so, Vice President Richard Nixon pressed the charismatic young Jack Kennedy in the closest election since 1916. The Eisenhower recession surely hurt Nixon, but it was not dispositive.  
 (Here I repeat my usual disclaimer: Much of what we believe about the relationship between presidents and economic performance is pure superstition, but that does not change how those beliefs influence elections.)  The CBO forecasts describe a different situation for Trump. That harrowing 11.8 percent Q2 crash is expected to be followed up by strong growth (5.4 percent) in Q3 and modest growth (2.5 percent) in Q4. Looked at another way, the economy in Q2 is expected to be declining at an annualized rate of 39.6 percent and then to grow in the following quarters at an annualized rate of 23.5 percent and 10.5 percent, respectively. That’s an absolute roller coaster, but a roller coaster headed upward on the eve of the election. On the flip side: The unemployment rate for Q2 is expected to be catastrophic at 14 percent — and to get worse in Q3, deepening to 16 percent. The unemployment numbers going into October are going to be horrible and, worse for Trump, moving in the wrong direction. The CBO expects that to reverse in the fourth quarter, ending the year at a much-improved but still awful 11.7 percent. Trump may get some credit for the GDP numbers but still get gutted by the unemployment rate. That is a problem for an incumbent president whose case for himself has mainly been an economic one. His prospects are going to be dependent on whether Americans are moved more by the fresh memory of the pain they have been through or by the fresh hope of the recovery that will — all of us must hope — by then be under way.  Again, for the purposes of setting the stage for the election, it does not much matter whether the assigning of credit and blame is fair or sensible. Do not expect the world to weep over the possibility that life has been unfair to Donald J. Trump. There is the possibility that things could go worse than the CBO has forecast. There also is the possibility that there is a major resurgence of coronavirus infections between now and the election. Consider that in Texas, which is in the early stages of reopening, there was a record increase in coronavirus deaths on Thursday and that Dallas County reported a record number of new cases on the same day.  Those are, in total, some potentially grim prospects.  The great ray of sunshine in the Trump camp is one Joe Biden of Delaware. Trump may be facing ugly polls, economic catastrophe, and a biblical plague on the land, but he also is almost certainly facing Joe Biden on Election Day. Biden, who is struggling under allegations that he sexually assaulted Tara Reade, a former aide, has named former senator Chris Dodd to head his vice-presidential search committee. This is political malpractice in one very obvious way and one less obvious one.  First, the obvious: Chris Dodd’s Joe Biden problems are worse than Joe Biden’s Joe Biden problems, and they include an account of then–Senator Dodd and Senator Ted Kennedy sexually assaulting a waitress, in public. This is not a story from some right-wing fringe blogger — this was from Michael Kelly, writing at the time for GQ. Joe Biden has pledged to name a woman to the VP spot, partly to muffle his Joe Biden problems, and this is who is running the show on his behalf? What, Harvey Weinstein wasn’t available? The less obvious problem with the Dodd arrangement is that Biden and other Democratic leaders are overwhelmingly rich, old, and white in a party that isn’t. Promising to put a woman on the ticket — but only if she gets the stamp of approval from a 75-year-old white male millionaire party hack — is a dramatic illustration of where the real power still is held in the Democratic Party. What Biden has done here is to emphasize that in the Democratic Party of 2020, women and minorities rise at the sufferance of Joe Biden, Chuck Schumer, and their ilk, and that men such as Chris Dodd are the hurdle everybody else has to clear to get there. Joe Biden made that choice — and, worse for his campaign, the brain trust around him allowed him to make that choice.  Some Democrats believed that nominating the familiar vice president intimately associated with the sacrosanct person of Barack Obama was, politically speaking, foolproof. They underestimated the fool. What are the next six months going to look like? Picture two enraged old men fist-fighting on stilts — in a minefield, in a tornado, after a flood. 

Attorney General Bill Barr received a lot of criticism for comments he made about the possibility that the Department of Justice would go to federal court to challenge some state lockdown policies. I defended him from that criticism (as did Andy). Now Philip Rotner is making some new criticisms of Barr over these issues. They don’t change my view.  Rotner argues that Barr’s concern about states’ restrictions on religious services is selective. “Religious liberty is not the only right protected by the Constitution. A number of states have used coronavirus restrictions to curtail abortion access, arguing that it is non-essential. Is Barr going to challenge these ordinances, too?” This complaint is unpersuasive for three reasons. First, the Constitution actually protects religious exercise — it’s right there in the text of the First Amendment — while the federal courts are just pretending that it protects abortion. The Attorney General is not, in my view, under any obligation to conduct litigation based on a view of the Constitution that he does not hold and that is incorrect. It is possible, of course, to take a contrary view, but one should not pretend that it is obviously true. Second, even assuming that abortion is on par with religious liberty as a constitutional right, there is a distinction between challenging a regulation singling out religious services and challenging a regulation that is merely being applied to abortion clinics.  Third, this isn’t an argument against Barr’s view that the Department of Justice may have to go to federal court if states violate the Constitution — it’s an argument that he should be more willing to do that. It would be a bad thing if Alabama started quartering troops in people’s homes without their consent and Barr let it slide. That bad thing would not justify allowing cities in Mississippi to abridge religious freedom, too. Next, Rotner objects to Barr’s having said that states could trigger intervention through “undue interference with the national economy.” Rotner calls that phrasing both expansive and vague. For starters, how are the lawyers at the Department of Justice supposed to reasonably calculate the national economic consequences of state and local ordinance? The answer, of course, is that they cannot. The only purpose of such a threat is to intimidate lawmakers into not adopting measures that might frustrate or delay Trump’s “open America again” policy. In the memo in question, Barr says that the Constitution forbids state interference with the national economy “in certain circumstances.” That is a reasonable inference from the constitutional text, and it lines up with scores of decades of Supreme Court precedent. Whether a state is running afoul of the dormant commerce clause does not turn on a calculation of the national economic consequences of state and local ordinances. (Somewhat off point, to say that Trump’s desire to “open America again” amounts to a “policy” is an overstatement.) Finally, Rotner complains that Barr offered an interviewer his opinions about how lockdowns ought to proceed. He writes as though Barr intended these opinions as a guide to what his litigation strategy would be, even though Barr never said any such thing. Among the opinions to which Rotner objects is this one: “I think the president’s guidance has been, as I say, superb and very commonsensical, and I think a lot of the governors are following that.” Barr’s opinion isn’t mine, and I think Cabinet secretaries ought to be embarrassed to say such things. I can see why Rotner finds the comment objectionable. I don’t think it has much to do with the Attorney General’s duties under the Constitution.  

 In this special plague-time episode of Uncommon Knowledge with Peter Robinson, two of the nation’s most brilliant and accomplished humorists have a good time — and say some serious things. P. J. O’Rourke and Andrew Ferguson on COVID-19, their wasted youth, Trump versus Biden, the state of journalism, and why they’d both bet on the United States over China any old day.  Recorded on April 29, 2020 

In severe cases, the novel coronavirus can cause labored breathing (dyspnea), which progresses into acute respiratory distress in critical cases. Mechanical ventilation is one of the few tools for alleviating such distress: Pumping oxygen into a patient’s lungs serves as a form of life support until the symptoms subside. This kind of palliative care does not, however, combat the virus itself, and pressurized oxygen can exacerbate lung injury by damaging unaffected areas of the lungs.  The economic fallout from the coronavirus has caused its own kind of oxygen shortage in the markets: a liquidity shortfall. The financial system relies on the constant flow of money. If that flow is halted, it can aggravate any underlying distress. As public-health officials raced to procure ventilators, economic policymakers put the financial system on life support with massive infusions of cash. First, the Federal Reserve stepped into the Treasury and repurchase-agreement markets, where demand for cash had raised short-term borrowing rates. The Fed’s purchases of short-term debt allowed financial markets to withstand some of the pressures of the coronavirus selloff. Soon thereafter, the Fed intervened in the commercial-paper and money markets as well. Those interventions did not stave off a bear market, which hit in mid-March as the pandemic spread through the U.S. In response, the Federal Reserve Open Market Committee brought interest rates to zero and initiated quantitative easing, buying assets from banks. While unprecedented in magnitude and haste, the Fed’s measures would have a muted impact: Lowering borrowing costs increases aggregate demand in normal times, but the pandemic has made most forms of consumption virtually impossible. Still, Fed chair Jay Powell made clear that he was willing to take forceful, immediate action to buoy markets, and investors took note: The selloff receded.  Then, in an unprecedented move, the Fed stepped into corporate-debt markets directly. Instead of channeling liquidity through banks, in keeping with long-held norms, the Fed took on the role of lender of last resort to corporations themselves. Its Primary and Secondary Market Corporate Credit Facilities extended credit to investment-grade firms and even “fallen angels” that had suffered rating downgrades in the pandemic’s wake. The new lending facilities, which also included municipalities and medium-sized businesses, turned the Fed into the single biggest debt-originator in the U.S., with its balance sheet growing at a rate of $41 billion a day.  
 Under monetary easing mediated through financial institutions, the Fed brings down borrowing costs by reducing the risk-free interest rate, but asset prices still reflect idiosyncratic risks. By holding debt in corporations directly, the Fed indiscriminately suppressed risk premia, such that firms disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 crisis would face similar borrowing costs to those less affected. Seeing that the Fed would prop up corporate balance sheets irrespective of risk, investors piled into risk assets. With the money machine running full throttle, the shortest bear market in history turned into a rally: Stocks gained 30 percent from their March 23 bottom.  As with mechanical ventilation, however, liquidity provisions do not treat the underlying disease: Economic shutdowns persist, and no COVID-19 treatment or vaccine is yet available. Market exuberance has not kept 30 million Americans from filing for unemployment. Constrained by an inability to take risk and by limits on the size of its holdings, the Fed can only put a floor under asset prices for so long. The sugar rush of money-printing now seems to be running out. With the S&P 500 index down roughly 4 percent over the past two days, warnings from investors that equities would test new lows are coming to fruition. Should asset prices continue to fall, it’s safe to assume that the Fed will take further action. At the FOMC press conference on Wednesday, Powell pledged to use his “full range of tools to support the U.S. economy,” including an expansion of current loan programs. But he also emphasized the need for more fiscal stimulus, signaling that the Fed cannot carry water for Congress indefinitely. While an initial $2.2 trillion Senate spending package passed with relatively little partisan bickering, the growing dispute over state bankruptcies suggests that future stimulus debates will be more contentious.  Though Powell’s approach is merited by the bleak economic outlook, it could amount to a Faustian bargain. If he lets asset prices fall in the coming weeks and months, the big bazooka of accommodative policy early in the crisis will have been for naught. Bailing out a divided Congress with further monetary accommodation will make fiscal stimulus less likely. But digging in further will require an even greater divergence from conventional monetary policy and feed into the mispricing of risk in asset markets. Financial markets cannot remain on life support indefinitely. 

Big Tech companies should make up their minds. Are they public fora, open to one and all, that faithfully carry an infinite spectrum of messages — much as AT&T phone lines transmit liberal, moderate, and conservative robocalls during election season? Or are they private institutions, exclusively for those with whom they agree — much as Mother Jones peddles the Left and National Review promotes the Right?  Either approach is fine and honorable. But Facebook, Google, YouTube, and their ilk should not do both — especially while morphing into the private/exclusive model, and savoring government protection to boot. Big Tech’s private-sector censorship has been on vivid display during the COVID-19 crisis. Opinions with which these companies differ simply disappear, as three examples show in just the last week. Department of Homeland Security scientist William Bryan said at President Donald J. Trump’s April 23 press briefing that ultraviolet light seems to kill COVID-19. Trump wondered aloud, “supposing you brought the light inside the body.” That’s all it took for Hate Trump, Inc. to hammer the president for medical malpractice. (He also mused over the prospect of doctors using disinfectants to treat patients, which the Get-Trump press wildly inflated into “reports” that he wanted physicians to inject COVID-19 patients with Lysol.) In fact, Aytu BioScience’s Healight would emit UV rays inside COVID-19 patients’ lungs. The Englewood, Colorado, company seeks FDA approval to test this possible therapy against a disease that lacks a proven treatment. Aytu did not concoct this with dodgy quacks at Bob’s Clinic. Rather, it exclusively licensed this technology from Cedars-Sinai Hospital, one of the finest medical centers in Los Angeles.   Aytu explained Healight in an online video that attracted 50,000 views in 24 hours. 
 But then a Trump-loathing writer at the so-called “Paper of Record” complained. YouTube (owned by Google) dutifully junked the video on April 24, as did Vimeo. Twitter froze Aytu’s account. Also in California, Bakersfield physicians Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi analyzed statistics on COVID-19 tests, infections, and deaths. They discussed their raw data with local journalists. “You have a 0.03 chance of dying from COVID-19” in California, Dr. Erickson said. “Does that necessitate people being out of work?” Their video enjoyed some 5.5 million views. On Monday, YouTube yanked it for violating “Community Guidelines.” On Wednesday, Facebook deleted a post with information on protests against Governor Gretchen Whitmer (D., Mich.), whose COVID-19 response (Thou shalt not buy paint!) strikes some as despotic.  The First Amendment applies to government, not private companies such as Facebook, Google, and YouTube. Anyone may stand on the public sidewalk outside the Wall Street Journal and demand tax hikes. But the privately held Journal’s editorial page is under zero obligation to publish that person’s tax-loving op-ed piece. Likewise, as long as these Silicon Valley juggernauts are in private hands, they have every right to post or yank videos for or against COVID-19 treatments, statistics, or demonstrations. But these firms have it both ways: They simultaneously want to enjoy private ownership and protection against civil-liability litigation under the Communications Decency Act § 230. This noxious hybrid — private entities that hide  behind Uncle Sam’s coat tails — is philosophically and practically odious.  “CDA Section 230 is immeasurably valuable to these companies, because they can act as gatekeepers to information, yet they can censor information,” said M. A. Taylor, director of The Creepy Line, a documentary highly critical of the dangers of Big Tech’s bipolarity. “Essentially, they can shape opinion at election time. So, by not being liable, they are free to pick and choose political speech without the restrictions that face the Washington Post or Fox News. One could call these in-kind donations, if they leverage this power to tilt opinions in a certain direction.”  Washington should make this a time for choosing and offer these behemoths this choice: If Big Tech wants the special benefits of CDA’s safe harbor, these companies should sail in, drop anchor, and welcome one and all. They should post articles, videos, and other material of every hue. But if they favor private-sector censorship, they should do so without Washington’s help. Instead, they should steer clear of CDA’s safe harbor and unfurl huge flags that say: “Those we like are welcome. Everyone else: Stay away!” 

The Trump administration said this week that Planned Parenthood will not receive any of the coronavirus-relief funding earmarked for small businesses that are struggling amid the pandemic. The administration will not grant the mammoth abortion provider any funding from the $670 billion Paycheck Protection Program, according to reports. “Through the Paycheck Protection Program, President Trump is delivering vital relief to help small businesses keep employees on payroll,” a senior administration official told the Daily Caller News Foundation.  “It’s clear that the abortion industry shouldn’t be able to qualify for those funds, which are desperately needed by small businesses,” the official said. The Trump administration is committed to making sure relief funding lands in the hands of small businesses so they can save jobs, “not getting the government into the business of funding abortion,” a senior administration official told The Daily Signal.   “While not all Americans share President Trump’s pro-life beliefs, there is broad bipartisan support for the idea that American taxpayers should not have to fund abortion,” that official added. The PPP forgives government loans of businesses with 500 employees or fewer as long as they retain most of their employees, although the businesses must still pay interest on those loans, a requirement supervised by the Small Business Administration. Despite having small affiliates across the country that employ fewer than 500 people, Planned Parenthood’s corporate structure precludes it from eligibility for the funds, the administration said. Because the largest abortion provider in the country retains a total of about 16,000 employees, it does not qualify for PPP funds.  The administration’s assurance that it will not grant additional funding to Planned Parenthood to offset the effects of the pandemic comes as abortion advocates have protested attempts by several states to count abortions as nonessential medical procedures. Ohio, Texas, Alabama, Iowa, Oklahoma, and Arkansas sought to temporarily block abortions during the public health emergency, although they have been largely unsuccessful after being met with legal challenges.  The Trump administration has made curbing funding to Planned Parenthood a priority. The abortion provider withdrew last year from Title X, the country’s family-planning program for low-income patients, over a Trump administration rule barring groups who provide abortions or abortion referrals from receiving Title X funds. Congressional Republicans have repeatedly pushed to strip Planned Parenthood of the $500 million in federal tax dollars the organization receives annually, but their efforts have been unsuccessful.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Some foreign workers who lived in the U.S. at some point during the last two years have mistakenly received economic stimulus checks designated for U.S. citizens due to an Internal Revenue Service glitch. Thousands of college-age workers, some of whom left the U.S. before the coronavirus was discovered in the country and are currently residing abroad, received an unexpected $1,200 payment from the IRS to their bank accounts in recent weeks, Politico reported.  The stimulus payments, part of the massive $2 trillion economic relief package passed by Congress last month, are earmarked for U.S. citizens, making the foreign workers ineligible for them. However, due to an error in the IRS tax filing system, payments were doled out to citizens of other countries who recently worked in the U.S. The error is thought to have arisen from a tax-filing mistake commonly made by non-citizen workers studying at universities or on temporary work visas. Such workers often file using TurboTax or a similar online filing service meant for U.S. residents, causing the IRS to count them as U.S. citizens. Now, the workers who received a stimulus deposit say they are unsure how to return it.  A majority of Americans have received their stimulus checks since the IRS began distributing them earlier this month, but millions are still waiting for their checks to arrive. Those for whom the federal government does not have bank-account direct-deposit information must wait for a physical check in the mail or can submit their information through the online tool the IRS has provided, although the system has been plagued with glitches.  Congressional lawmakers are considering a second round of payments to Americans to offset the economic damage of the coronavirus pandemic. White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett said Tuesday that the White House is “studying very carefully” the possibility of a second round of payments.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

One of the main questions on the minds of Americans is when government restrictions aimed at controlling the coronavirus epidemic can be safely lifted. In most states, we now have enough information to say that the strictest measures can be relaxed. California offers a good example. A review of the data shows that in mid March, when the state instituted severe restrictions on social contact and personal movement, the pace of SARS-CoV-2 infections had already begun to decline. The CDC’s monitoring of data tracking COVID-19 hospital admissions in the San Francisco Bay Area since early March demonstrates that the highest number of hospital admissions occurred between March 21 and 28. In cases requiring hospitalization, that occurs about twelve to 14 days after infection with SARS-CoV-2. Thus infections may well have peaked before the most restrictive of the Bay Area orders issued March 16.  Another CDC analysis of how quickly reported cases of infection were increasing in four U.S. metropolitan areas — Seattle, San Francisco, New York City, and New Orleans — examined the timing of various emergency measures, including limits on mass gatherings, school closures, and stay-at-home orders. In the four metropolitan areas, the authors found a significant decline in relative increase in the number of reported cases after local and state emergency declarations and a continued decline after bans on mass gatherings. There was little further decline in case growth, however, in the two weeks after stay-at-home orders were issued in mid March. Another report looked at the timing of various interventions in Wuhan, China, and their association with the reproduction number — the number of new cases, on average, caused by a primary case over time. When that number falls below one, the epidemic stops growing. Remarkably, the reproduction number for SARS-CoV-2 began to drop dramatically in mid to late January, before the implementation of the most stringent home-confinement policy in early February. The interventions before that time included the restriction of air and train travel, local traffic bans, increased mask-wearing, limits on social gatherings, isolation of those who were ill, and home quarantine for those who were exposed. By the date of the universal home-confinement order, the reproduction number had declined to 1.2 and only four days later to less than 1.0.  For our part, we have looked at the relationship between the timing of stay-at-home orders and the peaks in the number of reported cases in 31 U.S. states. We could not find a clear pattern relating the timing of such orders to the peaks in case numbers, suggesting no association between the orders and the limitation of cases. One would have expected, if there had been an effect of such state-at-home orders on the number of new cases, a consistent time-dependent effect —that is, a clear, observable average time, say ten to 14 days from the date of the order to the peak. That was not seen.  
 Closing down large sectors of society is a blunt tool, and its use comes with huge costs—the disruption of education, economic activity, and social interactions. The ongoing, and possibly future, use of such stay-at-home orders deserves timely and rigorous evaluation. As much as possible, we want to know how necessary, and how costly, each intervention (e.g., limiting gatherings, closing restaurants and retail businesses) is on its own. In the realm of public health, first principles of disease control dictate the use of the least costly set of interventions sufficient to prevent and mitigate illness.  Overall, several pieces of evidence suggest that the pace of new SARS-CoV-2 infections had declined significantly before government officials imposed the most severe restrictions. Those findings, along with the fact that most hospitals, outside of certain severely affected areas like New York City, had adequate capacity throughout the month of April, should give us confidence that self-protective changes in personal behavior along with testing, isolation, and quarantine can adequately mitigate the epidemic. It is time to step back from restrictions like prohibition of access to outdoor spaces, universal orders for home confinement, and closure of small businesses. In stages, and watching the data on test-positivity in key populations and COVID-19–related emergency-room visits and hospital admissions, we can get back to work and school while limiting person-to-person contact with measures such as occupancy limits, promoting hand-washing, and adopting policies for paid sick leave to enable ill workers to avoid others and reduce the spread of infection. Public health should focus on protecting the most vulnerable with screening and rapid response to outbreaks in nursing homes and shelters.   Finally, ensuring that we’re using the least restrictive means necessary also requires that we focus on keeping hospitals above water. That can be done by adjusting policies specifically to hospital-admission rates of COVID-19 patients and local bed-capacity for their care (e.g., dedicating 50 percent of acute-care beds). Leading indicators like daily COVID-19–related outpatient and emergency-room visits can now be monitored to provide an early warning system.  The findings described above, and increasing experience in other settings, lead us to believe that relaxing the strictest interventions while continuing more modest ones will not cause an unmanageable resurgence in cases.  Jeffrey D. Klausner, a former CDC medical officer, is a professor of medicine and public health at UCLA. Rajiv Bhatia, a former San Francisco City and County deputy health officer, is an assistant clinical professor of medicine (affiliated) at Stanford School of Medicine.  

Jamie Metzl, a member of the World Health Organization’s International Advisory Committee on Human Genome Editing, has speculated that the coronavirus originated in a lab in Wuhan, China. “When they have outbreaks in China, the zoonotic jump [of the virus from animal to humans] tends to happen in the south in Guangdong or Yunnan Province, and not in Wuhan or in Hubei Province,” Metzl told National Review. “They have the only level-4 virology lab in China, which happens to be in Wuhan and was studying dangerous coronaviruses.”  That lab is the Wuhan Institute of Virology, situated about nine miles from the seafood market where the coronavirus was initially thought to have originated. Metzl continued, “It seems kind of likely that [if] you have a Chinese lab studying a dangerous virus, and you have a very similar virus that leaps out right next to one of the labs, you could logically…put two and two together.” Metzl said he has considered this theory a possibility since January, “from the very beginning when I heard this news story.”  The first U.S. politician to point out the proximity of the Wuhan Institute of Virology to the outbreak’s epicenter was Senator Tom Cotton (R., Ark.). “China claimed—for almost two months—that coronavirus had originated in a Wuhan seafood market. That is not the case,” Cotton wrote on Twitter on January 30. The senator uploaded a video in which he noted the proximity of the lab.  While initially dismissed as a conspiracy theory, suspicion has grown amongst U.S. officials that circumstantial evidence points to an accidental leak. President Trump and other officials have called for investigations into a possible Chinese cover up of the outbreak’s origins, and Trump has halted funding to the WHO over what he described as the organization’s “gross mismanagement” of the pandemic. U.S. politicians, particularly congressional Republicans, have also accused the WHO of parroting Chinese misinformation in the early stages of the pandemic. Metzl said the WHO could have been more skeptical of the information coming from China in late December and early January, but on the whole defended the organization’s handling of the pandemic, saying his colleagues are “driven by doing the right thing and following the evidence.” However, Metzl slammed the Trump administration’s response to the pandemic.  “The Trump administration’s response to the pandemic has been among the greatest leadership failures in all of American history,” Metzl said. “Not only did they feel to heed the warnings, not only did they completely screw up the testing, but the president of the United States was actively spewing deadly misinformation to the American people and denying this crisis as it was playing out.”  China has so far refused to allow representatives from the WHO to join an investigation into the coronavirus’s origins. The coronavirus has infected over 1,000,000 Americans and killed over 64,000 as of Friday. Social distancing measures and business closures implemented to mitigate the spread of coronavirus have caused widespread damage to the U.S. economy and put roughly 30 million Americans out of work.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

To state the obvious, the U.S.–China relationship is at the lowest point since Chairman Mao was alive. President Trump bluntly declares: “The virus could have been stopped in China and it wasn’t, and the whole world is suffering because of it.” For its part, China alternates between protesting its innocence and raising dark theories that the virus originated through Western action. But the hostility shouldn’t be allowed to get in the way of the two nations fighting the virus going forward. But that’s what is happening. China is refusing to allow American companies access to monkeys they already own and need for research on developing a vaccine or treatments. The U.S. bureaucracy is distracted and has so far failed to press the urgent case for freeing the monkeys to be shipped to U.S. research labs. The crab-eating macaque monkey is the most widely used animal in studies that allow experimental medicines to move to clinical trials in humans. Dogs, rabbits, and pigs cannot be used to test new drugs. But monkeys have helped make great strides in cancer drugs as well as treatments for hepatitis C, rare diseases of the nervous system, and many others. The problem is that attempts to raise the monkeys domestically outside of their normal habitat and climate have largely been failures. That leaves importing the monkeys, and while several countries can supply the monkeys, China currently provides 60 percent of the monkeys used. Only China can provide sufficient numbers to support the needed medical research on the coronavirus. Several U.S. companies have already paid for Chinese monkey populations and are waiting for them to be shipped to the U.S. But China is sitting on the permits, and U.S. bureaucrats have been slow to respond. If the impasse isn’t resolved within days, the U.S. will lose the window for starting efficacy tests on several key drugs. Back in February, local Chinese officials began stopping monkey shipments after the central government banned animal transportation. A scheduled charter flight for April 29 had to be canceled. The next scheduled shipment date is May 15. If that date is missed, it’s possible another charter won’t be available for weeks. There are two players here. The Chinese government has lived down to our low expectations for it in international cooperation on the virus. It has failed to issue the needed permits for monkey shipments. The U.S. government and its embassy in Beijing has been unable — or unwilling — to engage the Chinese on the importance of the shipments and force action. If some action isn’t taken soon, our coronavirus health-care crisis could be extended unnecessarily. And this time, the reasons would be entirely man-made.  

A summary from the official one-pager: Despite risks to their own health, America’s frontline workers have provided health care, transportation, food, and more essential services throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. As unemployment lines grow longer, these patriots continue to return to work the next day, some even making less money than they could on unemployment insurance. Congress should allow critical employers to provide Patriot Pay bonuses to frontline workers who earn under $90,000 in essential jobs through a refundable payroll tax credit. This form of hazard pay would complement, not replace, an employer’s responsibility to pay their workers—it is designed to quadruple any bonuses an employer gives to essential workers. For those making less than $50,000, the bonuses could be worth up to $12 an hour. Here’s a concrete example: A grocery store in Provo, UT could opt into Patriot Pay to give their workers a $12/hour bonus. The employer would contribute $3, while the federal benefit would add $9, meaning a $10/hour worker would receive a $5,760 bonus from May 1 through the end of July. The grocery store worker’s weekly paycheck would include an extra $480. This seeks to address a real problem with unemployment benefits and to show gratitude to people who deserve it. But even if we assume that something like this would be worth the cost — and note that the hourly pay of the worker in the example goes from $10 to $22! — it strikes me as a problem that the government money workers receive would depend on whether their employers chose to (and could afford to) raise their pay.  

A couple people disagree with the assessment below that “we are likely through the worst” of the coronavirus outbreak. They point to warnings about the inevitable second wave, and point out that the second wave of the 1918 influenza outbreak was much worse than the first one. True enough, although our society has changed a lot in the past hundred years — our medical knowledge and understanding of viruses, our ability to treat patients, and our ability to communicate needed medical information.  Maybe I’m being uncharacteristically optimistic, but I think the second wave just won’t have the rapid spread and as high a number of deaths as the past few months. When SARS-CoV-2 hit the United States in late January/February/early March, the vast majority of Americans were not taking any precautions at all. Never mind the president’s comments, never mind New York City mayor Bill de Blasio’s comments. Almost no one took this all that seriously. Think about Utah Jazz center Rudy Gobert touching all the microphones. Americans gathered in big crowds for everything from Chinese New Year’s parades to sporting events to concerts to conventions. The only widespread wearing of masks was among Chinese Americans, and depicting that in news photos was allegedly racist. We were about as unprepared — psychologically and in our behavior — as we could get. We needed to be re-taught, or reminded, to wash our hands frequently.  Most people won’t lose their current good habits of frequent hand-washing and avoiding crowds during the summer. Our treatments will be improved, and our doctors and medical personnel have hard-earned experience in beating this virus and saving patients now. Those who have caught the virus and recovered will not be getting it again, at least not for a while. All of these factors should mitigate the harm from the second wave. A second wave could be bad, but I doubt it will be as bad as what happened when the virus hit oblivious America from January 1 to March 12 or so.  

Senator Mitt Romney (R., Utah) released a proposal Friday to raise wages for essential workers for three months, with debates on a possible phase-four relief package intensifying as the Senate returns to D.C. next week. Romney’s plan, titled “Patriot Pay,” calls for bonuses from May 1 to July 31, 2020, for front-line workers in healthcare and essential services who earn under $90,000. The funding would come from a refundable payroll tax credit that could pay employees up to an additional $12 per hour, if they worked at least 100 hours each month. Patriot Pay says that participating businesses would contribute to the program by paying 25 percent of the bonuses, with the government funding the other 75 percent.  “Health care professionals, grocery store workers, food processors, and many others—the unsung patriots on the frontline of this pandemic—every day risk their safety for the health and well-being of our country, and they deserve our unwavering support,” Romney said in a statement. “Patriot Pay is a way for us to reward our essential workers as they continue to keep Americans safe, healthy, and fed.” In the release, Romney’s office pointed to “one of the inadvertent anomalies” of the phase-three CARES Act that was implemented in March — an enhancement in unemployment insurance that Republican senators warned could “push unemployment higher” by paying individuals more than their salary, incentivizing them to quit over coronavirus to receive benefits. Romney said that Patriot Pay would “help ensure” that critical industries — designated by the Department of Labor and Congress — remained fully staffed, with the new compensation paying workers better than the already-enhanced unemployment insurance.   The Utah Republican played an instrumental role in pushing for direct cash payments to Americans, a plan that was ultimately included in the $2.2 trillion CARES package, and pushed to revise the initial plan after it stated that the size of the checks would be halved for Americans with no federal income tax liability. “The current bill has promise but it shouldn’t give lower earners smaller checks —that’s directly contrary to my proposal. We need to fix this to ensure lower earners get equal payments,” Romney tweeted on March 19.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

From the beginning of the COVID-19 crisis, it has been obvious that the fates of public health and the economy were tied together. Weeks before formalized “lockdown” policies began appearing, as news about the danger of the coronavirus spread, economic activity dramatically slowed. And it obviously won’t speed up again until the public in general has confidence that going back out into the world is as relatively safe as it was before.  So now we face a serious dilemma. It goes something like this: We don’t have enough money to stay idle, but we don’t have enough confidence in testing to go out and spend again. The COVID-19 social contract was cobbled together at alarming speed. Everyone quickly adopted three assumptions: First, that the government would compensate — and, as much as possible, make whole — those men and women who, for the sake of public health, lost income, business, or their livelihoods; second, that we would in due course build the kind of mass testing-and-contact-tracing system that would allow us to isolate the sick, rather than locking down everybody; and third, that we would adopt clear benchmark conditions for re-opening, and clear, universal guidelines on masks, handshakes, hygiene, and the like to be followed until we had a vaccine. None of those assumptions has held up. Congress accepted and arguably exacerbated the mass unemployment the pandemic immediately left in its wake. Its limits on “paycheck protection” loans and other small-business aid turned its relief program into a lottery. Talk of increasing test capacity to millions per day has turned out to be just that — talk. Guidelines for re-opening at the state level have proposed hopelessly vague metrics. And federal guidelines, while more sound upon examination, have not been publicized.  Perhaps it was inevitable that all those hopes would be dashed. Elsewhere, even our successes have come with unanticipated downsides. The lockdown policies were justified by the imperative of “flattening the curve.” That meant slowing the transmission of the disease to avoid the catastrophic medical-system collapses that sent death rates into truly scary territory in Wuhan, China and Northern Italy. And for the most part, we’ve done this. New York needed fewer ventilators than estimated. The naval-ship hospital has already left city’s waters. The curve is flattened so much that stories of New York emergency rooms filling to the brim have been crowded out by stories of hospitals that are eerily empty. People fearful of contracting the virus have delayed seeking medical attention for other problems. With elective surgeries cancelled, hospitals are actually laying off staff to balance the books. We’ve flattened the curve so much to prevent our hospitals from being overwhelmed that they’re now in greater danger of being underwhelmed.  
 It is, of course, a good thing that New York didn’t become Northern Italy, and that although there have been scary weeks in Seattle, Detroit, and New Orleans, none of those cities became New York. But when is the conversation going to change to reflect as much?  The lockdowns began with both suspicion and trust. The suspicion was that China wouldn’t shut down its industrial heartland and Italians wouldn’t give up their lives as free citizens for nothing. The trust was that our scientists were right. That Americans have cooperated so widely and readily with social-distancing directives is astonishing. But they have done so based on the conviction that COVID-19 was roughly twice as transmissible as the flu, and possibly ten times as deadly. Is that true in every environment? Every region? Every climate? Does avoiding a doubling and redoubling of the awful American death toll require this sustained and intrusive lockdown? Or can masks and a little more care and circumspection do the trick? We haven’t gotten consistent answers to such questions, and it has left us unsure. In some cases, this confusion was understandable; there is no good science on a new virus. But if they expect continued compliance, authorities have to be clear, consistent, and honest about what their experts are telling them, and about how confident they are in its accuracy. In the absence of sounder science more soundly communicated, the public will act upon its own understandable anxiety and take signs of abatement as signs of hope, or even invitations to begin rebuilding their lives, livelihoods, and businesses. If the authorities find this behavior foolish, then they must persuade us through intelligent legislative acts, provision, and publicity.   If they can’t — if government institutions cannot tie public health and the economy together in a collective national effort — then Americans can, must, and will begin to divide and make their own arrangements. Non-essential workers who can will work illicitly. People will get into screaming matches over masks and personal space in grocery stores until new social norms emerge.  Nature is not obliged to cooperate with our civilization, however much we might wish it were. A disease could always come along that wrecks our arrangements for good. A previous civilization on the American continent was destroyed by plague. But humans have a nature too, and the present lockdowns cannot be sustained without the proper combination of hope for sufficient federal aid and fear of the virus that satisfies it.  Both of those things are diminishing, and so the lockdowns are not long for this world. They’ll end just as they began: with the American people taking the lead because their elected officials can’t or won’t, muddling their way through an impossible dilemma. 

Back on March 30, I wrote: Everything we are seeing right now indicates that the coming five weeks or so are going to be brutal. You can quibble with this projection or that projection, because all of them are trying to account for a million little variables that aren’t easily seen: How strong are the immune systems of those currently infected? How well will the hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin treatments work? How well are health authorities keeping the virus out of nursing homes and retirement communities? How much are people practicing social distancing? We’re hoping the worst projections are wrong — and perhaps they’re so scary, they spur people to take additional steps to stop the spread and prevent the bad outcomes that they project. But here’s what we know: For the last week, the number of new cases is increasing by anywhere from 10,000 to 20,000 each day. Yes, some of that increase reflects more widespread testing. Yes, many of those people will recover without needing hospitalization… Hang on, hang tough, try to stay out of a hospital if you don’t need emergency treatment. If we can get through the next five weeks, the worst will probably be behind us. We are now four weeks and two days into that five-week period. In that time, the number of confirmed cases in the United States has increased from 168,177 to nearly 1.1 million; the number of deaths has increased from 4,066 to more than 64,000.  Yes, you can argue the official death count is likely an over-count because it counts cases that are suspected to be driven by the virus, but not confirmed. You can also argue the official death count is likely an under-count because the overall death rate in the United States skyrocketed after the virus reached our shores. The number of daily new cases nationwide seems to have peaked on April 24 with nearly 39,000 cases — although after a drop, the number has steadily crept back up in the past few days. The number of daily new deaths nationwide appeared to peak April 21 with 2,683 deaths . . . but we’ve lost between 2,470 and 2,200 people for the past three days.  Some parts of the country are on the downside of the curve — particularly the ones that were hit the hardest in late March and throughout April. Other parts of the country are still on the incline.  We are likely through the worst. Thankfully, only a small percentage of hospitals received more patients than they could handle. Most hospitals ended up starved for patients.  Treatment options are expanding, remdesivir looks particularly promising, and manufacturers are producing large quantities of potential vaccines on spec — making them and hoping that ongoing unfinished testing proves they work. With precautions such as widespread use of masks, continued social distancing, and avoiding crowds, our society and economy should be able to open up in a measured, careful way that mitigates the risk of further infections but recognizes that human interaction inevitably will lead to new cases. The worst is over, but the months to come are not going to be “good” but merely “less bad.” All in all, we’re probably living with this virus affecting our lives for one to two years, unless there is a breakthrough and really speedy production and distribution of a vaccine.  The CEO of Gilead, the company that makes remdesivir, says his company can make “140,000 treatment courses plus between now and July.” By the end of the year, they think they can ramp it up to 1.5 million doses. (Remember, remdesivir is a treatment, not a vaccine. It’s given intravenously for several days, and that increases the chance of recovery and shortens the recovery time.) This is terrific news for those who are currently having a serious infection and those who will have one in the weeks and months to come. But 1.5 million doses aren’t going to protect a country of 253 million adults, even if a million have already caught the virus and fought it off, and say, 20 million to a generous 60 million are asymptomatic and already caught it and fought it off.  The Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy at the University of Minnesota concludes “60 percent to 70 percent of the population may need to be immune to reach a critical threshold of herd immunity to halt the pandemic.” (That’s lower than the Los Alamos National Labs estimate of 82 percent.) On the lowest end, that’s about 152 million American adults. If this virus has a one-tenth-of-one-percent fatality rate over that sum of adults, we’re looking at roughly 150,000 deaths. If you think it is more likely that this virus has an overall four-tenths-of-one-percent fatality rate, we’re looking at roughly 600,000 deaths. On the higher end, it’s 177 million American adults — with a one-tenth-of-one-percent fatality rate calculating out to a little under 180,000 deaths, and a four-tenths-of-one-percent fatality rate calculating out to a bit more than 700,000 deaths. While there are several different ways the “waves” of infection could progress, the University of Minnesota report concludes “whichever scenario the pandemic follows (assuming at least some level of ongoing mitigation measures), we must be prepared for at least another 18 to 24 months of significant COVID-19 activity, with hot spots popping up periodically in diverse geographic areas.”  We will survive, we will endure, and we will ultimately triumph over this virus. But we will pay a terrible price along the way.  

Philadelphia convenience-store merchants are warning that the city’s lax law enforcement amid coronavirus has resulted in rising rates of shoplifting. In March, Philadelphia Police Commissioner Danielle Outlaw said that her department would halt arrests for non-violent crimes — including drug offenses, theft, vandalism, prostitution, and more — to prevent the overcrowding of jails during the pandemic. But 20 store owners told local news outlet ABC6 that criminals were emboldened by the lack of police presence.  “I’ve been facing a lot of shoplifting. Every day I try to call and sometimes when I call 911 nobody answers,” one store owner said. “People are coming in the store, they’re loading their bag and they’re actually telling us the law, that they’re not gonna get locked up,” another added. Members of the Delaware Valley Franchise Owners Association called the situation “lawless” and “the Wild West,” and pleaded for help. “I have three people quit last week, they don’t want to work anymore because of safety issues,” president Manzoor Chughta said.  A spokeswoman for the Philadelphia District Attorney’s Office said that the situation sounded “terroristic.” “If police are making arrests in cases like that, our office would charge appropriately,” she said.  State and local governments have grappled with how to deal with crime during the pandemic. New Jersey said last month that it would release up to 1,000 inmates from jails, citing fears that holding inmates could lead to outbreaks in prisons. In Baltimore, mayor Jack Young warned city residents that police would “come after” those who “want to continue to shoot and kill people in this city,” warning that hospitals needed to be free to deal with coronavirus patients.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The European Union’s foreign policy chief admitted Thursday that China “expressed their concerns” over an EU report on Chinese disinformation regarding coronavirus, after allegations that his team had watered down their initial findings “to appease the Chinese Communist Party.” Speaking to the European Parliament in Brussels, Josep Borrell denied that Beijing had coerced him to soften the report’s verdict. Drafts of the report showed that language condemning China for “a global disinformation campaign” was removed, while an analyst in the EU administration warned her superiors of “self-censoring.”  “I can assure you that no changes had been introduced to the report published last week to align the concerns of a third party, in this case, China. There is no watering down of our findings. We have not bowed to anyone,” he said. But Borrell admitted that it was “clear and evident” China was unhappy with the leaked report, first reported by the New York Times, stressing that the Chinese “expressed their concerns through the diplomatic channels.” The admission did not satisfy some lawmakers. Thierry Mariani, a French politician, told Borrell that his team had been “caught with their hand in the cookie jar,” while a Beligan member, Hilde Vautmans, demanded further answers. “Who interfered? Which Chinese official put pressure? At what level? What means of pressure?” she asked. “I think Europe needs to know that. Otherwise you’re losing all credibility.” Borrell did not go into details over his contact with China over the report. “The Chinese were not happy,” he stated. “They were not happy at the beginning and they are still not happy now.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

On the menu today: a deep dive into how American media are falling over itself to cheer China’s “success” against the virus, faulty materials sent from China are harming our personnel, and thoughts on Joe Biden’s TV appearance this morning. Stop Praising China’s “Methods”  The Washington Post offers a top-of-the-web-page “Fact Checker” column with the headline: “Chinese lab conducted extensive research on deadly bat viruses, but there is no evidence of accidental release” and much to my surprise . . . I don’t have a lot to complain about. Give the Post credit — they’re much more evenhanded than NPR was. In my coverage, I have tried to emphasize that all we have is circumstantial evidence — although it is a stack of circumstantial evidence that is starting to pile up. A lot of media institutions cite a quote from a virologist expressing skepticism of the theory, or touting the professionalism of Chinese scientists, and more or less conclude, “case closed.” I think the only way this will be definitively ruled out is if some biologist can determine, beyond any conceivable doubt, that SARS-CoV-2 had to pass through a pangolin before jumping into humans. We know other untreatable SARS-like viruses can jump directly to humans, thanks to research by the University of North Carolina in partnership with (ahem) the Wuhan Institute of Virology. The Post fact-checkers acknowledge that the honest answer to questions about the origins of this virus are “we don’t know,” and thus the lab-accident theory can’t be ruled out — even if one thinks that Chinese virologists are among the best and most diligent in the world: Records of accidents in U.S. labs reveal multiple inadvertent infections and exposures to lethal microbes, including the pathogens linked to anthrax, Ebola and the plague. While no comparable records are available for Chinese labs, a Chinese scientific paper last year described widespread systemic deficiencies with training and monitoring of high-security laboratories where disease-causing pathogens are studied. “Maintenance cost is generally neglected; several high-level BSLs [biological safety level labs] have insufficient operating funds for routine, yet vital processes,” said the paper by Yuan Zhiming, a chief scientist at Wuhan, published in the Journal of Biosafety and Biosecurity. Most laboratories “lack specialized biosafety managers and engineers,” he wrote. While the source of the outbreak ultimately may be unknowable, the claim that the laboratory could not have been involved in the virus’s release “is not credible,” said Richard Ebright, a professor of chemistry and chemical biology at Rutgers University. David Relman, a Stanford University professor of microbiology, said the outbreak at a minimum underscores the need for more stringent standards and comprehensive monitoring of research involving pathogens with the ability to inflict widespread harm on human health and economies. “There are far too many examples of lab accidents. Our own CDC and everyone else has had accidents, even with very dangerous agents,” Relman said. “There is simply no way around it, since humans are flawed — inconsistent, distractible — creatures.” As noted yesterday, we have confirmed cases of high-level Chinese scientists selling off lab animals on the black market, and dumping biohazardous and infectious material into the sewers . . . a sewer system where wet market cooks go hunting for “gutter oil.” I’ve got no beef — no pun intended — with someone who looks at all the evidence and says, “I think the virus originating from an animal brought to the market is more likely.” That’s a very reasonable suspicion — scientists have been worrying about new viruses coming out of wet markets for years! I do have a problem with people who insist that any suspicion of human error in a laboratory in Wuhan amounts to a conspiracy theory.    It doesn’t help that there are genuine conspiracy theorists out there arguing that this was a bioweapon, and that China was willing to expose many of its own citizens in order to harm the rest of the world. It also doesn’t help that a lot of people, in the general public and media alike, keep using the term “made in a lab” — meaning deliberately engineered — and “originated in a lab” — meaning came from an animal or sample being used for testing — interchangeably. But by and large, the people touting the theory that this is a deliberately engineered and deliberately released bioweapon are easily spotted conspiracy theorists. No, it is not surprising that Alex Jones thinks SARS-CoV-2 is a bioweapon. Jones also claims the virus can be cured by toothpaste. (“Crazy man says something crazy” is not news. If you turned to the medical advice of Alex Jones to protect your health, you essentially sent an engraved, calligraphed invitation to trouble to come your way.)  I’m not that worried about those conspiracy theorists, who are mostly on the fringe and preach to the already converted. I am much more worried about prominent Americans who look at this ongoing global calamity — more than 3.3 million cases and 234,000 deaths worldwide, as of this writing — and conclude that the Chinese government is the hero in this story. Right now, a surprising number of prominent Americans are loudly insisting that China has handled this virus outbreak correctly, and the United States has not. The U.S. federal, state, and local governments have made their share of mistakes in this crisis. But that doesn’t make Beijing the good guys or role models. In The Atlantic, Jack Goldsmith, formerly of the Bush administration-era Department of Justice and currently with Harvard Law School and Andrew Keane Woods of the University of Arizona Law School, contended, “In the debate over freedom versus control of the global network, China was largely correct, and the U.S. was wrong.”  Bill Gates insists “China did a lot of things right at the beginning” and insists that criticism of China’s regime is “a distraction, I think there’s a lot of incorrect and unfair things said, but it’s not even time for that discussion.” Our Jack Butler noticed an “analysis” piece over at CNN declaring, “China’s model of control has been blamed for the coronavirus crisis, but for some it’s looking increasingly attractive.” Griffiths concluded, “China, despite being where the virus first emerged, has coped with the ensuing pandemic far better than many other countries, even though those countries had a longer warning time and greater chance to prepare.” Back on March 26, NBC News declared, “as U.S. struggles to stem coronavirus, China asserts itself as global leader.” The network later tweeted out: “U.S. reports 1,264 coronavirus deaths in over 24 hours. Meanwhile in China, where the pandemic broke out, not a single new coronavirus death was reported.”  Foreign Affairs ran an essay with the headline, “Xi Jinping Won the Coronavirus Crisis.” CBS News and ABC News ran uncut Chinese state-run media footage, touting the defeat of the virus in Wuhan. CNN literally reran a Chinese state-run news agency’s story claiming the Chinese Navy had done a better job of controlling the virus than the U.S. Navy. Even coverage of the regime’s draconian steps to contain the virus are spun as demonstrations of toughness and resolution. USA Today declared, “This is what China did to beat coronavirus. Experts say America couldn’t handle it.” Er, no, we wouldn’t “handle” state authorities dragging people out of their homes and welding doors closed to keep the infected trapped in their homes. From this coverage, you would have no idea that the Chinese government lied about the contagiousness of the disease for three to six weeks, that the official numbers on cases and deaths from Beijing aren’t even close to the truth, that almost all of the wet markets — allegedly the source of this virus — remain open, or that vast swaths of the medical equipment Chinese manufacturers are shipping out don’t work.   Just what on earth is going on here? There is this weird wave of pro-Beijing cheerleading going on right now, and I can’t tell whether it’s anti-Trumpism run amok, it reflects the parent companies of media institutions having extensive business interests in China, or whether some American elites look at the stability and social control of authoritarian China and see a system they would like to emulate. It may not matter that much; these are all bad reasons to echo the propaganda of a regime that has at least a million, and perhaps as many as 3 million, ethnic minorities in concentration camps. The Chinese Did Not Help Massachusetts Personnel Let us close the week by taking a second look of that much-covered and much-praised account of masks from Chinese manufacturers being brought to Massachusetts on the New England Patriots plane. You probably saw the coverage; it was the sort of event that forced even me to say “Good job, Patriots owner Robert Kraft”: Gov. Charlie Baker, who came up with the idea to get the Patriots’ team plane involved, praised the Krafts, two other governors and even numerous Chinese officials and government agencies for getting the respirator masks to front-line health care workers. “We all know this pandemic is being fought across the globe and we couldn’t have accomplished what we’ve done here without willing partners in China that worked with us to bring this to fruition,” Baker said. “Ambassador Huang Ping at the Chinese consulate in New York was instrumental with the success of this effort.” Now fast-forward to this week, after the masks have been used by police on patrol for a while: When the Brockton Police Department received hundreds of protective respirator masks from the Massachusetts Emergency Management Agency earlier this month, they came as a welcome gift to officers increasingly worried about exposure in the line of duty. The masks were soon distributed to each of the department’s 200 sworn personnel. More were packed into kits and placed inside cruisers. But on Friday, the department received notice from the agency that new tests showed the masks to be severely deficient, filtering just 28 percent of airborne particles — far below what is considered safe for front-line workers. The department immediately recalled the masks. “We had the masks out there for quite some time before we found out about the deficiencies,” said Brockton Police Chief Emanuel Gomes. “They were in daily police use. . . . Officers were using these on every call.” . . . And many health care workers in Massachusetts have been wary; earlier this month, several questioned the quality of the KN95 masks the state received from China in an April 2 shipment brought by the New England Patriots team plane. At the time of that shipment, Governor Charlie Baker repeatedly described the masks as N95s, but many turned out to be KN95s. State officials said they have received additional masks from the federal government that are also KN95s. Sharon Torgerson, a spokeswoman for the state’s COVID-19 Response Command Center, said this week that the masks in that shipment were “a combination of KN95 and N95.” She did not directly respond to a question about whether Massachusetts officials knew some of the masks they were buying from China were KN95. “Most of the masks available from China are KN95,” she said. Massachusetts spent about $2 million for the masks in the Patriots’ shipment, Torgerson said. China sent defective masks and received $2 million and received a gushing press conference with profuse expressions of gratitude in return. God knows how many cops, first responders, and other personnel have been walking around the state of Massachusetts thinking they were adequately protected when they were not.  It turns out that the claims of a great achievement of an endeavor involving the New England Patriots plane were overinflated and that good people got cheated out of something they deserve. ADDENDUM: Joe Biden appeared on MSNBC’s Morning Joe this morning. When asked by Mika Brzezinski why he would not allow a search for Tara Reade’s name in his official Senate records and papers being kept at the University of Delaware . . . Biden simply didn’t answer and stared at the camera, in one of the more awkward silences you will ever hear.  

China has refused requests by the World Health Organization to take part in an investigation into the origins of the coronavirus. “We know that some national investigation is happening but at this stage we have not been invited to join,” Dr. Gauden Galea, WHO representative in China, told Sky News. “WHO is making requests of the health commission and of the authorities.”  The WHO and the U.S. intelligence community have concluded that the coronavirus is naturally-occurring and was not genetically engineered. However, U.S. officials suspect that the pathogen may have been accidentally from a lab, possibly the Wuhan Institute of Virology or the Wuhan Center for Disease Control. Laboratory logs “would need to be part of any full report, any full look at the story of the origins,” Dr. Galea said. The WHO representative emphasized that “the origins of virus are very important, the animal-human interface is extremely important and needs to be studied. The priority is we need to know as much as possible to prevent the reoccurrence.” U.S. officials and politicians have accused China of attempting to cover up the initial coronavirus outbreak. The White House has ordered intelligence agencies to compile evidence of a cover up. President Trump has also halted U.S. funding to the WHO after accusing the organization of mishandling the outbreak and parroting Chinese propaganda regarding the coronavirus. Republicans on the House Oversight Committee have urged Democratic colleagues to investigate the WHO’s ties to China.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

In the absence of proper new movie openings, Jean-Luc Godard’s Instagram interview by Swiss filmmaker Lionel Baier, who heads the cinema department at the University of Art and Design in Lausanne, Switzerland, momentarily revives movie culture. This almost-two-hour interview has lit up the Internet. Godard talks us through film culture’s now-paralyzed state: Owing to social-distancing shutdowns and distributors’ frozen release schedules (not just in the U.S. but across the globe), cinema is no longer a communal art. The unavoidable capitulation to television and digital streaming means we’re drifting further away from movie aesthetics and film history. The all-important spatial dimensions of bringing the world — especially the human face — intimately close are being lost, and so is the idea of larger-than-life discovery.  Who better than Godard to explain this attack on our biology and spirituality as a cultural-political crisis? He gets immediately to the point while also updating his own career history. Godard resides in the Swiss town of Rolle, where Baier made his pilgrimage to Godard’s sunlit workspace. Baier and his small camera crew wear facial masks, while Godard puffs on a cigar, speaking past the maduro, maintaining social distance but directly addressing the coronavirus catastrophe in typically theoretical terms: “The virus is a form of communication that needs something to survive on. It needs to latch on to a host, like certain birds.” This proposal is as intriguing as the disquisitions in Godard’s poetic lecture-collage films The Image Book, Film Socialisme, and the magisterial Histoire(s) du Cinéma. Godard uses a scientific analogy — the idea of symbiosis between microbes and humans — that breaks down a phenomenon the same way his earlier films broke down capitalism and Communism. These terms also explain our relationship to media.   Not playing a doctor, Godard hits on an important aspect of the COVID-19 crisis that pertains to language and propaganda — his long-time preoccupations. “Science too is bogged down in words and numbers. Otherwise there wouldn’t be a catastrophe like this,” he says, confessing, “I don’t know.” His summation: “I am happy to have found filmmaking. It’s sort of an antibody so to speak.” 
 As celebrities assemble before their quarantined webcams to fatuously repeat, “We’re all in this together,” Godard goes to the crux: “They’re not giving us any actual information. I’m surprised that they don’t give out more information.” He dares scientists to study RNA along with DNA to chart the development of the virus. As always with Godard, he calls us to challenge the source of information and the path of its distribution, which are crucial to the way that we receive knowledge and sort it out, and to how we develop our morality and our politics. This is also the basic archetype of film culture, even when we can no longer “go to the movies” but movies (content) now seem to come at us.   The virus brings Godard back to this fundamental process. Just as he revolutionized movies with his 1960 debut feature Breathless — the most radical and most romantic film of the French New Wave — his insight now presides over cinema’s decline. Cinema’s surviving sage, 89-year-old Godard, smiles frequently for Baier, like a slightly distracted elder who hangs in to give you some wisdom. His wispy gray hair arches over his bald spot like an accent aigu. He responds to Baier’s questions with the same calm and humor of his droll, probing, essayistic films.  There’s mutual respect if not exactly camaraderie for Baier, who directed the remarkable, semi-documentary coming-of-age film Garçon Stupide (2004). Their exchange weaves from parochial European topics and gentle memories of the New Wave to gleaming cinematic insights of a sort that you don’t get on Turner Classic Movies or Netflix. Baier asks, “Do you work toward precision?” Godard answers, “No, I work toward doubt or passion. Joseph Conrad said doubt is our passion, passion is our duty.” That passion is almost palpable when Godard muses on how today’s film students mostly watch clips of classic movies, extracts rather than the full work of art. With rigorous honesty, Godard relates this Millennial reality to his own collage-based methods — but then the aesthete comes through in a detailed recall of Agnes Moorehead’s performance in one scene of Orson Welles’s The Magnificent Ambersons. Godard was doing research on Ambersons for his next big project, yet he felt its power. “I watched a segment up to when she burst into tears. These are historical moments as I said in The Image Book. It’s archeology.”  Godard reminds us that virus-era film culture is an occasion to renew cinematic study and passion. He indicated its urgency with a teasing innuendo, borrowed from France’s greatest romantic-comedy filmmaker: “As Sacha Guitry said, ‘It [the virus] is against us. But right up against us.’” 

If you thought the coronavirus presented difficult policy questions, don’t worry — we have science. Governor Gavin Newsom tweeted the other day, “The West Coast is — and will continue to be — guided by SCIENCE.” Joe Biden has urged President Trump, “Follow the science, listen to the experts, do what they tell you.”  Neil DeGrasse Tyson calls the crisis “a giant experiment in whether the world will listen to scientists, now and going forward.” The invocation of science as the ultimate authority capable of settling questions of how we should govern ourselves is a persistent feature of modern Western life going back several centuries and has always been a mistake. It is especially so in this crisis, when so much is still unknown about the coronavirus and immensely complicated and consequential public-policy questions are in play.  Modern science is obviously one of the wonders of our age. We owe it an unimaginable debt — for technological advancements in medicine, transportation, industry, communication, computing, and more. All honor to Newton, Turing, Curie, and Einstein. 
 The world was slow to react to the coronavirus, and yet the genetic code of the virus was publicly posted by China on January 20, and South Korea had deployed a test kit by early February. It’s possible we’ll have a vaccine by the end of the year. Science has a limited competency, though. Once you are outside a lab setting and dealing with matters of public policy, questions of values and how to strike a balance between competing priorities come into play, and they simply can’t be settled by people in white lab coats.  Science can make the atom bomb; it doesn’t tell us whether we should drop it. Science can tell us how to get to the moon; it doesn’t tell us whether we should go. Science can build nuclear reactors; it doesn’t tell us whether we should deploy them. Invoking scientists in this crisis is a little like saying, “My economic policy is going to be guided by an ECONOMIST.” Well, good for you. But is your economist on the left or on the right? Does he care most about inequality or dynamism? Is he Paul Krugman or Art Laffer?  Science can indeed settle debates once and for all — we don’t argue about heliocentrism any more. But an extraordinary feature of the coronavirus is how poorly understood it is. We don’t know how many people have it, what the death rate is, or how best to treat it, among other things. The models of how the virus would spread were invested with a certainty that they didn’t deserve.  If we are going to unquestioningly accept expert opinion, we’d better prepare for whiplash. At first, the elite consensus was that wearing masks was unnecessary. Now, we are told it’s an essential piece of getting out of this mess. We worried about running out of ventilators, but in recent weeks some doctors have been wondering whether they have been overused. Then, there are the big questions. Science can’t tell us how we should think about the trade-off between the economic misery caused by shutdowns and the public health risks of reopenings. It can’t determine the balance between shutting down a hospital’s elective surgeries so it can prepare for a COVID-19 surge, and tanking its business. The people in our political debate who most volubly insist that they are simply following “the science” tend also to be most resistant to nuance and prone to unscientific fervency. They are using “science” as a bludgeon and conversation stopper. Obviously, science already has made an enormous contribution to our fight against the coronavirus, and may — through therapies or a vaccine — go a long way to solving this crisis. But life is not an equation, and neither is politics or policy.  We as a free people will have to decide the important questions raised by this crisis, not the doctors on TV or the researchers in the labs. © 2020 by King Features Syndicate 

1. In a Victory for Women in Sudan, Female Genital Mutilation Is Outlawed A victory for humanity 2. Victims of Communism Day 2019 3. On the Ethical Development of COVID-19 Vaccine 4. New data from @pewresearch: – 24% of Americans say their faith has grown stronger as a result of the coronavirus outbreak.– 2% say their faith has grown weaker.The rest say it hasn't changed.https://t.co/RLfzaUqCEw — Luke Goodrich (@LukeWGoodrich) April 30, 2020  5. Coronavirus: Putting priesthood on hold to return to medicine  6. Local priests care for the dying during coronavirus pandemic   7. The Angel of Dachau: Pope Francis declares concentration camp priest a martyr  8. Is It Ethically Defensible for the Church to Suspend Public Masses? 9. Since ‘Man Does Not Live on Physical Bread Alone’, State Allowed Masses to Never Be Interrupted in Latvia (With Restrictions) 10. Time to Unlock the Churches 11. Promise and peril: The history of American religiosity and its recent decline 12. An ‘Un-distancing’ Pandemic Proposal for Fathers and Daughters 13. No, We Don’t Need To Foster A Culture Of Snitching To Stay Safe 14. I have long argued that norms of civil discourse are basic to a well-functioning and just society.  I am often criticized for this, on the grounds that norms of civility do nothing more than uphold unjust power structures. — Jennifer A. Frey (@jennfrey) April 30, 2020  15. Therapeutic Holding (The Journal of Palliative Care) 16.  A webinar Friday on dealing with the emotions of these days, from a palliative-care doctor at Stanford 17. One of Becket's own will be arguing before #SCOTUS on May 11. Instead of feeling cheated to be missing out on the grandeur of the Supreme Court courtroom, @ericrassbach said, "I get to be a footnote in history.” @washingtonpost @scotusreporter https://t.co/wLux8gvg0a — BECKET (@BECKETlaw) April 30, 2020    18. Potential postulants wait and see as COVID puts convent plans in question  19. A clever song and video by two talent young women 20. Introvert Misses Good Old Days When People Didn’t Video Call Him All The Time  PLUS: Catholic Family Conference this weekend I’m speaking at The Sisters of Life had to move their virtual gala to Friday at 8 p.m. NY time. Sign up here.  

A poll from Business Insider found that nearly one in four Americans surveyed are either unable or unsure if they will be able to afford their rent or mortgage payments tomorrow, which could portend further economic upheaval. Ellen Cranley at Business Insider writes: The poll, which received 1,099 responses, asked Americans if they are able to make this month’s rent or mortgage payment. While 77% of respondents said they were set to make this month’s payment, 12% said they don’t have the money and 10% said they aren’t sure if they’ll have all of it. The results come as the latest sign of increasing financial concerns from the pandemic, which cities like New York, D.C., and Los Angeles have addressed with moratoriums on evictions. But they’ve stopped short of pausing rent. More than 30 million Americans have filed for unemployment in the last six weeks. With a financial system that remains tightly interwoven with real estate markets, a shock to the latter could reverberate through the former in a way that would only enhance the economic hardship many Americans are experiencing at the moment.  

A few days ago, I argued in Bloomberg Opinion that while the U.S. has made serious mistakes in handling coronavirus, claims that we have shown ourselves to be a failed state are overwrought. I noted, for example, that several other advanced countries have suffered a higher death rate than we have.  The column generated a lot of email and tweets in response. Many of them were complimentary, but there were also some criticisms. I paraphrase those and respond below. Didn’t you conservatives used to believe in American exceptionalism? Now you’re crowing because the U.S. is doing a little better than some European countries.  I continue to believe that America is an exception among developed countries in several respects — notably its religiosity and its hostility to centralized power — that are worth defending. I do not believe that our country will always do better than all other countries in all respects. Nobody does. How can you be satisfied after thousands of avoidable American deaths?   I’m not satisfied, and I don’t think anyone should be. That’s why I wrote, “Americans have a lot of legitimate complaints about the response to the coronavirus. The complaints are worth voicing. Criticism of mistakes can lead to fixing them, or at least preventing their recurrence.” There ought to be some space between “we have made very serious mistakes” and “we’ve shown ourselves to be a failed state.” Shouldn’t we be trying to learn from the countries that have done better than us?
 Absolutely — so long as we keep in mind the possibility that the lessons include “smallish island societies have certain advantages” and “recent pandemic experience makes people more willing to take prophylactic measures.” You wrote that column just to give cover to President Trump. . . .  

On the homepage, Yuval Levin capably surveys the lay of the land on a potential Phase IV congressional response to the COVID-19 crisis. Levin writes that Republicans are hearing it from constituent entrepreneurs that the unemployment-insurance scheme is poorly designed and prevents them from accessing paycheck protection loans. That’s all true. But, while we all recognize that the government cannot indefinitely substitute for the economy, I still believe we have fiscal capacity to make small-business relief much more generous and predictable — namely by taking the limits off and providing it on a more as-needed, ongoing basis. The limits on small-business relief turned the program into a lottery, with banks having the ability to rig the machines.  Many small enterprises will need relief beyond “re-opening,” as continuing restrictions and a hangover of public confidence take their toll. It will be tremendously costly. But letting viable small enterprises die on the vine because of a public-health emergency will have the most grievous consequences. It would mean starting our recovery by kneecapping the very institutions that would help us climb out of the hole. And while it may not be anywhere near the worst trauma during this crisis, a generation of small businessmen and women watching their work destroyed through no fault of their own will be demoralized in a way that’s difficult to capture. I can’t begin to fathom the way it would slow down job growth.  

Turning Point USA, a young conservative political organization run by Charlie Kirk, applied for a $1.2 million small business coronavirus loan through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), only to publicize an ideological rejection of it as “money from big government.” Kirk, who tweeted on Wednesday that his organization was “rejecting” a loan, did not confirm whether Turning Point had in fact applied in the first place.  “Accepting any form of government assistance would be in violation of our beliefs at Turning Point USA,” he explained, before adding in a further statement that “our board instructed us to begin the initial process exploring this option, but today we are announcing we are rejecting any and all taxpayer aid and staying completely independent.” The group’s chief operating officer, Tyler Bowyer, then revealed in the comments of a public post on his Facebook page that the organization did in fact apply for the loan, only to reject it. “We applied as soon as the gates opened before details were confirmed publicly and digestible (as you remember the bill was huge) and after researching and seeing the strings attached it is clear this is not the appropriate action,” he explained. “We certainly considered the loan and simply repaying it, but believe that government lacks the ability to ensure accountability with taxpayer dollars.”  Bowyer added that the move, which Kirk publicized in an op-ed for the Daily Caller, did not amount to “any contempt for business owners doing the right thing for their business.”  “We live off of donations and as you can imagine this is a tough time for all non-profits to raise money!” he stated. Turning Point USA has over 200 full-time employees between its Phoenix headquarters and its nationwide field staff. PPP has been one of the most popular programs passed under the $2.2 trillion phase-three CARES Act, but ran out of its initial funding of $349 billion earlier this month after the Small Business Administration said it approved over 1.6 million loan applications. Last week, the Treasury Department said it would ask approximately 150 publicly-traded companies to repay nearly $600 million in loans that they received from PPP, before the program was replenished with another $310 billion in funding on Friday.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

The Senate Republican campaign committee recently circulated a memo suggesting that the party’s candidates attack China, and their opponents’ softness on it, rather than defending President Trump’s response to the coronavirus. When the news broke it naturally caused some consternation in the White House, followed by statements of unity. There’s no getting around the fact that Senate Republicans’ fortunes are tied to Trump’s in this election. In 2016, for the first time, every state’s electoral votes went to the same party as its Senate election — and since then the party and Trump have gotten further entangled, in reality and in voters’ minds. A senator would have to have a very strong and longstanding brand of his (or more likely her) own to be able to separate their fates.  The problem this creates for Senate Republicans is twofold: Trump is the underdog, and there’s not a lot that senators can do to change that. (Any Republican senators who have read Henry Olsen’s advice that they try to make the case for Trump that the president hasn’t were probably alarmed by it.) The candidates would probably be best off doing something close to what the memo suggests: talking less about Trump, although without openly running away from him, and more about China. It won’t save the candidates if enough voters conclude that Trump has botched the response to COVID-19. But nothing else will either.  


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					U
				ntil recently, the most commonly accepted timeline suggested that the COVID-19 first appeared in Wuhan, China in late December 2019, first hit the U.S. in mid January, and caused its first American death at the end of February. In total, over 1 million individuals have been infected with the coronavirus in the U.S., and 58,000 have died, for a rough American case-fatality rate of 5.8 percent.  Unfortunately, this epidemiological profile comes with several caveats: There are many Americans who have caught the virus but don’t show up in the official infected count because they haven’t been tested. And at least some have died from the virus without being counted toward the official death toll, so the true case-fatality rate remains unknown. The noise inherent in the data makes it all the more essential that we continue to develop our epidemiological understanding of COVID-19 so that we can make sound policy decisions in the fight against it. Fortunately, over the past few weeks, new information has emerged that has helped that effort along. It is now apparent that COVID-19 landed on the shores of the U.S. earlier than we’d thought. After an autopsy, it was determined that a 57-year-old California woman, who was diagnosed with the flu and died on February 6 of what was thought to be a heart attack, had actually died of complications from COVID-19. February 6 was three weeks earlier than the COVID-19 death previously thought to be the first in the U.S., meaning the virus had three crucial extra weeks to spread through our country.  There is also new word coming from several recent regional antibody surveys on the percentage of people who were infected during the early months of the pandemic. It is assumed that individuals who have been infected develop antibodies to COVID-19. While it is still unknown whether the presence of antibodies can provide some degree of immunity, the percentage of people with antibodies gives a good indication of how many people were infected in the past. A study of New York State found that among 3,000 individuals who were out shopping, 13.9 percent had antibodies to the virus. (In New York City, the rate was 21.2 percent.) A study of 3,000 Facebook users in Santa Clara County, Calif. showed antibodies in between 2.2 percent and 3.4 percent of those tested. And in Los Angeles, 4.1 percent of a random sample of 863 people were shown to have antibodies. Each of these studies can only tell part of the story, because of how their subjects were recruited. But they still provide a helpful idea of the extent of the virus’s spread in these areas early in the outbreak. We have also learned much about the distribution of the disease across the country and within cities and states. We know that large metropolitan areas are, in general, more heavily affected. We know that the number of COVID-19 cases varies by neighborhood in these cities, and that cases and deaths have been higher in African-American and Latino neighborhoods, which often have high population density and limited community resources. American-Indian reservations with similar environmental conditions seem to have an unusually high number of cases as well.   There is also emerging data that suggest we still do not know COVID-19’s true case-fatality rate. It has long been assumed that the case-fatality rate would drop to below one as more asymptomatic individuals were tested, leading to an increase in the equation’s denominator. But we are now learning that more reported deaths may need to be attributed to coronavirus than previously were, increasing the equation’s numerator and potentially keeping the case-fatality rate higher than anticipated. 
 Recent changes to how the CDC reports COVID-19 deaths could also increase the official death toll. The CDC has changed the COVID-19 case definition that is used to standardize what is considered a true reportable case of infection. Cases are now defined as confirmed if there is laboratory evidence of infection and probable if there is insufficient laboratory evidence but the individual was in close contact with a confirmed case or had certain clinical indicators. As of April 14, CDC case and death numbers included both categories. In the past few weeks, the CDC has also expanded the number of clinical features included in the case definition.  An analysis by the Washington Post and Yale University researchers further validates concerns about the case-fatality rate. It showed that there were more total deaths from all causes observed during March and early April than were observed on average in past years. It found that there were over 15,000 “excess” deaths nationwide — that is, 15,000 more than we’d have expected from historical data — during this time period. One obvious interpretation is that these excess deaths are unreported cases of COVID-19. But of course, it’s also possible that because of COVID-19’s drain on health-care resources, people with other mortal conditions did not receive the care they normally would have and died.   All of this new information helps fill in the gaps in our understanding of the virus and its spread. We can now assume given that by the time travel from China (January 31) and then Europe (March 11) had been banned by the Trump administration, the virus had already seeded New York City and large metro areas on the West Coast, and that it spread widely throughout the country thereafter. It’s also clear that New York City and other such metropolises were particularly hard hit, in all likelihood because of their population density.  Grim as it may be to read, this is good news: The better our understanding of the virus, the more effective we can be in responding to it. But now is not the time for congratulations. We must continue to produce more data to assist government leaders in developing their plans for when, where, and how to scale back on extreme-mitigation measures and move to a more measured containment strategy of wide-scale testing, masks, social distancing, good hand hygiene, and contact tracing. Countless lives and the health of our economy depend on it. 

Republicans on the House Oversight Committee on Thursday urged Democrats leading the committee to investigate the Chinese government’s influence over the World Health Organization. Ranking member Jim Jordan along with five Republican ranking members on oversight subcommittees sent a letter to Democratic Chairwoman Carolyn Maloney calling on Democrats to investigate China’s sway over the WHO.  “The potential misuse of taxpayer dollars is at the heart of the Committee’s jurisdiction, and we owe it to the American people to evaluate how the WHO has been spending their hard-earned money,” the letter read, noting that American taxpayers are “the single largest contributor to the WHO,” contributing many times China’s contribution. “Notwithstanding this drastic imbalance in funding, the United States should not support organizations that promulgate communist propaganda instead of the facts. Our republic is not obligated to hand money to an entity that espouses ideals of international cooperation while furthering the Chinese government’s machinations,” the letter continued. The GOP committee members noted Maloney’s own statement acknowledging that “the WHO has shortcomings that must be corrected,” although she opposed the decision by the Trump administration to suspend U.S. funding of the organization until a review is conducted to assess the WHO’s role in “severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.”  “In light of such an admission, coupled with multiple media reports of WHO’s failures, we request immediate briefings, and hearings next month, on the WHO’s relationship with the Community Party of China and its widely criticized response to the ongoing COVID-19 crisis,” the Republicans wrote.  The WHO also attracted harsh criticism after it praised China for its transparency and willingness to share information regarding the nature and spread of the virus. The Trump administration and U.S. lawmakers have since cast doubt on China’s good faith in sharing information about the outbreak and have criticized the WHO for apparently taking the communist country at its word. The GOP lawmakers also commended the president’s decision to pause WHO funding temporarily, saying the organization’s “inaction and delay undoubtedly cost American lives.”  “If Democrats were serious about oversight of American tax dollars, they’d investigate the WHO’s ties to China. It’s no secret that the WHO has been using American tax dollars to peddle Communist China’s talking points about COVID-19 for months,” A senior Republican aide told National Review. “This practice should offend every American, no matter the party. The United States Congress should lead the way in opposing such propaganda.” As of Thursday afternoon, the U.S. has over a million positive cases of the coronavirus, and over 61,700 people have died after being infected.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Earlier this week I gingerly walked through some of the land mines one encounters while exploring COVID-19 data. Here I’d like to add that the data on the flu have similar problems, as explained in John McCormack’s excellent new magazine piece, as well as an article over at Scientific American.  The numbers that have anchored a lot of the discussion so far — such as that the flu has a fatality rate of 0.1 percent and kills 60,000 or so in a bad season — are not as firmly established as one would hope. As McCormack notes, drawing on an earlier piece from Justin Fox, the 0.1 percent figure does not account for asymptomatic infections, so it can’t be compared with COVID-19 numbers that do. The adjusted number for the flu is probably somewhere around 0.04 percent. Meanwhile, the Scientific American piece starts with a simple observation from the author: If the flu kills tens of thousands of people a year, he should have seen plenty of these deaths “in four years of emergency medicine residency and over three and a half years as an attending physician” — just as he’d seen other causes of death with similar tolls, such as gun violence and opioid overdoses. But he “could only remember one tragic pediatric case.” He called around the country to ask colleagues about it, and hardly any of them saw flu deaths in significant numbers, either. Turns out those common statistics are the result of some guesswork: The 25,000 to 69,000 numbers that Trump cited do not represent counted flu deaths per year; they are estimates that the CDC produces by multiplying the number of flu death counts reported by various coefficients produced through complicated algorithms. . . . In the last six flu seasons, the CDC’s reported number of actual confirmed flu deaths — that is, counting flu deaths the way we are currently counting deaths from the coronavirus — has ranged from 3,448 to 15,620, . . . far lower than the numbers commonly repeated by public officials and even public health experts. . . . In the fine print, the CDC’s flu numbers also include pneumonia deaths. As to the methods, the linked CDC page points us to this paper and this one. Here’s a brief explanation from the second (and more recent) study: First, we adjusted the reported annual hospitalization rates from FluSurv-NET [a system that collects flu data from a small subset of U.S. health-care providers] . . . using multipliers that included the probability of being tested for influenza and the sensitivity of influenza testing. . . . Rates of influenza mortality were calculated by multiplying the adjusted rates of hospitalization by the ratio of deaths to hospitalizations. That “ratio of deaths to hospitalizations,” in turn, comes from massaging still other numbers: Not all persons who die with influenza are admitted to a hospital prior to their death, and others may die after hospital discharge, thus hospital surveillance does not fully capture deaths due to influenza in the catchment area. To estimate a more complete ratio of deaths to hospitalizations, we also included data on the probability that a person with a respiratory infection would die outside of a hospital admission. For this we used publically available mortality data from the National Center for Health Statistics for the U.S. population in 2010 to identify the deaths attributable to pneumonia and influenza (ICD-10 codes: J10-J18) and the proportion that occurred while hospitalized vs. outside of a hospital admission (e.g., at home, on arrival, in the emergency department, in hospice or long-term care facility). Or, if you prefer a flow chart:  So, yeah. These are estimates, not hard facts, just like most of the numbers you’ll see regarding COVID-19.  


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					L
				ife won’t completely return to normal while the novel coronavirus remains a threat to health and to life. More than 60,000 Americans have already lost their lives to this virus; while older people seem especially vulnerable, the virus has demonstrated its ability to kill people of all ages. Even as the country edges back to work and school, there’s a palpable anxiety. We don’t want to get infected, and we don’t want to infect others.  The most appealing solution would be a transformational treatment that immediately neutralized the threat. This would most likely be in the form of a vaccine, a preventive approach currently used against viral illnesses including polio, measles, mumps, rubella, hepatitis A, and hepatitis B. According to the Milken Institute, nearly 100 potential vaccines for COVID-19 are “in development,” some by big pharmaceutical houses such as Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer, others by smaller biotechs such as Moderna. Another attractive, equally transformative solution would be a treatment that was completely curative — one that might not prevent the infection but would be able to eliminate the virus, the way an effective antibiotic can cure a bacterial infection. The singular example here are the cures several companies have developed for hepatitis C. After a relatively short period of treatment — weeks to months — the virus is gone.  Transformative therapies are what many medical researchers dream of developing, and what so many in society hope for from biomedical science, the “magic bullet” in Paul Ehrlich’s famous phrasing, borrowing from what Boston University professor Muhammad Zaman describes as an “old superstitious belief that bullets could be charmed, under the right spell, to hit a particular person” — or, in this case, a particular pathogen. For those eagerly waiting, I have some good news and bad news.  
 First, the bad news: While the polio vaccine was an infinitely better treatment than the iron lung, such transformative therapies are notoriously difficult to come by, especially for most anything besides infectious diseases — and even here, there are challenges. Bacteria are increasingly resistant to antibiotics, and developing effective vaccines for viruses can be a challenge. Now the good news: Our progress in most diseases, from pediatric cancer to diabetes to HIV, reflects not the singular impact of one curative medicine but rather the progressive improvement in treatment, iteratively, over time. Incrementalism, it turns out, may be grossly underrated. *   *   * Wednesday brought some much needed “good news,” according to White House health adviser Dr. Anthony Fauci. Data from a study of Gilead’s experimental medicine remdesivir, conducted by Fauci’s National Institute of Allergy Immunology and Infectious Disease (NIAID), showed a “clear-cut positive effect in diminishing time to recover,” Fauci told reporters. The randomized controlled study included a placebo arm.  Remdesivir, Fauci said, shortened the time to recovery by about a third. “Although a 31 percent improvement doesn’t seem like a knockout 100 percent, it is a very important proof of concept because what it has proven is that a drug can block this virus,” he said. “This is very optimistic.”  Respected Evercore analyst Umer Raffat offered this tidy summary: “Remdesivir ‘works,’ but it’s not a magic bullet.” I’ve been following remdesivir developments with particularly keen interest (my wife leads virology at Gilead), and my sense is that Fauci and Raffat are exactly right: Remdesivir would seem to represent a significant step forward, though it is not a cure for the disease, nor an end to the pandemic.  “We have a certain heroic expectation of how medicine works,” Atul Gawande observed with characteristic eloquence in “The Heroism of Incremental Care,” a New Yorker essay in 2017. Gawande admits he “was drawn to medicine by the aura of heroism — by the chance to charge in and solve a dangerous problem.” Even so, he’s come to recognize that in the care of patients, it’s often the “incremental steps that produce sustained progress.” This seems to hold not only for the care of individual patients but also in the evolution of treatment for a particular condition. As pediatrician Darshak Sanghovi, author of A Map of the Child and now the chief medical officer of Optum Labs, noted in 2008, the long-term survival of children with leukemia dramatically improved between the early 1970s and the late ’90s, “skyrocketing from less than 20 percent to around 80 percent.”  Why? Because pediatric oncologists “saved lives simply by refining the use of old-school drugs,” systematically varying the doses and routes of administration. Using this approach, Sanghovi explains, doctors gradually learned what drug combination, doses, and sites of injection worked best. And they kept at it. With each small innovation, survival rates crept forward a bit — a few percent here and there every couple of years — and over decades those persistent baby steps added up to a giant leap. Childhood cancer is hardly exceptional; Sanghovi cites other examples, including the treatment of tuberculosis and the management of heart disease. Another example he might have pointed to: the treatment of HIV, which through a process of incremental innovation — and thanks to some new medications — has evolved from a death sentence to a difficult but somewhat tractable disease treated with complicated polypharmacy, and from there to an entirely manageable, chronic condition, often requiring just a single combination pill taken once a day. Incremental improvements led to a profound improvement in care — though still not quite a cure. Unless or until a vaccine against COVID-19 is developed, we will likely depend on such iterative innovation — including non-pharmacological approaches such as “proning” and, potentially, the use of nebulized saline to reduce aerosolization — to progressively improve the treatment of patients. The remdesivir results reported Wednesday represent an important early step in this process. *   *   * If incremental invention — deliberate tinkering — is so useful, is there anything that can be done to accelerate this process and help the sorts of curious doctors (Harvard surgeon Judah Folkman lionizes them as “inquisitive physicians”) innovate faster or more effectively?   One interesting approach to this is the use of “real world” data: information gleaned from traditional patient–doctor encounters. The thought is that perhaps there are patterns that can be extracted from the data, characteristics of patients who seem to do better, or worse, than other similar patients. By deliberately learning from as many patients as possible, the thinking goes, health-care practitioners can deliver better outcomes. This is very much what the U.S. Food and Drug Administration is trying to do, according to Dr. Amy Abernethy, FDA principal deputy commissioner. “Within the context of COVID-19, we’ve got this urgency to learn what we can as soon as we can,” she commented at a recent webinar sponsored by the Duke-Margolis Center for Health Policy, “and that means that we need to be learning from the patients that are receiving care right now and trying to understand how do we apply that as quickly as possible.”  Efforts to collect real-world data on COVID-19 are the core of a new initiative, the COVID-19 Evidence Accelerator, launched by Friends of Cancer Research and the Reagan-Udall Foundation, which was mandated by Congress to accelerate regulatory science. The goal, according to a note in BioCentury, is “to create ways to learn from the COVID-19 patient experience and reinvest that knowledge in ways that benefit future patients.” Whether these systematic efforts to catalyze insight and accelerate incremental innovation will succeed is anyone’s guess. But while much of the world is mired in resignation, pessimism, and bitter partisan squabbles, these efforts to attack COVID-19 are promising, broad-based developments that should leave all of us feeling hopeful and more than a tad encouraged. 


		In response to Did Wisconsin’s April 7 Elections Cause a Spike in Coronavirus Cases? 	 The chairman of the Wisconsin Elections Commission shares two charts that show the state has actually fared far better than other Midwestern states following its April 7 elections: Despite huge increase in testing, NO "spike" seen in Wisconsin since Apr 7 election, new cases & deaths both FLAT while neighbor states saw increases.  Hospitalized cases down 25%, in ICU down 30%.  2/3 pic.twitter.com/9rzZnAcMxB — Dean Knudson (@deanknudson) April 30, 2020     

Buried in the very last paragraph of a lengthy New York Times article about the intelligence community, and the Trump administration’s interest in the theory that SARS-CoV-2 emerged because of some sort of accident in a lab in Wuhan, China: Global Times, a popular state-run newspaper, then published an article on “chronic inadequate management issues” at laboratories, including problems with biological disposal. Oh. From that article: The release of the guideline deals with chronic loopholes at laboratories, Yang Zhanqiu, a deputy director of the pathogen biology department at Wuhan University in Hubei Province, told the Global Times on Sunday. “The mention of biosafety at labs by the ministry has nothing to do with some saying that the coronavirus leaked from the Wuhan Institute of Virology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,” Yang said. Laboratories in China have paid insufficient attention to biological disposal, Yang said.  Lab trash can contain man-made viruses, bacteria or microbes with a potentially deadly impact on human beings, animals or plants. Some researchers discharge laboratory materials into the sewer after experiments without a specific biological disposal mechanism, Yang explained. Oh, wait… the same sewer system that wet-market cooks use to collect “gutter oil” for use in cooking?  We have Chinese state-run media reporting that labs dump hazardous lab materials into the sewers, and cooks who collect cooking oil from those same sewers and use it in the preparation of food, and some people still insist that there’s no way a laboratory could have had any role in this outbreak? That Global Times article continues: Medical staff and experts have long been asking for better regulation and supervision of biological research institutes in China, but with mixed results. A top academician at the Chinese Academy of Engineering earned 10.17 million yuan ($1.46 million) by illegally selling off lab animals and experimental milk, according to a report in the Shanghai-based The Paper. Li Ning, a leading expert at transgenic technologies at China Agricultural University, was sentenced to 12 years in prison on January 2 for grafting 37.56 million yuan. Chinese scientists are selling the lab animals off for cash, and some people still insist that there’s no way a laboratory could have had any role in this outbreak?  

In March, in response to the public-health emergency of COVID-19, Congress passed three large pieces of legislation in short order and with relatively little friction. Even the third and by far the largest of these bills, a $2 trillion economic relief measure that did involve some bargaining and partisan confrontations, was drafted quickly and pretty much passed unanimously. In late April, another bill adding funding to the small-business relief program created in March, again basically sailed through both houses.  But the next phase of relief and response legislation, the so-called “Phase IV” bill, does not look likely to go nearly as smoothly. Not only familiar partisan debates but also some divisions among Senate Republicans have been emerging as members turn their attention to that next stage. Ironically, these familiar dividing lines may be the first sign of a return to normality as the shock of the crisis wears off just a little. But they also suggest that Congress is dangerously disconnected from some of the most important realities of both the public-health and economic facets of the national calamity we’re living through. I’d point to four emerging areas of division or uncertainty in the legislation. The first has to do with just who will have the pen and draft the bill. The CARES Act, that $2 trillion measure enacted in late March, began in the Senate and so was mostly drafted by Senate Republicans. Those Republicans were of course under pressure to satisfy both House and Senate Democrats to get the bill passed, and they were also constantly frustrated by the tendency of administration officials (especially Treasury Secretary Mnuchin) to negotiate directly with House Democrats. But they gave the bill its basic character.  Some Republican Senators were happy with that, but Majority Leader Mitch McConnell clearly wasn’t. He thinks holding the pen put Senate Republicans at a disadvantage, since it gave both House and Senate Democrats enormous leverage to make specific demands. McConnell was also immensely irritated by the administration’s behavior in that process—especially the president’s tendency to change his mind on key issues under the slightest pressure while Senate Republicans were trying to negotiate, and Mnuchin’s willingness to deal directly with Nancy Pelosi and undercut Republicans when the president changed his views. So McConnell’s preference is to have the next bill start in the House. At this point, that looks likely to happen, even though House leaders have announced they won’t be returning to Washington next week as originally planned (and as the Senate will be). Not all Senate Republicans agree with McConnell’s view, but his sense is that if a bill is ultimately going to be shaped by negotiations between Mnuchin and Pelosi anyway, Senate Republicans will have more leverage by making specific demands against a House framework in return for their votes than they would by framing the bill and then conceding to Democratic priorities.   But just what demands would Republicans make? This is the second source of contention and uncertainty at this point. There has been a peculiar loss of focus by both parties in Congress on the particular challenges the country is facing in this crisis. Both are reverting to their familiar reflexes some. For the Democrats, those reflexes are fundamentally programmatic, and so Republicans are finding that their Democratic colleagues increasingly talk about the response to this crisis in terms of bulking up existing welfare programs and checking off longstanding agenda items with little connection to the pandemic. President Trump has been falling back on careless reflex too, with his ridiculous emphasis on “infrastructure” in the Phase IV bill. For Senate Republicans, the reversion to reflexes points toward the restraint of federal action and spending, so that some members are implicitly beginning to put this crisis in the past tense far too early. John Thune, the Senate Majority Whip, expressed this view a few days ago to the Washington Post, saying, “As we start thinking down the road in future iterations, my hope would be that it’s more fine tuning what we’ve already done rather than taking on big, aggressive new initiatives that are paid for by additional debt.” It’s an understandable view, and concern about spending is certainly in order. Even before we faced a pandemic, the federal government was set for a deficit of roughly a trillion dollars this year. The demands of the crisis, and the ensuing recession, look likely to push that number to an unprecedented $4 trillion or so, according to the Congressional Budget Office. It could rise much higher before the year is out. Congress will no doubt need to take aggressive action to control the future growth of the debt when this crisis is actually behind us.  But the crisis is not behind us. The worst of it, especially in economic terms, is surely ahead of us. And it’s going to take more than fine-tuning to help Americans through it and to keep it from doing more lasting damage to our economy than it has to. My view, like that of NR’s editors, is that Senator Josh Hawley’s general approach—focused on keeping people employed and keeping businesses whole—makes a lot of sense. Even just a more open-ended form of the Paycheck Protection Program enacted in March would help. But it seems increasingly clear that support for such measures among congressional Republicans is waning.    So what do Senate Republicans agree on? In my conversations, there has been an emphasis on two issues above all: Fixing the perverse incentives in the CARES Act’s increase in unemployment benefits, and providing employers with liability protections as they re-open businesses. On the unemployment question, Republicans seem utterly unified. They are hearing a lot about it from constituents—particularly employers who want to retain their workers through the crisis but are finding that those workers prefer to be laid off onto the unemployment rolls, where at least temporarily they can make more money. This makes it difficult for employers to make use of PPP loans (which are only forgiven if employers maintain payrolls), and will make it difficult for shuttered businesses to re-open when they are allowed to. But above all, it is worsening and will extend the economic downturn we have entered. Democrats are dug in on this question—it is their version of regressing to reflex. Some seem almost to see this as a means of enacting more generous minimum wages, failing to grasp the enormous economic harm this approach is likely to cause. So while Republicans are intent on addressing the problem, their ability to do that in this next bill will be limited. They may be able to reduce the extra benefit (from $600 a week) as a condition of pushing back its expiration date. But that remains unclear.  The liability question, which McConnell has stressed, is also no simple matter. As my AEI colleague Adam White has noted, Congress will need to do more than just waive employers’ legal liability for workers’ exposure to the virus. That would be irresponsible. Members will need to frame some new rules and standards, and the work required to do that has barely begun. But without question, some relief from liability concerns is going to be important as states begin re-opening their economies this spring and summer. Important though both these issues are, however, they are relatively marginal. Core questions of economic assistance, let alone of public health, remain to be addressed, and at this point Republicans do not seem unified around specific ways of doing that. They are also divided when it comes to helping the states, which will be an enormous challenge as Phase IV goes forward. This is the third area of contention I’d point to: the coming crisis of American federalism. The pandemic and the ensuing economic disaster are placing enormous pressures on state finances, and there is no question that Congress will be called on to help. Some such help is in order, yet some states (like Illinois) are also clearly using this crisis opportunistically to try to backfill longstanding obligations resulting from their own fiscal mismanagement. Rather than clarify that distinction, Republicans are dividing over whether Congress should be helping the states meet urgent fiscal obligations at all. McConnell didn’t help matters by recently describing the issue as a debate over “blue-state bailouts.” (Even the pension crisis itself isn’t best understood that way. McConnell wouldn’t have to look far to find red states with massive pension problems that want federal help.) But ultimately, this crisis is going to require both some form of federal bailout in response to pandemic-related state spending and some sort of reckoning for states whose longstanding recklessness is now becoming untenable. Changes to bankruptcy laws to give states more options (as McConnell implied) should be on the table when it comes to the latter. But Republicans will need to consider the former too—the real needs that states will confront in this crisis and the federal role in helping states meet them. McConnell’s resistance to aid for states and localities is not shared by all his Republican colleagues. And their division on that subject will be important to track as the Phase IV bill takes shape. But all of these divisions, and the great bulk of the ongoing discussions about Phase IV, are about the economic response to the crisis. What about the public-health response? This is the fourth area of uncertainty I’d point to as the bill takes shape. Both Republicans and Democrats in Congress are paying too little attention to the continuing need for federal coordination, action, and funding for testing, tracing, and treatment of COVID-19. We may be passing the peak of this first phase of the pandemic, but to start gradually re-opening the economy and to be prepared for a second phase of outbreak in the fall, we will need to be mobilizing America’s public-health infrastructure and medical-research enterprise. Somehow, there is still not enough urgency on this front in Washington. Support for massively expanded testing and for research coordination in particular, should be part of this next bill. It still remains far from clear what shape the Phase IV bill will take. But it’s already obvious that the process of its formulation will be more contentious and uncertain than Congress’s pandemic-response efforts have been so far. This is not the end of the world: Contention is Congress’s bread and butter. But it’s vital that members focus on the scope and character of the calamity the country is confronting and look for ways to address the actual problems we face, rather than just revert to longstanding partisan reflexes. Our politics will return to normal in time, and those reflexes will again have their proper place. But that time has not yet come, and pretending it has will only extend the crisis.  

South Korea has kept its coronavirus outbreak under control with an aggressive regime of testing for infections, tracing the contacts of the infected, and isolating the affected individuals. The nation of 51 million people has had fewer than 11,000 known COVID cases and fewer than 250 known COVID deaths.  Still, that translates to a crude case-fatality rate of over two percent.  It is well known that the true “infection-fatality rate” in every country is significantly lower than the case-fatality rate due to the fact that there are many more undetected cases than undetected deaths. As Bloomberg Opinion columnist Justin Fox recently reported, the initial round of serological studies that test for coronavirus antibodies — which are being conducted to get a better sense of how many cases are going undetected — point to an infection-fatality rate anywhere between 0.12 percent and 1.08 percent: So the range of IFRs derived from these surveys so far is 0.12% to 1.08%, and the latter result should probably be given much more credence than the former both because of the false-positives issue described above and the seeming flaws in the calculations used to arrive at 0.12%. The most exhaustive and up-to-date pre-serology-survey estimate of Covid-19’s IFR that I’m aware of, from a peer-reviewed article in Lancet Infectious Diseases by a group of researchers at Imperial College London, is 0.66%. If the IFR of the seasonal flu is 0.04%, these blood surveys show Covid-19 to be anywhere from three times deadlier to 27 times deadlier — and given the incompleteness of current death counts, the true range seems likely to be higher than that. South Korea seems to be another sign that it is unlikely that the lowest estimate of the infection-fatality rate is correct. For the rosiest estimate of a 0.1 percent infection-fatality rate to be correct, then there must be 230,000 infections in South Korea that have gone undetected. That seems unlikely in a country where the outbreak is under control, unless asymptomatic cases almost never infect other people. Still, it’s too early to draw a conclusion, and a serological study testing for coronavirus antibodies in South Korea could help shed more light on the virus’s true fatality rate. Of course, when thinking about fatality rates, it is important to keep in mind that a virus with a seemingly low fatality rate can kill a lot of people. If 30 percent of Americans are eventually infected with a virus that has a 0.25 percent infection-fatality rate, that would result in a death toll of nearly 250,000 people.  

Republican senator Josh Hawley of Missouri and Democratic senator Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin are calling on the Federal Trade Commission to open an antitrust investigation into the meatpacking industry:  The domination of a select few companies in the American meatpacking industry is cause for serious concern. Four companies process 85 percent of all the beef in the United States: Tyson Foods, Cargill, JBS S.A., and Smithfield Foods. Just three of these multinational firms — Tyson Foods from the United States, JBS from Brazil, and Smithfield from the People’s Republic of China — control 63 percent of America’s pork processing. […] This physical plant concentration, in turn, has undermined the stability of America’s meat supply and become an issue of national security. Following a spate of COVID-19 infections among plant workers, in recent days these oligopolistic companies have closed three pork plants indefinitely, resulting in the shutdown of a staggering 15 percent of America’s pork production. As a result, farmers cannot process their livestock — which are costly to maintain — and consumers risk seeing shortages at grocery stores, exacerbating the food insecurity that all too many Americans are currently experiencing. These harms might have been mitigated if the meatpacking industry was less concentrated. The current COVID-19 crisis has exposed the vulnerabilities of American supply chains and the importance of ensuring that, when disaster strikes, America’s food supplies are not in the hands of a few, mostly foreign-based firms. On the homepage today, Michael Brendan Dougherty writes on the problem of the supply chain breaking down.  

In Wisconsin, 413,000 people voted in person 23 days ago. The incubation period of the coronavirus is two to 14 days, so even accounting for delays in testing and reporting, it would seem a spike in COVID-19 cases due to in-person voting should have showed up by now if it were going to occur.  So far, there’s no evidence of a spike:  “The state said about two dozen people may have been infected on election day,” the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported on Wednesday. “Some have characterized these numbers as an ‘uptick,’ but the experts are cautious.” Ryan Westergaard, the chief medical officer at the Department of Health Services, told the paper that a link could not be established between the election and the very small number of cases that had developed among the 413,000 voters who showed up to the polls on April 7. “With the data we have, we can’t prove an association,” Westergaard said. “It would be speculative to say that was definitely the cause without really investigating closely and being clear that somebody really had no other potential exposure to infected people. I don’t think we have the resources to really do that to know definitely.” “I don’t think that the in-person election led to a major effect, to my surprise. I expected it,” Oguzhan Alagoz, an expert in infectious-disease modeling at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, told the Journal Sentinel. A Democratic state senator suggested last week that there had been a surge of cases because of the election, but as Politifact Wisconsin reported, the surge was due to an outbreak at several meat-packing facilities in Brown County, home to Green Bay. There is still a case to be made that it would have been prudent for Wisconsin’s legislature and governor to agree to postpone the election given the uncertainty of how transmissible the virus is, the fact that at-risk populations may have been scared away from voting in-person, and the fact that there were many people who requested absentee ballots and did not receive them in time to have them counted.   And there is also obviously a strong case to be made that more should be done to allow absentee voting in November. But the push to postpone Wisconsin’s April 7 elections was very different from the decision made by Ohio governor Mike DeWine to postpone Ohio’s March 17 Democratic presidential primary. DeWine only had a few days to make a decision just as the crisis began, and, unlike Wisconsin, there was not a statewide election for constitutionally-held office on the ballot.   Wisconsin governor Tony Evers waited until the weekend before the April 7 vote to call for postponing the election. He issued an executive order the day before the election to postpone it — an action he had previously said would be illegal.  Allowing a governor to unilaterally cancel election for a constitutionally held office at the last minute due to panic about the coronavirus could have set a terrible precedent for the November elections.  

At this point, the easiest and least useful contribution to the discussion about reopening society is to pound the table and bellow, “We need more testing!” Yeah, no kidding. As laid out yesterday, not even the United States of America can snap its fingers and start producing 5 million coronavirus tests a day. Demanding something happen does not make it happen; logistical facts don’t care about your feelings. The FDA has granted 50 companies “emergency use authorizations” to produce tests, but these production lines take time to set up. Manufacturers need supplies. Once those tests are manufactured, they need to be distributed, conducted, and in some cases, processed at a separate facility. Interestingly, the Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that we’re not yet conducting and processing the most tests that we can with our existing capacity: “We have university laboratories around this country that have the ability to run 1,000 or 3,000 tests per day, yet many of them are nowhere near capacity,” said Michael Pellini, managing partner of venture fund Section 32 and a contributor to the Rockefeller Foundation’s national Covid-19 testing action plan. “We need to make sure they’re utilized.” With the full potential of U.S. hospital, commercial and academic labs unlocked, testing could scale from roughly 1.5 million to 3 million weekly tests within eight weeks, says Rajiv Shah, president of the Rockefeller Foundation. The big three existing test manufacturers — Thermo Fisher Scientific, Quest Diagnostics, and LabCorp — are currently producing about 800,000 tests a day. By the end of May, it could be up to 1.6 million per day, perhaps higher. A Harvard study released April 20 concluded, “We need to deliver 5 million tests per day by early June to deliver a safe social reopening. This number will need to increase over time (ideally by late July) to 20 million a day to fully remobilize the economy.” That is extremely unlikely to happen. Assistant Secretary of Health Brett Giroir bluntly told Time earlier this week, “There is absolutely no way on Earth, on this planet or any other planet, that we can do 20 million tests a day, or even five million tests a day.” This is not excuse-making or spin; it is an acknowledgment that the figure is well beyond the plausible expansion of production capacity. You can’t conduct 5 million tests a day for very long, or at all, if you’re not making 5 million tests a day.   The current unused capacity suggests that we can increase testing now, beyond the current 200,000 range. Manufacturers’ projections of rapidly expanded production over the next month suggest we can climb through the six figures and maybe even reach a million tests a day as summer arrives. Maybe if everything goes well, and the newer, smaller test manufacturers can produce a lot quickly, we will hit 2 million daily. If your argument is that we should only reopen society when we have enough tests, you’re making an argument on par with contending we should only reopen society when we have a vaccine.  

You may not know it, but most of the laughs in modern American comedy were being put together years ago between 22nd and 29th Streets in Manhattan. Many of the best comedy performers that you see across HBO, Netflix, and what’s left of broadcast television, not to mention the writers working with them, did at least some time in New York’s improv-comedy scene. The institutions that sustain those laughs, like everything else dependent on the nightly take, are mortally ill because of COVID-19.   Lots of great comedic actors were part of the Groundlings in Los Angeles, or of the Second City Theater in Chicago. But starting in the late 1990s, a veritable Tin Pan Alley of comedy grew up across several small improv joints in Manhattan. These institutions make their money charging the up-and-coming performers for classes and training workshops, then charge audiences a few bucks to see them. There’s the People’s Improv Theater — “the PIT” — on East 24th Street, and the Magnet Theater on West 29th. But the flagship and first of its generation was the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre — just “UCB” — which lived most of its life on West 26th Street.  Last week, UCB announced it would close and shut down its New York space. It can’t keep paying New York’s early-Trump-era rents during COVID-era lockdowns that prevent classes and shows from happening. While the principals insist that they intend to stay in New York, the pandemic puts the entire enterprise in mortal danger.   UCB was named after the comedy troupe and short-lived Comedy Central sketch show featuring Amy Poehler (Leslie Knope from Parks and Rec), Matt Walsh (Mike from HBO’s Veep), Ian Roberts (who had a hand performing or writing in almost everything funny since 2001), and Matt Besser (similar). They were students of the man credited with inventing long-form improv, Del Close. Veterans of UCB include Saturday Night Live performers such as Horatio Sanz, comic actors such as Rob Huebel, and Hollywood director, producer, and comedy writer Adam McKay, who did almost everything Will Ferrell starred in plus The Big Short.  Standup is the pro-golf circuit of comedy. Endless rounds of individual performances, until the singular genius has honed his or her skills to the point of featuring in a closeup shot in a televisual event. Improv comedy is more like pickup basketball, in which good team players who can pass the ball and understand the open lanes on the court are both coveted as teammates and rewarded.    Del Close wrote that “many actors don’t understand the difference between a joke and a laugh. A joke is only one way — and seldom the best way — to get a laugh.” Close’s book had the slightly pompous title “Truth in Comedy.” If it had a message, it’s that what’s humor isn’t something that is superadded to a normal human. What’s funny are the human things that we can’t help but do. You’re seeing something of Close’s ideal in Adam McKay movies such as Anchorman, which came out a few years after Close’s death. Anchorman relied heavily on improv on the set, as the performers tried to find the truth in their cartoonish characters. Ron Burgundy can’t help bloviating and admiring himself. His rival Wes Mantooth can’t help but be jealous, and can’t help honoring his beloved mother, Dorothy. The mentally handicapped weatherman Brick Tamland loves lamp. He can’t help it. That’s not a joke, not exactly, but it is funny. My best friend from high school threw himself into the broader New York improv scene over a decade ago, eventually landing on the team Big Black Car at the PIT. One of his teammates worked in finance. Some held typical entertainers’ jobs, such as waitressing. Others just became famous, a few months or years after I saw them. My friend’s team members included Ellie Kemper (who went on to join The Office and was in Bridesmaids) and Kristen Schaal before she joined Flight of the Conchords. We’d have our laughs at the PIT, then decamp to the Triple Crown around the corner and make plans for when we’d next hit UCB. However, among our friends, I got a reputation as a “cooler” whose presence in the audience almost guaranteed a weak show. Also, I was too young and broke to take the train into the city every week to see him.   But in those moments I learned that the helpless idiots in Adam McKay movies were just larger-than-life versions of the comedic players showing up at improv classes, learning how to transform their insecurities, their obsessions, and their malformed characters into something hilarious.     The great joy of improv comedy is that it is a kind of private matter between the performers and the audience. That relationship is established in the first seconds, when a performer from the group asks the audience for a suggestion. Usually one member of that audience shouts it clearly, and the great performers receive the simple noun or verb as a gift. They build on it and play a few structured games of imagination with that one-word suggestion, and the results of those games become the themes and even the plot points to come. Trying to explain the storylines, character arcs, and double-backing plot twists that develop over the course of a half-hour performance is almost futile; it can be enjoyed only as an in-joke.  There is no delicate way to describe it, but the best performances at UCB had a kind of hormonal quality. While the players on stage have lots of practice at accepting and building on new premises, while they are usually working within a format that gives them a reassuring sense of structure and chances for serendipity, this is still a comedy high-wire act without a net. You can often feel the adrenaline in the air as they dare themselves, one another, and the audience to go deeper together. An absurd premise will be joined to a few odd characters, and then it’s all rigged to some universal features and clichés in human storytelling. The greatest improv acts wrap up so many divergent plot lines and gags into a finale that it feels as if it had been authored by a genius. Except, of course, no sound mind would have tried something so stupid, deranged, or marvelous as the thing you just witnessed.   In 2004 my friends and I went to the UCB theater for the St. Paddy’s Day performance of a group mostly made up of Boston-area comics called “Wicked F***in’ Queeyah.” Already the star members of the group were actual stars of comedic performance on screen. Rachel Dratch and Amy Poehler were then cast members of Saturday Night Live. Rob Corddry, now on HBO’s Ballers, was a Daily Show regular and had just been in Old School with Will Ferrell. But just as much their equals were Jackie Clarke, Jason Mantzoukas, and Ari Voukydis, a teacher at the theater. This was a performance given during the playoff season when Pedro Martinez slammed Yankees bench coach Don Zimmer into the ground, and when the Sox made their curse-breaking comeback against New York. The members of Wicked F***in’ Queeyah all came onstage wearing “Yankees Suck” T-shirts and flipping the audience the bird, radiating their mock contempt and resentment of the audience.  The twist that night was that they introduced themselves under different stage names and a different improv-group name. The premise was that they were a bad improv group falling apart and falling out with one another live on stage, rather than what they were, a rare collection of the funniest people on planet Earth, at the zenith of their talent. It gave this show a photo-negative quality. Normally, when performers on a stage acknowledge the existence of an audience, or the fact that they are performing — when they “break the fourth wall” — they rob believability from the show itself. But in this case, every time one of them laughed inappropriately, or commented on the joke another player made, they reinforced the premise: that they were just drunken unfunny idiots, their mutual jealousies, secret crushes, and betrayed friendships undoing them on stage. They played it as if they had been given this Paddy’s Day gig by some great cosmic mistake or malice. Which just made us love them more.  All that I can say is that by the time my friends and I emerged from the dark onto the chilly and damp streets, my jaw and face were hot and sore from laughing, as if everything between my diaphragm and my teeth had been through a death march of hilarity. Attempting to describe the bits that emerged in that show, the spur-of-the-moment genius callbacks, is not just impossible as an act of memory, it would be a kind of betrayal of confidence. That show was just for the people who showed up that night, the performers and the audience.  Improv comedy was already under challenge from the Internet. Comedians can go right to social media as an alternative sphere for comedy performance and promote their work on YouTube and other platforms. And Twitter itself has emerged as a surprising cultural antagonist, making audiences and performers alike too cautious and calculating to find the truth in comedy. But could it really begin to vanish from the city? In those years after 9/11, these small improv theaters felt like the vital part of New York to me, the place where American culture’s nerve endings were still exposed. What CBGB’s had been to the much smaller cults around punk rock and Talking Heads, UCB was to laughter itself. And I can’t bear the thought that a generation of young people coming to the city after this calamity of a global pandemic may not have these little places — safe spaces of a different sort — where every form of personal pain, tragedy, anxiety, and neurosis is probed and turned into something so hilarious it is unrepeatable. What UCB taught me is that the truth in comedy is a truth of transfiguration.  This article appears as “The Day the Laughter Died” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

The Office of the Director of National Intelligence said in a Thursday statement that the U.S. intelligence community “concurs” with scientific assessments that coronavirus “was not manmade or genetically modified.” “As we do in all crises, the Community’s experts respond by surging resources and producing critical intelligence on issues vital to U.S. national security,” ODNI said in a statement. “The IC will continue to rigorously examine emerging information and intelligence to determine whether the outbreak began through contact with infected animals or if it was the result of an accident at a laboratory in Wuhan.” Intelligence Community Statement on Origins of COVID-19 pic.twitter.com/MIPr6LVzU4 — Office of the DNI (@ODNIgov) April 30, 2020  On Wednesday, the White House ordered the National Security Agency and Defense Intelligence Agency to examine whether China and the World Health Organization engaged in a coverup of Covid-19’s initial outbreak. U.S. intelligence has already determined that the Chinese Communist Party attempted to conceal the extent of the virus’s spread by intentionally lowering its number of cases, but has denied reports that it knew of the outbreak as early as November.  ODNI also stated that the virus “originated in China,” after Beijing said earlier this week that it was a “victim” of a “disinformation campaign” surrounding the pandemic and accused the U.S. of “hiding something.”  Chinese officials and state media have pushed a conspiracy theory that the U.S. is behind the coronavirus, including claiming that the virus was brought to China by an American cyclist who took part in the World Military Games in Wuhan in October. The Chinese Communist Party has aimed at stifling academic research into the origins of COVID-19 by requiring papers to be submitted to a state-appointed task force in order to be approved for publication. Chinese diplomats have also attempted to promote China’s image abroad, with the wife of the Chinese Consulate-General in Chicago sending a drafted resolution that praised China’s “effective” efforts against coronavirus to the head of the Wisconsin state senate in February.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

One of the less-helpful aspects of our current quandary is the shrill argument between two closed-minded camps. One condemns those who wish to open up the economy as science-defying ghouls who care nothing for human life. The other depicts the stay-at-homes as saboteurs willing to destroy the national economy in the name of unobtainable safety.  Neither reckons with the indispensable bridge — the testing problem. Whatever mayors, governors, or presidents might say, we cannot restart the economy as long as people are too frightened to resume working, shopping, and socializing. An NPR/Marist poll found that 65 percent of Americans believe that it would be a “bad idea” to have people return to work until further testing is available, and 80 percent say the same about eating in restaurants. Even larger majorities oppose opening schools or sporting events. On the other hand, it’s simply untenable to keep huge sectors of the economy in what Will Wilkinson of the Niskanen Center calls “soft house arrest” indefinitely or to open up only to be forced to shut down again in the face of new illness spikes. We are stuck in limbo. We’ve succeeded in flattening the curve but haven’t conceived a way to avoid thousands more deaths without causing an economic catastrophe. Fortunately, the Safra Center for Ethics at Harvard has gathered experts from across the political spectrum and prepared a very compelling roadmap for escaping from this trap. It requires shifting focus from quarantining the entire population (with its attendant economic pain) to testing on a massive scale, contact tracing, and supported isolation (TTSI). With the proper level of TTSI, we could begin safely to reopen the economy, sector by sector, starting with the most essential.  We are currently testing about 150,000 people a day. That number needs to ramp up fast to 2 million a day and then quickly to 5 million per day, reaching 20 million by August. To accomplish this, Safra calls for a Pandemic Testing Board modeled on World War II’s War Production Board to coordinate the innovation, supply chains, and regulatory changes necessary to facilitate this. Testing is always a critical part of disease control but never more than in this case, when so many carriers are asymptomatic.  
 Once infected people are identified, they need to be supported in isolation — meaning that they should be able to expect sick pay, the guarantee of a job when they return, and perhaps temporary housing (hotels may be useful for those who need it). Their contacts also must be informed and urged to self-isolate for the two-week incubation period. Johns Hopkins University has estimated that we will need to hire and train at least 100,000 new personnel. This will involve the use of apps and other technologies that pose privacy concerns, but experience with other epidemics such as HIV has shown that it can be done sensitively. After a negative test, people can safely return to work.  Phase One would focus on essential workers, the 40 percent of the workforce who are not able to self-quarantine and alarming numbers of whom are falling ill. Doctors and nurses are at high risk. Seventeen percent of the New York City police force is infected, and the outbreak at meat-processing plants has prompted the chairman of Tyson Foods to warn that the “food supply chain is breaking.” Phase Two would permit the reopening of many businesses while maintaining social distancing for vulnerable populations. Phase Three would see about 80 percent of the economy back on track, and Phase Four would see a new normal in which the economy returned to pre-pandemic levels but with testing, careful monitoring, and improved decontamination to suppress further outbreaks.   If a vaccine comes along, so much the better. But this roadmap would permit us to cope with a world that contains COVID-19 — or some future pathogen — without letting it wreak devastation on the economy or our health. How much would it cost? Between $50 billion and $300 billion over two years. But compared to what? The current lockdown regime is the costliest emergency of our lifetimes. The price we are paying now, including eye-popping outlays of up to $350 billion a month from the federal government (spiking our national debt to levels unseen since World War II), lost education for children, bankruptcies, diminishing mental health, overwhelmed soup kitchens, spikes in domestic violence, and more, is incalculable. This roadmap — or something like it — offers a lifeline. COPYRIGHT 2020 CREATORS.COM 

This spring Damon Glei ran a renegade garden center. Under the rules of Michigan’s COVID-19 lockdown, his business, Glei’s Orchards and Greenhouses, should have been shuttered for most of April. Yet he kept it open, selling trowels, gardening gloves, and flats of vegetable seedlings. “You have to eat,” he says. “If you grow your own food, you have to start now. We will sell you everything you need.”  This act of civil disobedience could have led to fines and even prison time for Glei. As Americans bristle at the stay-at-home orders that have thrown tens of millions of people out of work, actions like his could become increasingly familiar. Michigan is on the leading edge of the debate over how to balance public health with commercial and personal activity during a pandemic. In March and April, the coronavirus took lethal hold of Detroit and nearby counties, as only New York and New Jersey surpassed Michigan in the number of deaths. On April 9, Democratic governor Gretchen Whitmer issued some of the nation’s most stringent and confusing orders. On April 24, she extended her stay-at-home order to May 15 and relaxed some of her previous restrictions, while also warning that “we have to be nimble enough to go backward.” Her decrees have included prohibitions, like those in other states, on eat-in restaurants and hair and nail salons, but also more aggressive bans on travel, boating, and construction. Whitmer has called her decisions “gut-wrenching,” and surely they have been. Nobody knows for sure how to save the most lives while doing the least harm to the economy. From the start, however, Michiganders had trouble making sense of her rules. The purchase of scratch-off lottery tickets? Legal. Paint from Home Depot? Banned. Recreational weed? Approved. Elective surgery? Postpone it, even though hospitals are operating below capacity and laying off thousands. What about abortion? That’s perfectly okay, Whitmer explained in a podcast interview, because it’s “life-sustaining.”  In March, shortly after Whitmer issued the first executive order outlawing a wide range of economic activity but with a set of exceptions, Goeff Hansen of the Michigan Greenhouse Growers Council inquired about the permissibility of plant sales. For garden centers, spring is the Christmas season: an intense period of six or eight weeks that can make or break an entire year. They need to sell their Easter lilies in a flash, move mountains of mulch, and hire enough people to handle a crush of green-thumb customers in May. Michigan’s Department of Agriculture and Rural Development replied with a clear answer: no plant sales. Hansen conveyed the bad news to Michigan’s nurseries. Most of them closed. As he put it in an interview, “If you remain open, you do it at your own risk.” Glei decided to take that risk, in part because he thought the vague wording of the executive order, with its exemptions for agriculture and food sales, permitted him to stay in business. He also saw that big-box stores were continuing to sell the same products he had on his own shelves. On April 9, however, Whitmer imposed limits on large retailers: They had to quit selling not just plants but also carpets, flooring, furniture, and paint. This led to the odd spectacle of Walmart stores’ cordoning off certain aisles and even parts of aisles while keeping others open. How this protected public health is anyone’s guess — but it certainly made it harder to find materials for repainting the family room at what might otherwise have been an ideal moment for it. Glei still lacked clear guidance: His trade association said the state had banned all plant sales, but then Whitmer ordered only large stores to quit selling them.   The state government couldn’t get its story straight in other areas either. On April 3, a spokesman for the Michigan State Police told the Detroit News that the governor’s order forbade recreational boating on waterways. A few hours later, the Department of Natural Resources said that this was wrong: People could use the waterways as long as boats carried only the members of a single household. On April 9, however, the governor banned motorboats, which meant that 54-foot sailboats were okay but fishing boats with trolling motors were not. Again, the rationale was unclear. Meanwhile, marinas couldn’t take pontoons out of storage and deliver them to owners, even though these activities can occur at a safe social distance.  Todd Ritchey, the owner of White’s Welding, chose to shut down in March. Whitmer’s order had blocked him from even the simplest jobs, such as repairing a broken metal gate. “I was going to stay open, but when people stayed at home, business dropped off.” He thinks closing his shop may have been the right call for the sake of safety, but he says that he and a lot of others need to get back to work soon: “If you make a living at something, then it’s essential. I don’t care if you sell butterfly magnets.”  Landscapers and lawn crews were idled, too, at a time when they should have been revving up. “Normally we’d be cleaning up yards, removing sticks and leaves, and making our first cuts,” says Spike Lewis of TLC Lawn Care. Lewis, who works by himself, also employs a couple of mowers who operate as a two-man team. They rarely see customers when they work. Lewis bills by mail. “I understand being safe, but I don’t understand why we can’t be out there. Why does she have to shut us down?”   He wasn’t alone in wondering. The mayor of Warren, Jim Fouts, said that he wouldn’t enforce the lawn-care ban on behalf of senior citizens who need the service. “I called the governor’s office last week, and I thought I made a pretty good argument,” he told the Detroit News. “I said, ‘If you do this, we’ll end up with weeds instead of grass, and tall weeds will bring rats and mice.’ I told them it’s a bad idea and asked them to rethink the policy.” Even sheriffs, who in Michigan are elected, have their doubts. On April 15, sheriffs in four counties issued a joint press release accusing Whitmer of “overstepping her executive authority” and stating, “We will not have strict enforcement of these orders.” Other sheriffs probably have felt the same way but have avoided making public statements. Whitmer’s rules permit “outdoor physical activity,” which can include walking, running, hiking, and biking. Before April 24, however, they didn’t include golfing, on the grounds that it would threaten course employees. Teed-off golfers who complained about the ban prompted Democratic attorney general Dana Nessel to fire back with a super-woke tweet: “I just can’t hear about one more black health care worker, police officer or bus driver [dying] while getting a barrage of complaints from white folks outraged because they can’t go golfing.” What about walking the fairways? “If they want to walk the course, I suppose they can but with no golf clubs in their hands and no balls,” a spokeswoman for Nessel told the Lansing State Journal. “Long distance travel” also was forbidden unless it met a “critical” need, and traveling between two homes was outright banned, which meant that Michiganders couldn’t move between their primary residences and the cabins that many of them own, especially in the northern part of the state. Weirdly, people who live in other states but own property in Michigan have been welcome the whole time. Despite the lifting of some limits on April 24, many kinds of work remain illegal, such as commercial construction and nonemergency home repairs. Localities have interpreted Whitmer’s rules in various ways. If a new house lacks a roof, for example, should the builder be allowed to finish the job, or does he have to make do with a tarp? Matthew Rizik faces exactly this problem in Birmingham: He says the city won’t let him put a roof on the house he’s building. “Rain is getting through and I’m worried about water damage,” he says, so now he’s suing. Another type of banned activity is recreational camping. “We’ve refunded $20,000 in reservations,” says Michelle Wilcox, who with her husband owns Gateway Park Campground, which mostly rents sites to families with RVs. “We can operate safely, following CDC guidelines,” says Wilcox. “I just wish the governor would let us run our business.”  Although Whitmer’s rules have sparked protests — a rally in Lansing on April 15 drew national attention — polls suggest that most Michiganders approve of her performance. Six months ago, that wasn’t true: Following a clash with legislators of both parties last year over her failed proposal to increase gas taxes by 45 cents per gallon, her approval rating among likely voters dropped to 42 percent, according to the Marketing Resource Group. Now it appears to have bounced back: In a poll of residents released on April 20 by the Detroit Regional Chamber, 57 percent approved of her handling of the coronavirus crisis and 37 percent disapproved. This may be an expression of the common impulse to rally around a leader during a crisis, and probably shouldn’t be taken as widespread support for everything she’s done — but that positive rating has helped vault her into the discussion over whom Joe Biden should pick as a running mate. By all accounts, Whitmer is on the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee’s short list. A Biden-Whitmer ticket might help Democrats avoid the defeat they suffered in Michigan in 2016, when President Trump won the state by fewer than 11,000 votes. Long before November, of course, comes May — the make-or-break month for greenhouses, nurseries, and garden centers. On April 20, the Michigan Greenhouse Growers Council sent a letter to Whitmer, describing what its members would do if they could reopen: limit the number of customers and require them to practice social distancing, make available curbside pickup and delivery, and sanitize their premises. That’s only a portion of what Glei was doing throughout April at his store, where he created a safe space of coronavirus prevention by setting up a one-way entrance and exit, putting out a basket of face masks for customers who didn’t already have them, and suspending plexiglass screens from the ceiling in front of checkout counters to separate shoppers and cashiers. At least now his one-time rogue operation is in the clear.  Shortly after the anti-lockdown demonstration in Lansing, Whitmer complained about Michiganders who objected to aspects of her policy. “In World War II, there weren’t people lining up at the capitol to protest the fact that they had to drop everything they were doing and build planes or tanks or to ration food,” she said. “They rolled up their sleeves and they got to work.” She didn’t seem to realize that getting to work is exactly what her critics have wanted to do.  This article appears as “COVID Confusion in Michigan” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

As recently as mid February, President Trump seemed to be in the best political shape he had ever been in. His job-approval numbers had been climbing since late October, as impeachment and Democratic primaries dominated the news. Bernie Sanders had won most of those early primaries, suggesting Trump would be running against someone who divided his own party and held a suite of unpopular views. The unemployment rate continued to hit new lows. We seemed to be on track to have the fourth incumbent president reelected in a row.  Then biology upended politics. We now know less about how November will go than we usually do at this point in a presidential-election year. We don’t know the future course of the virus: whether there will be a second wave, what the death toll will be, whether people will feel safe going to the polls. We don’t know what the economy will look like: whether a recovery will have begun and, if so, how robust it will be. Even if we had answers to those questions, we would not know how those voters who are up for grabs would judge these developments. If the economy is rapidly improving but unemployment remains much higher than in the spring, will the improvement or the earlier decline matter more to them? Will they be looking for someone to blame for all our losses, in which case Trump will suffer? (Deservedly or not.) Or will they take the perspective that disaster can strike, mistakes in responding to them are inevitable, and the country has survived and begun to recover?  Even amid all this uncertainty — in these “unsettled times,” to use the language of every other advertisement on TV these days — we can confidently make a few nontrivial observations about the shape of the campaign to come. The first is that Trump is the underdog.  In the second half of March, as the coronavirus began to dominate national life, President Trump’s net approval rating rose from –8 to –3 in the RealClearPolitics average: a substantial improvement, given the narrow band in which those numbers have moved over the last three years. Over the course of April, though, he gave back most of those gains. He appears to have benefited from a muted, and mostly temporary, version of the “rally around the flag” effect that often lifts heads of government during crises. Previous presidents, and such current leaders in other countries as Boris Johnson and Emmanuel Macron, saw their ratings rise by more. Even during his March upswing, however, Trump barely improved in polls testing him against Joe Biden among registered voters. Biden is consistently leading in polls of Arizona, Florida, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and Wisconsin: five states Trump won in 2016. Democratic victories in those states would be more than enough to make Trump the first president to be defeated for reelection in 28 years.  In 2016, overlapping majorities of the public disliked both of the major-party nominees. Those voters who disliked both Trump and Hillary Clinton — the Trump campaign’s analysts called them “double haters,” according to Joshua Green’s book Devil’s Bargain — broke heavily at the end for the Republican. Trump is viewed much more favorably now than he was four years ago, since a lot of Republicans have changed their opinion about him, and Biden is viewed more favorably than Clinton was. Among those who dislike both Trump and Biden, though, Biden has an enormous lead.  Election analyst Henry Olsen, writing in the Washington Post, sees some hope for Trump in the fact that he does slightly better in job-approval polls than in head-to-head polls against Biden. If a lot of the voters who approve of Trump’s performance but are undecided in the contest will be for him in the end, he is only slightly behind Biden.  The second thing we know is that the election will be less a “referendum” on Trump’s performance than a “choice” of candidates. For a long time, presidential-reelection outcomes were thought mainly to represent up-or-down verdicts by the public on the incumbent’s performance. It is a theory that challengers still cherish. The classic cases are 1980 and 1984. By 1980, the public had decided that Jimmy Carter was failing as president, and Ronald Reagan needed only to establish that he was an acceptable alternative to win. In 1984, the public had decided that Reagan was a success, and Walter Mondale had no chance. In recent elections with incumbent presidents, the challengers’ campaigns have promoted the theory. In 2004, Democratic political strategists argued that the public had turned against President George W. Bush, who was below 50 percent approval for much of the spring and summer; Democratic nominee John Kerry merely had to clear the threshold of acceptability, they said. Bush’s strategists argued that they would succeed in making the election more about Kerry’s flaws than the referendum theory suggested, and that Bush’s performance would look better as voters paid more attention to those flaws. The Republicans were right.   The next time an incumbent was up for reelection, in 2012, the parties switched sides. Republican strategists and spinners said that Barack Obama, who was under 50 percent in the spring and summer, was losing a referendum election. This time they were wrong. In retrospect, it appears that the referendum theory of presidential elections was an artifact of a less politically polarized time. When a lot of voters floated between the parties, presidents could win or lose landslides based on their perceived performance. Now we have two hardened and roughly evenly matched party coalitions with more uniformly antagonistic views, and almost all voters lean toward one or the other of them. An incumbent starts with a high floor of support, and highlighting the ideological and personal defects of his opponent is effective in keeping those who are on the outskirts of his camp from leaving. A third safe prediction is that the campaign will dwell more on the characters and personalities of the nominees than on their policies. This is of course a matter of degree. But if Bernie Sanders had won the Democratic nomination, we could have expected a more policy-based campaign. Sanders is enthusiastic about his policy ideas, and the Trump campaign was enthusiastic about running against them.  Biden, on the other hand, seems to come alive when promising to restore decency to the White House and talking about Trump’s deficiencies. The Trump campaign seems to view Biden’s main vulnerabilities as personal ones: his age, his many years in Washington, his son Hunter’s trading on his father’s offices, and now Tara Reade’s accusation that he sexually assaulted her when she was working for him. The coronavirus has had a huge effect on our health, public policy, and economy. Its long-term impact is yet to be seen. As momentous as the epidemic is, though, we can already see signs that one thing it cannot disrupt is the polarization of our electorate.  This article appears as “The Infection Election” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

‘During our lifetimes,” Ryan Brooks suggested recently in a long piece for Buzzfeed News, “the US has always felt like it was in crisis.” Brooks’s essay is titled “The Coronavirus Pandemic Has Put Gen Z and Young Millennials’ Lives on Hold,” and it is dedicated to the proposition that those two generations have been uniquely unlucky in their timing. In Brooks’s estimation, people of his age are constantly dropping into holes. “The country has always felt like it was in a free fall,” he writes, and this has prompted its younger citizens to endure an “endless sinking feeling that begins when you realize just how severe the situation might turn out to be — climate change, gun violence, debt. You get the sense there’s no turning back to the world you knew prior.” Per Brooks, this chronic lack of turning is causing yet more falling and yet more sinking. “You’re free-falling into a version of the future you didn’t want,” he explains. “That sinking, weightless feeling is what it’s felt like, for the most part, to be alive for the past 20 years.”  Perhaps it is, although I must confess that I’m still unclear as to how a weightless person would be prone to such frequent bouts of sinking. But, if so, it’s also what it’s “felt like” to be alive for most of human civilization. As anyone with a basic grasp of history can attest, the sudden imposition of events is not an interruption of normal life; it is normal life. Brooks casts the last 20 years as being an endlessly chaotic period that began with 9/11, continued with the Great Recession, and has culminated in the coronavirus pandemic. This is arguable, certainly. And yet the complaint would be wholly familiar to someone born in, say, 1905, whose young life began with the arrival of World War I, continued with the Spanish flu and the Great Depression, and culminated in World War II. It would seem commonplace to someone born in, say, 1770, whose early days were set against a backdrop that involved the American and French revolutions and the rise and fall of Napoleon. And it would be regarded as a dull observation even by a member of the post-war generation, whose inaugural memories were the struggle for civil rights, the Cuban missile crisis, the assassinations of John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King, and Watergate, and who spent much of his early twenties hoping to avoid being drafted into the Vietnam War. Okay, Boomer?  Along with the nine people he interviews, Brooks complains specifically about “climate change, gun violence, debt” — which issues he believes are inspiring existential dread among the young. (“Gun violence” is an odd candidate for inclusion, given that it has markedly diminished over the last two decades.) But even if we accept the premise that these issues should be dread-inspiring, it is not at all clear why they are different from those that animated my parents. My mother and father grew up believing that it was more likely than not that they would be vaporized in a nuclear war — a belief they were encouraged to hold by their parents, their schoolteachers, and the British government. Should they have lived in “endless freefall”?  Reading Brooks’s essay, and examining the trite words of his interviewees, I cannot help but think of my grandfathers, both of whom were plucked away from their already-difficult lives to be sent halfway around the world to kill strangers. My father’s father was a carpenter’s apprentice in 1939, until, through no fault of his own, he found himself at sea being chased around the Atlantic by submarines filled with Nazis. My mother’s father was a country boy from Devon who, despite having no interest in leaving even his home county, ended up fighting throughout North Africa with General Montgomery and eventually taking part in an infantry attack on Monte Cassino. Harold Macmillan’s famous observation that all governments are made and broken by “events, dear boy, events” applies equally to epochs writ large. When those of Brooks’s persuasion complain about the last 20 years, I suspect that what they are really saying is that they wish it could still be 1997. As a Millennial myself, I have a great deal of sympathy for this desire. The 1990s were, indeed, a fantastic time, especially for a child. And yet that decade, which Brooks calls “the world you knew prior,” remains the exception rather than the rule. I was born in 1984, and between then and my 16th birthday I knew nothing but improvement. The Berlin Wall came down. Communism disappeared. The economy boomed. Poverty was diminished. Technology exploded. There were wars, yes, but if Britain and the United States were combatants, the wars tended to be over quickly and to involve only a handful of casualties on our side. History, we were reliably informed, was over. But it wasn’t. We were merely enjoying an unusually good time.  And now we are not. Or at least, now we are enjoying a good time with frequent interruptions. It is rather tiring having to point this out as often as we do, but it remains the case that people who are born today have it considerably better than anyone has ever had it in the history of the world — especially if they are born in America or Britain or Australia or Western Europe. Kevin D. Williamson is fond of pointing out that in Dumas’s Count of Monte Cristo, the titular character illustrates his incredible wealth by serving two different sorts of fish at dinner — an indulgence that he describes as “a millionaire’s whim” — and that, today, someone boasting about that would elicit confused laughter. Until the coronavirus spread far and wide, the United States was enjoying the lowest unemployment rate in its recorded history. Even during the coronavirus outbreak, most of us are living in a manner that would have astonished and impressed the potentates of the past. That — not the arrival of exogenous events — is what is different about our time. John D. Rockefeller was perhaps the richest man who has ever walked this earth, and yet, as George Will has noted, because he lived when he lived there was nothing he could do about even a garden-variety toothache. Want to talk about having a “sinking” feeling? Have a root canal without an anesthetic.     The assumption that one’s own era is somehow “different” from all the others is as perennial as the temptation to believe that one can eradicate or perfect human nature. But it is an assumption that should be resisted at all costs. There have been only a handful of periods in human history in which a given people not only was predominantly free but had no crises to deal with, and even those become far less appealing upon closer examination. My great-great-grandfather lived through the Pax Britannica at the end of the 19th century and into the Edwardian era. He was also so dreadfully, unyieldingly poor that he had to steal coal in order to enjoy a fire once a week.  I have no doubt that Brooks means well. But he should know that his way of thinking is a gateway drug to conspiracy theory and self-pity, and, in turn, a boon to huckster politicians who are only too happy to encourage the belief that a certain class of people has been dealt a weak hand and that only they hold the panacea. The core component of wisdom is gratitude, and gratitude is impossible without a solid understanding of history. Those who know what came before them are less likely to condemn their own time. “Free-falling”? Onto a featherbed, perhaps.  This article appears as “The Universality of Suffering” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

TO: BennetPHD@researchlab.edu
FROM: JPrGrah@researchlab.edu
RE: Weird thing today Hey there — Coming in this A.M. to the lab I did the regular check with the test rats, but the count came up short. We were supposed to have 12 rats in the Southside RED cage infected with COVID-19 and the rest (22) in the Southside BLUE cage for control, and it looked like we only had 8 rats left in the COVID-19 cage.  So, weird, right? I looked around and noticed that there was a gap in the cage assembly for the COVID-19 rats and it looked to me like maybe that’s how 4 infected test specimens got loose, so I pulled the counter away from the wall and began to search and got nowhere until I heard some noise in the cleaning-utility closet, and there they were, all 4 of them, lapping up a small spill. One of the bleach containers I guess was leaking, so they’ve been drinking bleach all night. I put them back into the secure extra cage and I guess we can wait for them to expire because I can’t imagine they’ll survive drinking bleach, right?   I’ll let the night shift know about this but we should let everyone in the lab know that the cage assemblies are faulty. Thanks! JP   TO: JPrGrah@researchlab.edu
FROM: BennetPHD@researchlab.edu
RE: RE: Weird thing today That is really weird. Just checked the lab. I think the COVID-19 specimens are dead already? Did you replace the bleach-drinking rats? Because I now count 4 healthy rats and 22 rats in the control cage and the rest I guess are dead from the bleach? Can you clarify this for me? I need to know how to report this to the CDC etc. when we do the final tabs. Thanks! Bennet   TO: BennetPHD@researchlab.edu
FROM: JPrGrah@researchlab.edu
RE: RE: RE: Weird thing today No, the 4 rats that are alive are the ones that drank the bleach. They came from the COVID-19 cage and drank bleach by mistake and should probably be dead by now because they were infected with COVID before escaping. I’ll check later today when I do my lab rounds. JP     TO: JPrGrah@researchlab.edu
FROM: BennetPHD@researchlab.edu
RE: RE: RE: RE: Weird thing today Okay, so yesterday I put the 4 healthy bleach-drinking rats in the infection cage and infected all of them with COVID-19 at the highest viral load we have. This morning I expected to find 4 dead rats but instead they’re all fine and basically just chilling. So I tested them for COVID-19 and discovered that none of them show any traces of infection. And the ear tags all match so I know the rats are the same. So the question is, did drinking bleach cure them of COVID-19??? We need to stop other testing and focus on this. Bennet   TO: bigtimeresearchphd@hotmail.com
FROM: 45hsyyak!!!@gmail.com
RE: Using personal email Hey there Bennet — JP here. Using my non .edu email and suggest you do the same because the university email servers are not secure. I mentioned your findings to the lab supervisor and immediately was called to a meeting with the dean and the research fellows’ council and told in no uncertain terms that there’s no way drinking bleach can cure COVID-19 in rats or ANYONE ELSE and that we need to shut down whatever we’re doing to test that and neither one of us is to tell ANYONE about this at all. So, forget the bleach and just get rid of those healthy rats by giving them to the cancer teams or something, and let’s just do the other set of tests, the ones with the teeny tiny masks, which I know are a pain to tie onto the rats but that’s the direction they want us to investigate and boy were they mad to learn that drinking bleach cures COVID-19. So shut it down and let’s shred the notebooks and tell the night team you were just trolling them to be funny. Okay?  JP   TO: 45hsyyak!!!@gmail.com
FROM: bigtimeresearchphd@hotmail.com
RE: RE: Using personal email Hey JP: Totally get it. I shut it all down and just for good measure I put the rest of the rats into the Southside RED cage and infected them all with COVID-19 at a HUGE viral load and left them overnight. Meanwhile let the night teams know it was all a funny haha joke, which they bought. Consider the situation over. Sorry to have caused such a problem with the bleach-drinking-cure discovery. Was confused this afternoon to see that the whole cage of infected rats were still doing fine and realized that I had left the powerful UV lamp trained on them for 24 hours, so maybe the UV rays are also a cure? Should I shut this down, too? Say the word! Bennet  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

On January 23, the Chinese government initiated a draconian quarantine of the city of Wuhan in order to stop the spread of SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that only recently began infecting human beings. The army surrounded the city of 10 million. Soon thereafter, doors of some apartment buildings in the city were welded shut.  Not to worry, some voices in the media reassured Americans. “Get a Grippe, America. The Flu Is a Much Bigger Threat than Coronavirus, for Now,” read the headline of a February 1 Washington Post story. “Don’t Worry about the Coronavirus. Worry about the Flu,” BuzzFeed News declared on January 28. Although President Trump acted on January 31 to sharply curtail the number of people entering the United States from China, he suggested as late as March 9 — even as Italy was hours away from initiating a national lockdown — that the threat of the coronavirus was no greater than that of the flu. By the middle of March, of course, the president had changed his mind. “It’s not the flu,” he said at a March 31 press conference. “It’s vicious.” He was right then. There is still much we don’t know about the coronavirus, but we know enough to say that it is far more dangerous than the flu. It took twelve months and 61 million infections for the H1N1 swine flu to kill 12,500 Americans in 2009–10. The Centers for Disease Control estimated that the seasonal flu killed 34,200 Americans during the 2018–19 flu season. In 2019, car crashes killed 38,800 Americans.  As for the new coronavirus? On February 26, the United States had not yet recorded its first COVID-19 death. By March 26, the death toll had topped 1,200. By April 26, the coronavirus had killed more than 55,000 Americans.  Despite the fact that the coronavirus has killed more Americans in the past month than the seasonal flu kills in one year, some have continued to argue that the epidemic will end up being no more serious than a bad flu season. On Fox News on April 13, Bill Bennett, the former education secretary, said, “We’re going to have fewer fatalities from this than from the flu. For this, we scared the hell out of the American people.” He pointed out that the model created by the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington was projecting that COVID-19 would kill 60,000 Americans and that the seasonal flu killed 61,000 Americans in 2017–18, a particularly bad flu season.  But the coronavirus has now killed about 60,000 Americans in six weeks — and that was with lockdowns to stop the virus from spreading at an exponential rate. What’s more important to keep in mind: The IHME projection is only an estimate of the death toll for a first wave of infections, and most of the country will still be vulnerable to infection after the first wave passes. Harvard epidemiology professor Marc Lipsitch tells National Review he’s unaware of any epidemiologist who thinks there will be only one wave of coronavirus infections.  To estimate how many people any disease could kill, it helps to have a sense of two things: the fatality rate and the total number of people who may be afflicted by it. A virus with a 25 percent fatality rate that infects 1,000 Americans would kill 250 people. A virus with a 0.25 percent fatality rate that infects 100 million Americans would kill 250,000 people.  As Bloomberg columnist Justin Fox recently reported, the first round of studies that test for coronavirus antibodies indicates that the infection-fatality rate for the coronavirus could be anywhere from 0.12 percent to 1.08 percent. These antibody tests attempt to account for asymptomatic and otherwise undetected infections, and there are many such coronavirus infections. Epidemiologists told Fox that when asymptomatic infections of seasonal flu are similarly accounted for, its infection-fatality rate is 0.04 percent (that’s different from the 0.1 percent case-fatality rate often cited in the press). So the infection-fatality rate could be anywhere from three to 27 times greater than the flu’s, according to initial studies. Even if the fatality rates of the flu and the coronavirus were close, the latter would still be more dangerous because it could infect many more people.  “This is worse than the flu. There’s no question about it,” Dr. Jay Bhattacharya of Stanford Medical School tells National Review. He notes that, as is not the case with the coronavirus, there is a vaccine for the flu. We also have some immunity from previous infections.  Bhattacharya recently helped conduct a study that found that 2.5 percent to 4 percent of the population of Santa Clara County in California have already been infected with the coronavirus, and the study concluded that the infection-fatality rate in the county could be between 0.12 percent to 0.20 percent. In a recent interview on Peter Robinson’s program Uncommon Knowledge, Bhattacharya cautioned that we do not yet know how much immunity those who recover from the infection have and how long it lasts, but “if we were to talk about herd immunity, 3 [to] 4 percent [of the population having been infected] is nowhere near” the threshold. If herd immunity is possible, how many people would need to be infected nationwide to reach it? “Let’s say there’s a component of folks who are sort of naturally immune for whatever reason that we don’t understand. Well, then herd immunity would be a lower number,” Bhattacharya says, declining to offer a low-range estimate. “If that’s not true, you need, you know, 70 to 80 percent [of the population infected]. That could happen.”  “If the [fatality rate is] 0.1 percent and 30 percent of the country gets infected, that’s about 90,000 deaths,” says Bhattacharya. What’s the upper range of potential deaths? “I don’t want to speculate. That’s not responsible,” he replies. Of course, it’s no more speculative than calculating the lower-range estimate. If 70 percent of Americans were infected with a virus that kills 0.2 percent of those infected, that would result in a death toll of over 460,000 people. Harvard’s Marc Lipsitch tells National Review his latest estimate is that anywhere from 35 to 75 percent of the population could get infected before herd immunity is reached. Former FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb has estimated that herd immunity would likely kick in at 50 to 70 percent of the population — far above the current 1 to 5 percent of Americans estimated to have already had the coronavirus. You don’t need to rely on statistical models to come to the conclusion that the coronavirus is much more dangerous than the flu. You just have to look at the reality of what has already happened around the world and in our own country. The Wall Street Journal reported that confirmed coronavirus deaths in the month of March in the Italian province of Bergamo (population 1.1 million) were equal to 0.2 percent of the entire population. The true percentage may be higher: There were 4,000 more deaths in Bergamo in March 2020 than the average number of deaths in March in recent years, but only 2,000 of those deaths were attributed to confirmed COVID-19 cases. The coronavirus has already killed more than 0.1 percent of the entire population of the state of New York. That may seem like a small percentage. But imagine the entire country getting hit as badly as New York State: 0.1 percent of the U.S. population is 330,000 people. In New York City, antibody testing indicates that 25 percent of residents have already been infected, which equals 2.1 million residents. The city recorded 11,500 confirmed COVID  deaths and an additional 3,700 probable COVID deaths from March 11 to April 25, but the New York Times reports that there were 21,000 more deaths recorded in the city during that same period this year than in a typical year. The numbers indicate a fatality rate in the city of at least 0.55 percent but likely closer to 1 percent. There are other signs of the unusual lethality of the coronavirus. It has killed 100 Italian doctors. That doesn’t happen during a bad flu season. It has killed 30 employees of the New York City Police Department. That doesn’t happen during a bad flu season. It’s entirely possible the virus is more contagious and lethal in densely populated cities, but those facts are cause for concern. It’s unclear where the fight against the coronavirus goes from here. Having a reasonable understanding of the ongoing danger does not dictate how long lockdowns must go on, or whether less stringent measures would have made more sense in the past, but it will help the government, businesses, and individuals take precautions that could limit the virus’s death toll in the months to come. Some have said that the lockdowns and “flattening the curve” of the epidemic will merely spread out deaths over time without saving any lives, but that’s not necessarily true. The death rate is higher when the health-care system is overwhelmed. And buying time provides the opportunity to ramp up a system of widespread testing and tracing that can slow the spread of the virus. If the transmission of the virus slows enough that an effective antiviral drug (or vaccine) hits the market when 15 percent of the population has been infected rather than 30 percent, many lives would be saved.  With herd immunity, it becomes impossible for a virus to gain a new foothold. But even if herd immunity is what ultimately stops the virus, “flattening the curve” of the epidemic still “saves cases and lives because of the phenomenon of overshoot,” says Lipsitch. Essentially, “overshoot” means that the people infected with the virus at the time that herd immunity is reached will still infect many others before the virus dies out. The fewer cases there are at that time as a result of measures to suppress them, the fewer deaths will result from overshoot. No nation can afford to endure a hard lockdown until a vaccine is developed for the new coronavirus. We need to have “a functioning economy as well,” says Lipsitch. “It’s really good for people to have a job and a salary.” He says the least bad solution could involve some “economic disruption but not paralysis.” His hope is that widespread testing for infections and tracing the contacts of those infected, combined with wearing masks, washing hands, and social distancing, will mean the virus “just sort of trundles along at a reproduction number near 1 and we don’t get very close to the herd-immunity threshold but we also don’t completely shut down.” (The reproduction number is how many new cases each existing case creates, and a reproduction number of 1 would mean the virus does not spread at an exponential rate.) There are still many things we don’t know about the coronavirus: How much will heat and sunlight slow it down this summer? How soon will an effective drug be on the market? Or even a vaccine? We’ll know the answers in time. For now, we know enough to say it’s not the flu.  This article appears as “It’s Not the Flu” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

‘In a way, everything is technology,” noted one of the world’s greatest economic historians, Fernand Braudel, in his monumental study Civilization and Capitalism. “Not only man’s most strenuous endeavors but also his patient and monotonous efforts to make a mark on the external world; not only the rapid changes . . . but also the slow improvements in processes and tools, and those innumerable actions which may have no immediate innovating significance but which are the fruit of accumulated knowledge,” he continued. Yes, land, labor, and capital (that’s to say, the factors of production) are important components of economic growth. In the end, however, human progress in general and global enrichment in particular are largely dependent on invention and innovation. That is surely even clearer now that humanity’s hopes for the end of the pandemic and for our liberation from the accompanying lockdown rest on further scientific breakthroughs within the pharmaceutical industry. Let’s take a brief look at the impact of technology on health care, food supply, work, and sociality in the time of COVID-19.  HEALTH CARE
The impact of modern technology is surely most keenly felt and anticipated within the sphere of human health care. Consider some of the worst diseases that humanity has had to face in the past. Smallpox, which is thought to have killed an estimated 300 million people in the 20th century alone, originated in either India or Egypt at least 3,000 years ago. Smallpox variolation, it seems, was practiced in China in the tenth century, but it was not until the late 18th century that Edward Jenner vaccinated his first patient against the disease. Smallpox was fully eradicated only in 1980. Similar stories could be told about other killer diseases. Polio, which can be seen depicted in Egyptian carvings from the 18th dynasty, is of ancient origin. Yet the disease wasn’t properly analyzed until the year of the French Revolution, with Jonas Salk’s vaccine appearing only in 1955. Today, polio is close to being eradicated (just 95 cases were reported in 2019).  Malaria, probably humanity’s greatest foe, is at least 30 million years old (the parasite has been found in an amber-encased mosquito from the Paleogene period). It was only after the discovery of the New World that knowledge about the fever-reducing benefits of the bark of the cinchona tree spread to Europe and Asia. Quinine was first isolated in 1820, and chloroquine was introduced in 1946. Artemisinin drugs, which we still use, were discovered in the late 1970s. That’s to say that humanity lived with deadly diseases for millennia without fully knowing what they were, how they were transmitted, and how they could be cured. The fate of humanity, our ancestors thought, fluctuated under the extraneous influence of the “wheel of fortune” and there was nothing that anyone could do about it. One day you were alive and next day you were not.  Contrast that glacial pace of progress, and the fatalistic acceptance of disease and death, with our response time to the current pandemic. The Wuhan Municipal Health Commission reported the existence of a cluster of cases of “pneumonia” in Wuhan on December 31. On January 7 the Chinese identified the pathogen (novel coronavirus) responsible for the outbreak. On January 11 China sequenced the genetic code of the virus, and the next day it was publicly available. That enabled the rest of the world to start making diagnostic kits to identify the disease. To take one example, the first COVID-19 infection in South Korea was identified on January 20. On February 4, the first test kit (made by Kogene Biotech) entered production. On February 7, the test kit was available at 50 locations around the country. Other countries followed suit. The World Health Organization, which declared COVID-19 a global pandemic on March 11, may have acted too late. Still, it is noteworthy that just two months expired between the first sign of trouble and the time when the entire world put measures in place to retard the spread of the disease. In the meantime, we have learned a lot about governmental incompetence and regulatory overreach. But we have also learned a great deal about the spread and symptoms of the disease. Instead of starting from scratch, medical specialists in Europe and America can draw on the expertise of their colleagues in the Far East. Before the telegraph appeared midway through the 19th century, it took up to a month for a ship to carry information from London to New York. Today, we learn about the latest COVID-19 news (good and bad) and research in seconds.   By mid April, thousands of highly educated and well-funded specialists throughout the world were using supercomputers and artificial intelligence to identify promising paths toward victory over the disease. Some 200 different programs are underway to develop therapies and vaccines to combat the pandemic. They include studies of the effectiveness of existing antiviral drugs, such as Gilead’s Remdesivir, Ono’s protease inhibitor, and Fujifilm’s favipiravir. The effectiveness of generic drugs, such as hydroxychloroquine and chloroquine, is also being evaluated. Takeda is hard at work on convalescent plasma (TAK-888) in Japan, while Regeneron works on monoclonal antibodies in the United States. New vaccines, such as Moderna’s mRNA-1273, Inovio’s INO-4800, and BioNTech’s BNT162, are under development.  We don’t know which of these treatments (if any) will work, but here is what we can be sure of: There has never been a better time for humans to face and defeat a global pandemic. The world is richer than ever before, and money is what enables us to sustain a massive pharmaceutical industry and pay for highly sophisticated medical research and development. Coronavirus may be deadly, but it is not the bubonic plague, which had a mortality rate of 50 percent. Luckily, it is a far milder virus that has reawakened us to the danger posed by communicable diseases. Once the immediate crisis is behind us, researchers will collect billions of data from dozens of countries and analyze the different governmental responses to the pandemic. That knowledge will be deployed by governments and the private sector to ensure that best practices are adopted, so that next time we are better prepared.  FOOD
When the Black Plague struck Europe in 1347, the disease found the local population ripe for slaughter. Following the close of the Medieval Warm Period at the end of the 13th century, the climate turned cold and rainy. Harvests shrunk and famines proliferated. France, for example, saw localized famines in 1304, 1305, 1310, 1315–17, 1330–34, 1349–51, 1358–60, 1371, 1374–75, and 1390. The Europeans, weakened by shortages of food, succumbed to the disease in great numbers.  The people of yore faced at least three interrelated problems. First, the means of transport and the transportation infrastructure were awful. On land, the Europeans used the same haulage methods (carts pulled by donkeys, horses, and oxen) that the ancients had invented. Similarly, much of Europe continued to use roads built by the Romans. Most people never left their native villages or visited the nearest towns. They had no reason to do so, for all that was necessary to sustain their meager day-to-day existence was produced locally. The second problem was the lack of important information. It could take weeks to raise the alarm about impending food shortages, let alone organize relief for stricken communities. Third, regional trade was seldom free (France did not have a single internal market until the Revolution) and global trade remained relatively insignificant in economic terms until the second half of the 19th century. Food was both scarce and expensive. In 15th-century England, 80 percent of ordinary people’s private expenditure went for food. Of that amount, 20 percent was spent on bread alone. Under those circumstances, a local crop failure could spell the destruction of an entire community. (Those who think that COVID-19 exposed the fragility of modern society should look up the Great Famine.) By comparison, by 2013 only 10 percent of private expenditure in the United States was spent on food, a figure that is itself inflated by the amount Americans typically spend in restaurants. Speaking of restaurants, while most have been forced to close their doors, the restaurateurs use apps to deliver excellent food at reasonable prices. Moreover, months into the COVID-19 pandemic, the shops are, generally, well stocked and regularly replenished by the largely uninterrupted stream of cargo flights, truck hauling, and commercial shipping. Due to the miracle of mobile refrigeration, fresh produce continues to be sourced from different parts of the United States and abroad. Shortly before writing this piece, I was able to buy oranges from California, avocados from Mexico, and grapes from Chile in my local supermarket. Globalization may be under pressure from both the left and the right of the U.S. political spectrum, but should the pandemic impair U.S. agricultural production, many will be forced to acknowledge the benefits of the global food supply and our ability to import food from COVID-19-unaffected parts of the world. This extensive and, at this point, still sturdy supply chain is, of course, a technological marvel. Computers collate information about items on the shelf that are in short supply, adjust the variety and quantity of items shipped between stores, fill new orders, etc. And so, commerce that’s still allowed to go on goes on. So does charity. Feeding America, a network of more than 200 food banks, feeds tens of millions of people through food pantries, soup kitchens, shelters, etc. Since 2005, the organization has been using a computerized internal market to allocate food more rationally. Feeding America uses its own currency, called “shares,” with which individual food banks can bid on the foods that they need the most. Grocery-delivery services bring food to the doorsteps of those who cannot or do not want to leave their homes. The old and the infirm can also use phones, emails, and apps to call upon volunteers to do their shopping and delivery.   WORK
The nature of work has changed a lot over the last 200 years or so. Before the industrial revolution, between 85 percent and 90 percent of the people in the Western world were farm laborers. Their work was excruciatingly difficult, as witnessed by one 18th-century Austrian physician who observed that “in many villages [of the Austrian Empire] the dung has to be carried on human backs up high mountains and the soil has to be scraped in a crouching position; this is the reason why most of the young people are deformed and misshapen.” People lived on the edge of starvation, with both the very young and the very old expected to contribute as much as they could to the economic output of the family (most production in the pre-modern era was based on the family unit, hence the Greek term oikonomia, or household management). In those circumstances, sickness was a catastrophe: It reduced the family unit’s production, and therefore its consumption. The industrial revolution allowed people to move from farms to factories, where work was better paid, more enjoyable, and less strenuous (which is largely why people in poor countries continue to stream from agricultural employment to manufacturing jobs today). Moreover, wealth exploded (real annual income per person in the United States rose from $1,980 in 1800 to $53,018 in 2016). That allowed for ever-increasing specialization, which included a massive expansion of services catering to the desires of an ever-more-prosperous population. The service sector today consists of jobs in the information sector, investment services, technical and scientific services, health care, and social-assistance services, as well as in arts, entertainment, and recreation. Most of these jobs are less physically arduous, more intellectually stimulating, and better paid than either agricultural or manufacturing jobs ever were. Crucially, many of these service-sector jobs can be performed remotely. That means that even in the midst of the government-imposed economic shutdown, some work (about a third, estimates suggest) can go on. The economic losses from COVID-19, in other words, will be astronomical, but not total. My own organization, for example, shut its doors in mid March. Since then, everyone has been scribbling away at home or appearing on news shows around the world via the Internet. All of us are in regular contact via the phone, Zoom, and Microsoft Teams. Other organizations are doing the same. As we already discussed, a great deal of shopping is taking place online. Shipping and delivery companies are expanding, with Amazon hiring 100,000 additional workers in the United States. Home entertainment, of course, has grown tremendously, with Netflix adding millions of new customers and expanding its offerings with thousands of new films and television shows. With over 30 million American children stuck at home, online learning companies are booming, and educators from high-school teachers to college professors continue to perform their jobs remotely. Telehealth is expanding, allowing patients to see their doctors in a safe and convenient way. Even minor medical procedures, such as eye exams, can be conducted remotely, and multiple companies will deliver your new specs to your front door. Banking and finance are still going on, with many people taking advantage of low interest rates to refinance their mortgages. Finally, the often unfairly maligned pharmaceutical industry is expanding as we all wait and hope for the release of a COVID-19 vaccine or effective therapeutic treatment. SOCIALITY
Aristotle observed that “man is by nature a social animal” and noted that without friends we would be unhappy. But the role of sociality (that is to say, the tendency to associate in or form social groups) goes much deeper than that. As William von Hippel explained in his 2018 book The Social Leap, sociality is the mechanism by which Homo sapiens came about. When early hominids were forced down from the trees (perhaps as a result of a climatic change that dried up African forests), they became more vulnerable to predators. To cover longer distances between the fast-disappearing trees while maintaining a modicum of protection against other animals, our ancestors developed bipedalism, which allowed them to free their upper body to carry weapons such as sticks and stones.  Even more important was the invention of cooperation. While a stick-wielding ape is slightly better-off than an unarmed one, a group of armed apes is much better at dispatching predators. Individuals in more cooperative bands survived to adulthood and bred more often, resulting in more-cooperative species. Furthermore, since living alone was tantamount to a death sentence, selfish apes who didn’t care about being ostracized for not pulling their weight died off, resulting in a desire for communal cooperation and a deep-rooted fear of rejection by the group. The early hominids had brains more like those of chimps than those of modern humans. That’s because the evolutionary pressures that created the former — such as predation and food scarcity — could be overcome without tremendous intelligence. These pressures to survive were part of the physical landscape — a challenging but static environment that didn’t require a lot of cognitive ability to navigate. The environmental pressure that resulted in modern humans was the social system itself. The social landscape is much more dynamic than the physical one. Once they had banded together in groups, our ancestors were forced to forge relationships with, and avoid being exploited by, individuals with divergent and constantly shifting interests. Those who couldn’t keep up with the increasingly complex social game either died or were unable to mate. This new pressure created a positive evolutionary cycle: Banding together created more complex social systems, which required bigger brains; bigger brains needed to be fed; and the best way to get more food was more cooperation and a more sophisticated social system. The main cognitive development that evolved from this evolutionary cycle is known as the “theory of mind.” In short, the theory of mind is the ability to understand that other minds can have different reasoning, knowledge, and desires from your own. While that seems basic, the theory of mind distinguishes us from all other life on Earth. It allows us to determine whether an affront, for example, was intentional, accidental, or forced. It allows us to feel emotions such as empathy, pride, and guilt — abilities that are keys to a functioning society. So sociality and human beings are inseparable, as we have all been clearly reminded by the sudden restrictions on our ability to interact with others. As we sit at home, working away on our computers or watching television, most of us feel a tremendous sense of isolation (“social distancing”) from our family, friends, and colleagues. The urge to be around others is innate to us. It is who we are. Dissatisfied with impersonal modes of communication, such as email and texting, we have rediscovered the need for a face-to-face interaction with our fellow humans. To that end, we utilize digital platforms such as Zoom, Google Hangouts, Facebook Live, and FaceTime to catch up on the latest news in other people’s lives, or simply to complain about the misery of loneliness and the pathetic inadequacy of our public officials (of both parties). Throughout the nation, people engage in virtual happy hours, dinners, book clubs, fitness classes, religious services, and group meditation. As my Cato Institute colleague Chelsea Follett recently wrote, “Technology has made it easier than ever to hold a physically-distanced ‘watch party’ synchronized so that viewers in different locations see the same part of a movie at the same time. For those who like to discuss movies as they watch, technology also enables a running group commentary of each scene in real time.” In the saddest of cases, technology enables people to say goodbye to dying friends and relatives. In a very real sense, therefore, technology keeps us sane (or, at the very least, saner). Technology, then, allows us to cope with the challenges of the pandemic in ways that our ancestors could not even dream about. More important, technology allows our species to face the virus with grounds for rational optimism. In these dark days, remember all the scientists who are utilizing the accumulated store of human knowledge to defeat COVID-19 in record time and all the marvelous (not to say miraculous) ways the modern world keeps us well fed, psychologically semi-balanced, and (in many cases) productively engaged. Editor’s Note:  Because of an editing error, an earlier version of this article mistakenly stated that real family income, rather than real income per person in the United States, had risen from $1,980 in 1800 to $53,018 in 2016.   This article appears as “Imagine a Pre-modern COVID Pandemic” in the May 18, 2020, print edition of National Review. If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

• GDP shrank 5 percent in the first quarter. Who says government can’t get anything done if it sets its mind to it? • Presidents running cautiously for reelection run Rose Garden campaigns; cautious challengers run front-porch campaigns. Then there is the basement campaign of Joe Biden, presumptive Democratic nominee. During the coronavirus lockdown, Biden has been confined to quarters, issuing made-at-home videos, lost in the pandemic freak-out. This turns out to be a blessing for him. Biden on the stump can be rambling, goofy; his supposed moderation has been shredded by concessions to his party’s noisy left wing. His ideal strategy was outlined by a supporter of William Henry Harrison almost two centuries ago. “Let him say not one single word about his principles, or his creed — let him say nothing — promise nothing. . . . Let the use of pen and ink be wholly forbidden as if he were a mad poet in Bedlam.” Biden visible is Biden with an array of weaknesses, personal and ideological. Biden invisible is generic Not-Trump. His lead over Trump in the polls so far attests to the power of the strategy.  • If Biden were to become the 46th president, he would be older at his swearing-in than Ronald Reagan was the day he left office. Biden’s choice of running mate therefore assumes great importance. He has promised to pick a woman. There is a push on to make sure she is a black woman. Kamala Harris would tick that box if she had not hit Biden so savagely when they both sought the nomination. Stacey Abrams, failed and flaky gubernatorial candidate from Georgia, also offers herself. Elizabeth Warren, on the other hand, would mollify the party’s left, though no one else. Amy Klobuchar could appeal to a battleground state (Minnesota) and demographic (moderates) but risks offending the left and identity politicians for just those reasons. Not to spoil the handicappers’ fun, the party swung so impressively behind Biden after his come-from-the-grave victory in South Carolina that perhaps he will have a free hand.  • At this point, one has no choice but to conclude that the material difference between the accusations leveled at Brett Kavanaugh by Christine Blasey Ford and the accusations leveled at Joe Biden by Tara Reade is that Reade’s charges implicate a Democrat. How else can one explain the treatment that the press has given Joe Biden? When, back in 2018, Brett Kavanaugh was in the crosshairs, the mantra was “Believe women,” and the inspiration for the coverage was Franz Kafka’s The Trial. Then, the mere fact of the accusation was considered sufficient to demand that Kavanaugh withdraw. Then, adamant denials and heartfelt appeals to the presumption of innocence were cast as “privilege.” Then, nothing was too fanciful to print. And now? Now, media restraint is imperative, lest a career be ended by a falsehood. It does not seem to matter much that the evidence against Joe Biden is stronger than was the evidence against Kavanaugh. Nor, apparently, is it important that Biden has spent years insisting that women who accuse men of sexual misconduct must be believed as a matter of course. There’s an election to win. Time’s up on #TimesUp.  • President Trump’s coronavirus briefings, a near-daily exercise since March, began as a good thing for him and possibly for the country. They allowed him to do what he likes best, hold a stage; and they offered, in theory anyway, an opportunity for Americans to be informed. Yet Trump could not dial down those aspects of his persona — aggression, carelessness, vainglory — that are peculiarly unsuited to the moment. He mocked political rivals, speculated about medical silver bullets, and boasted about his ratings as doctors and nurses struggled and the sick and the dying lined hospital hallways. The climax was a riff on the possible uses of disinfectants and UV light: not, as his enemies said, urging people to drink Lysol, but spinning ideas that should never have been uttered aloud. In the deluge of mockery that followed, Trump insisted that he had been sarcastic: an obvious untruth that only undercut him (are you being serious or sarcastic now, Mr. President?). Did we say “climax”? No, because after a brief hiatus, he was back. He cannot stay away. He must be the bride at every wedding. It is what the Greeks called “nemesis.”   • President Trump said he would impose a 60-day moratorium on immigration to reserve jobs for Americans during the crisis. Immigration hawks complained that the executive order ended up having large loopholes after business interests lobbied the White House. The truth is that any short-term order, loose or tight, will have only marginal effects: The crisis has already shut down most immigration. An immigration system that is better geared to our economic needs — or just looks as though someone designed it on purpose — will have to be accomplished through legislation.   • President Trump has assembled a task force called the “Opening Up America Again Congressional Group.” It has 100 members, from House and Senate, of both parties. All of the Republican senators are included — except one: Mitt Romney. Arguably, he is the best-equipped member of the whole Congress to serve on the task force, given his experience and abilities. He had great success in management consulting and private equity. He led the Salt Lake City Olympics, and indeed saved that event. He was governor of a state, before he arrived in the Senate. He understands free enterprise, government, and the tricky intersection between those two spheres. In short, Romney could be useful on a task force like the president’s. His exclusion says a lot about the president. • The White House has been attacking Voice of America for being soft on China, and calling on the Senate to confirm Michael Pack, its nominee to run the U.S. Agency for Global Media, which oversees VOA. Wrong reason, right man. Voice of America has broken important stories about China’s corruption, incompetence, and oppression. Pack, whose nomination has languished in the Senate for years, is a sterling choice. He is an unabashed conservative; more to the point, he is a top-drawer artist whose award-winning documentaries over a decades-long career have covered an array of subjects, from Hyman Rickover to the battles for Najaf and Fallujah in the Iraq War to George Washington and Alexander Hamilton (in profiles hosted by Richard Brookhiser — if Pack’s filmography has a partisan bias, it would be Federalist). Let VOA do its job, and let Pack show his stuff.  • Calling in to Fox & Friends, President Trump stressed our alliance with the Soviet Union during World War II. “They were our partner,” he said. “Germany was the enemy. And Germany’s, like, this wonderful thing.” Yes, Germany is a wonderful thing — as are Italy and Japan. The transformation of these countries into liberal democracies is one of the great success stories of the 20th century. The Soviet Union, true, was our wartime ally — because the Nazis double-crossed the Soviets, breaking the original alliance. On Fox & Friends, Trump went on to say that Germany “takes advantage of us on trade,” etc. Yet we “talk to” Germany, our wartime enemy, and not to Russia, our wartime ally. Since then, Trump has issued a joint statement with Vladimir Putin marking Elbe Day — the day in April 1945 when U.S. and Soviet troops met at the Elbe River in Germany. “The ‘Spirit of the Elbe’ is an example of how our countries can put aside differences, build trust, and cooperate in pursuit of a greater cause.” Not really. The Soviets, of course, proceeded to lock Eastern Europe under Communism for 45 years. Today, Putin’s Russia invades foreign countries, murders critics, interferes in our elections, and so on. There is, in other words, still too much of that old spirit over there.  • For more than three years, Michael Flynn waged a strange battle to clear his name after pleading guilty to lying to FBI agents and then declining a judge’s invitation to withdraw the plea. But there has always been something very wrong about the case. The retired army general, fleetingly President Trump’s first national-security adviser, was investigated during the Trump transition by anti-Trump officials at the FBI and Obama Justice Department. There was no criminal predicate: Flynn’s communications with the Russian ambassador, which set off the whole affair, were proper. Former FBI director James Comey broke protocol by having agents brace Flynn at the White House on his first day on the job. Though they had a recording of his conversation with the ambassador, they didn’t play it for Flynn — just grilled him to elicit perjury. Still, they didn’t think he lied. The case sat for months until Special Counsel Mueller’s aggressive prosecutors pressured Flynn to plead guilty. Now, the Justice Department has finally disclosed that they withheld key exculpatory evidence and threatened to prosecute Flynn’s son if he refused to plead guilty. Attorney General Barr is reviewing the case. The just result would be vacating the plea with prejudice. • At a press briefing in April, New York governor Andrew Cuomo said that the number of new coronavirus cases in the state appeared to be leveling off. Likening the tenuous and hard-won progress to dieting-induced weight loss, he said, “The number is down, because we brought the number down. God did not do that. Faith did not do that.” He repeated the point in an interview with CNN: “Our behavior has stopped the spread of the virus. God did not stop the spread of the virus.” It was not the first time that Cuomo, a Catholic, has seemed to unite a muddled conception of basic tenets of his own faith with an animus toward believers whom he regards as extremist rubes. Most of those inclined to pray for God’s mercy and protection during this crisis, and to thank Him when efforts to combat the virus meet with success, understand that He acts through human beings, and don’t take their faith as a license for recklessness in the face of infectious disease. Cuomo needn’t fear that prayer will crowd out action, or that God will be unwilling to share the credit.  • Cuomo also says it’s “offensive” for Mitch McConnell to have said that the federal government should not provide funding for state pension systems and that states should be allowed to declare bankruptcy instead. McConnell, note, was not ruling out the possibility of more federal aid to states to help them through the coronavirus crisis. He was drawing a line between such aid and a bailout of irresponsibly managed pensions. It is the right line, and holding it, judging from the shrieks McConnell elicited from the press and politicians in both parties, will be an ordeal. • The $2 trillion relief bill passed by Congress in March created the “Paycheck Protection Program,” a Small Business Administration loan program for which businesses with fewer than 500 employees were permitted to apply. The loans are forgiven so long as the recipient continues paying its employees and uses the money to cover basic expenses. Reasonably, Congress wanted to deliver the money to businesses as quickly as possible, so it decided to keep the program’s eligibility requirements minimal. But plenty of businesses that don’t meet the intuitive definition of “small” — including chain restaurants, hedge funds, and the Los Angeles Lakers — received PPP loans while the money ran out. (Many of these returned the loans after public outcry.) Congress re-funded the program on April 27 and will likely need to do so again soon. When it does, it should ensure there are basic safeguards attached. Advocates say the program is being unfairly attacked, but the PPP’s being worth fixing is all the more reason to fix it. • Ivy League colleges felt compelled to turn down funds from the federal coronavirus-relief bill. Considered apart from the broader debate about federal funding for higher education, leaving the money on the table was the right call. The question in that debate is what taxpayers get in return for subsidies. The purpose of the relief bill was to help those who need it during an emergency — and these colleges manifestly do not. • Evangelicals are sometimes accused of being “obsessed” with sex to the neglect of charity, but when Evangelical relief organization Samaritan’s Purse set up a COVID-19 field hospital in Central Park, it was the group’s opponents who seemed most obsessed with sexual questions. Members of the Reclaim Pride Coalition, a gay-rights outrage shop in New York City, picketed outside the field hospitals where volunteers risked life and limb to provide treatment to overflow COVID patients of every color, creed, and sexual orientation from the nearby Mount Sinai Hospital. One protester asked, “How was this group ever considered to bring their hatred and their vitriol into our city at a time of crisis when our people are fighting a pandemic?” Who’s doing the “hating” here, exactly? • To San Francisco’s food-delivery market, where demand is very high because of the city’s aggressive coronavirus lockdown, local authorities are applying the same great thinking that has made their city impossibly expensive for middle-class people. With restaurants shut down and many locals unable to safely visit grocery stores or takeout restaurants (think of the elderly and those with compromised immune systems), app-based food-delivery services such as Uber Eats and Grubhub have provided a lifeline. But the city government is seeking to impose price controls on these firms, capping the commissions they charge to restaurants for their services. San Francisco is solving a non-problem (many of these firms have been cutting or waiving fees for consumers and restaurants, especially small businesses), and the most likely effect of its regulations will be to shift costs from restaurants to consumers. Restaurants use these app-based services because they are efficient and effective. (It is more economical for several firms to share a stable of drivers than for each to maintain its own delivery work force, and the apps provide an important marketing boost.) Consumers use them for convenience — and, at the moment, because of health concerns. Government price-fixing leads to artificial scarcity and invariably reduces consumers’ choices. San Francisco is home to a great many innovative and highly intelligent people, and we are confident that they can figure out how to deliver a pizza without being micromanaged by the people who have so misgoverned San Francisco that it now looks like San Francisco. • A doorman named Louis Puliafito may well be elected to the state assembly in a New York City district that includes the city’s Upper East Side. This area was once known as the “Silk Stocking District” for its wealthy conservative residents, but as Upper East Siders have gotten even richer, they have also grown more Democratic, like the rest of New York. This might seem likely to impair Puliafito’s candidacy, because (a) he’s a Republican and (b) he’s a doorman. But his expected opponent, the incumbent Democrat Rebecca Seawright, has been disqualified from the ballot for turning in signature petitions without proper cover sheets. That’s not always a problem in New York, but a few years back Seawright’s husband, a high official at the city’s university system, got on Governor Andrew Cuomo’s wrong side, and when that happens the Board of Elections gets real technical. So for the time being, Puliafito is the only candidate. Seawright could still win on appeal or run a third-party candidacy, but we’re rooting for Puliafito.  • When Population Bomb author Paul Ehrlich lost his wager with Julian Simon — Ehrlich bet on the Malthusian view that a growing population would tax resources, sending commodity prices higher — die-hards in his camp argued that Simon had been the beneficiary of unforeseeable technological advancements. Decades later, partisans of “peak oil” were embarrassed by a world positively awash in petroleum. This defied their pet theory, which held that worldwide oil production would soon peak and decline, sending fuel and energy prices soaring. They, too, then cited unforeseeable technological advancements to explain their inaccuracy. In a free economy, there is nothing more predictable than unpredictable technological advances. The disruptive trend in energy prices has, in fact, run in precisely the opposite direction: With global demand tanking because of worldwide coronavirus lockdowns and storage facilities overflowing, oil prices briefly turned negative during trading in April. (Storage costs money, and some big oil traders were willing to pay to get the stuff off their hands.) In our time, we have problems of scarcity in certain goods (especially highly regulated and state-dominated markets such as health care and education) and problems of abundance in others. There is so much oil being produced in the world that the OPEC cartel could not successfully conspire to keep prices higher — even with President Trump promising American cooperation and offering to subsidize Mexican cooperation. Oil prices are historically volatile, and the current crash will be disruptive to many U.S. businesses. But problems of abundance are the right problems to have. • “The Trump administration is considering cutting back on sharing intelligence with partner countries that criminalize homosexuality as part of a push by the acting director of national intelligence, Richard Grenell, to prod those nations to change their laws.” So begins a report in the New York Times. We will make the elementary point that we share intelligence not because we like other countries but because we are pursuing the U.S. interest and trying to keep the world as safe as possible from war and other calamities. Saudi Arabia not only bans homosexuality — even as its rulers and elites practice it robustly and notoriously — it slices up critics of the government with bone saws. Yet we must deal with bad actors, until nations beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruninghooks. • Trump has halted funding to the World Health Organization following its bungled response to the coronavirus pandemic. During a 60-day investigation of Chinese influence on the agency, the White House will redirect funding to other public-health programs. Not only was the WHO unprepared for the coronavirus, it willingly undermined public-health efforts in order to placate the CCP. The more the World Health Organization capitulates to Chinese soft power, the less effective — and the less deserving of our support — it will be. • Bowing to pressure from Beijing, the European Union has gutted a report on coronavirus disinformation and propaganda. The original report, characterized by the New York Times as “not particularly strident,” noted the fact of a “global disinformation campaign,” corrected baseless claims of racist slurs directed at the WHO chief by French officials, documented a Serbian-based bot network spreading Chinese propaganda, and contained a standalone section on the state-sponsored disinformation campaigns organized by China and Russia. All of that was cut from the final report. The European Union is not only failing to see to the interests of its own members (of which France is still one, we believe) but is in effect cooperating with Beijing’s disinformation campaign by helping to minimize it. Which is to say, the European Union is helping to cover up a crime of which it is the victim. Beijing’s dishonesty and its plain incompetence in this matter present a genuine danger to the world at large, with consequences that we are all now paying, from the United States to Europe and around the world. If the European Union is to be a credible partner for diplomatic, economic, and military cooperation, then it is going to have to learn to stand up for itself. • Boris Johnson is still recovering from COVID-19. Before his infection, Johnson was seriously considering allowing the Chinese telecom giant Huawei a significant part in developing the U.K.’s 5G network. Some Conservative members of Parliament already opposed this; now, even more do. Their suspicions are justified. Huawei claims to be a private company, free from Chinese-government interference. But Chinese law compels the company to reveal its data to the government if they are requested, and U.S. intelligence believes that Huawei maintains a covert backdoor in its technology to access the information of users. Which is why the company is already at the center of surveillance scandals in Poland and Germany, and severely limited in its 5G operations in the U.S., Australia, and Japan. The U.S. Department of Justice has also accused Huawei of intellectual-property theft, among other crimes. Even before the coronavirus, the U.K. would have been wise not to consider working with Huawei. If the outbreak causes the country to reconsider, that should be counted among its few silver linings.  • Taiwan, barred by China from participating in the WHO, has had remarkable success in combating the coronavirus. In late December, Taipei sent the WHO a request for information about the novel flu-like virus that had emerged in Wuhan; it never received a response. That proved to be a blessing in disguise, as the Taiwanese concluded through their own research that the virus could spark an epidemic. Before COVID made headlines, Taiwan began inspecting travelers entering the country from China and instituted a “test and trace” program to isolate those infected. On January 20, the country mobilized its Central Epidemic Command Center while mainlanders flocked to Wuhan to celebrate the Lunar New Year. Despite deep economic and cultural ties to the mainland, Taiwan was the first country to restrict travel from China. The upshot: Only six Taiwanese have died of the coronavirus, in spite of geography and geopolitics. At the behest of Beijing, multilateral institutions have sidelined the Taiwanese. Taipei may be better off without them. • As we go to press, Kim Jong-un may be dead. Or nearly dead. Or alive and well. It is hard to get information from the “Hermit Kingdom,” even for the world’s best intelligence agencies. But we know that three Kims have ruled North Korea since the end of World War II — father, son, and son — and there is no apparent Kim in the wings. Kim Jong-un’s children are too young for dictatorship. Could there be a regent? Kim Jong-un’s sister, Kim Yo-jong, perhaps? Stranger things have happened, but not many: Dictatorship has long been a man’s game. The question of North Korea’s government is an extremely serious one, because this is a government — a “psychotic state,” as Jeane Kirkpatrick said — with nuclear weapons. U.S. leadership should look with clear, unblinking eyes, and partner to the maximum with Japan, South Korea, and anyone else who will help us keep this menace, North Korea, in check. • Yuri Dmitriev, an amateur (in the best sense of that word) historian, researches the Great Terror of 1936–38, when the Soviet government executed hundreds of thousands of “enemies of the people.” In 1997, Dmitriev helped discover vast killing fields near his home in Karelia, bordering Finland. He spent long winters in local archives to determine, to the extent possible, the identity of the thousands of victims. He served as the first chairman of the Karelia chapter of Memorial, an organization dedicated to the investigation of human-rights abuses in present-day Russia as well as in the Soviet Union. In 2016, a historical society given to whitewashing atrocities of the Stalin era challenged Dmitriev’s findings. Soon afterward he was arrested on charges of child pornography. The case involved his chronically ill foster daughter, unclothed in nine photos among hundreds in a folder marked “Natasha, Medical” on his computer. After more than a year in custody, he was acquitted but then sent back to jail, where he remains, after a court ordered a retrial. Putin complains about the “demonizing” of Stalin, whose outrageous cynicism the current Russian government emulates too successfully. • Assuming that the pandemic in his country will soon subside, Italian prime minister Giuseppe Conte has announced a plan for the incremental easing of lockdown measures. Restaurants, bars, and hairdressers will be allowed to reopen for business on June 1. Public parks and beaches were scheduled to reopen as soon as May 4. Missing from the plan was any provision for the public celebration of Mass. Italy’s Catholic bishops objected. They issued a statement explaining that, in consultation with Conte and other government officials, they had proposed “guidelines and protocols with which to face a transitional phase in full compliance with all health standards.” Conte maintains that “for scientists” the resumption of public worship is “still too risky.” The reopening of restaurants, bars, and hair salons is not? The double standard is glaring, and the bishops are right to call it out. • It is often the fate of conservatives to dedicate the best years of their careers to stopping bad things from happening. When we ask “what has conservatism conserved,” few can point more clearly to having stopped something bad, when it seemed inevitable, than Phyllis Schlafly. Her tireless energy killed the Equal Rights Amendment in the 1970s. They hated her for it, and they hate her still. Four years after her death at 92, Hollywood now finds it safe to rewrite her story, with Cate Blanchett in the title role of Mrs. America. Not for Schlafly the breathless hagiography treatment given to the likes of Ruth Bader Ginsburg. The series creators “wanted to be free to imagine these private conversations,” and so did not consult the Schlafly family, which protests in particular its treatment of Schlafly’s husband, Fred, and their marriage. Yet even in caricature, Schlafly’s arguments and the force of her personality are displayed to a new generation. For some critics, that is still too much to bear.  • New documents unearthed to coincide with the series reveal that Schlafly joined the John Birch Society in 1959 and resigned in 1964, asking the group not to associate its increasingly toxic name with her advocacy for the Barry Goldwater campaign. The context was the divergence of the rising conservative movement (including Goldwater and National Review) from the Birchers’ conspiracy-minded leader, Robert Welch. To her credit, Schlafly chose the right side; to her discredit, she long denied having been a member, to the point that the news surprised even her biographer. One blemish on a long career rich in controversy cannot undo what Schlafly accomplished, but blemish it is. • It used to be said by gridiron enthusiasts that there were only two seasons: football and spring football. But the virus has shut down nearly all football, which is why the NFL draft attracted so much more attention than usual this year. Most grateful of all, perhaps, were the gamblers: Las Vegas sports books reported that they took in five to ten times their usual Draft Day amount from action-starved bettors guessing which players would be taken when, how many would be drafted from specified colleges, and assorted other propositions. We suspect George Blanda and Bronko Nagurski would curl their lips at such shenanigans, but to your true gambler, the only thing worse than betting on pretend football is betting on curling, ping-pong, and assorted varieties of martial arts, which is what many of them had been reduced to. Where there is no football, the people perish. • We’re going to miss the Land O’Lakes butter logo, with its image of a kneeling American Indian maiden proffering a one-pound package of the product. Years ago, kids were fascinated by the logo’s recursive nature: The package she was holding bore a label with a picture of herself, holding a package with a label with a picture of herself, holding a package . . . In grade school, that’s as metaphysical as it gets. A few years farther along toward adolescence, the fetching girl herself became the main attraction, and now adult dairyphiles see her as a comforting connection to their youth. But not for long, as the farmers’ cooperative that markets Land O’Lakes is observing its centennial by replacing the girl (Mia by name) with an image of, logically enough, a lake. Nothing wrong with that; not all ethnicity-scrubbing amounts to “political correctness,” and after 100 years the farmers are entitled to change their packaging. But we’ll still have fond memories of Mia, who brought a smile to our trips to the dairy case that Breakstone’s bland script never could. • “A leading climate change contrarian,” reads the headline in the New York Times. We would call him a skeptic: Fred Singer, that giant of the public debate on the question of whether carbon emissions raise global temperatures and lead to environmental disaster. The climate warmed between 1900 and 1940, “before humanity used much energy,” he pointed out. “But then the climate cooled between 1940 and 1975.” His study of the issue was deep. His opinions on it were strong. His way with words and with argumentation won him many careful listeners. As the Nazis bore down on Vienna, he left as a child with his family for England. In the 1940s he crossed the ocean to study at Ohio State and Princeton, where he earned a doctorate in physics. His long career in the armed services, academia, and the federal government was punctuated by his publication of countless articles and more than a dozen books on science, economics, and the intersection between them. A happy, indefatigable polemicist, he fought with vigor but without rancor. Dead at 95. R.I.P. • Sidd Finch, who threw a 168-mph fastball, turned out to exist only in George Plimpton’s imagination and on the pages of an April Fool’s edition of Sports Illustrated. Bob Feller is reported to have thrown 107.9 mph once, but before radar guns, so who knows? No one could put a sure number on Steve Dalkowski’s fastball either, although the sportswriter Joe Posnanski thinks he might have topped out at 113 mph. “Fastest ever,” said Ted Williams, daunted by Dalkowski in spring training. “I never want to face him again.” After high-school ball in Connecticut, Dalkowski signed with the Baltimore Orioles in 1957 and spent the next eight seasons in their farm system, averaging 1.4 strikeouts per inning and — he was a southpaw, after all — almost as many walks. He tended to throw too high or low, not wide. Still, few batters dared to crowd the plate. Maximum velocity, maximum wildness: It was a disconcerting combination. The pitcher who may have been the fastest in baseball history never played in the major leagues. The character Nuke LaLoosh in the movie Bull Durham is based on his extraordinary legend. Dead at 80. R.I.P. • One hundred and one years apart, twin brothers Philip and Samuel Kahn each died in a pandemic. This twist of fate and dash of irony were well recognized by World War II veteran Philip when he died of the coronavirus on April 17. Born in Manhattan in December 1919, Philip never knew Samuel, who had died at just a few weeks old of the Spanish flu, but he remained deeply aware of the loss all his life. According to Philip’s New York Times obituary, a family member called the brothers “pandemic bookends.” Philip fought in the Pacific theater during the war, earning two bronze stars for his service. Always an active man, he worked as an electrical foreman in New York City after the war. He is survived by his daughter, six grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren. R.I.P.   Parts of the country are starting to reopen, and it’s a good thing. We took radical measures at the outset of the epidemic to keep the virus from spreading out of control, and indications as we went to press were that the number of new cases had plateaued nationally. Meanwhile, the country’s hardest-hit area, New York City, appeared to be through the worst of it. And the nightmare scenario that the lockdowns were meant to avoid, the overwhelming of hospitals in hot spots, has indeed been averted. The debate over the wisdom of the lockdowns will continue for a very long time. There is still much we don’t know about the disease, including the true death rate. But it is unquestionably more virulent than the seasonal flu. We have had 60,000 fatalities, the same as a bad flu season, in a little more than a month, and that’s with much of the country locked down. Studies of excess deaths in Western countries have established that the fatalities aren’t merely a matter of how COVID-19 deaths have been counted. There have indeed been alarming spikes in mortality — in New York City, deaths might be six times higher than the normal level. If New York is the epicenter of the disease in the U.S., COVID-19 is not exclusively a New York–area phenomenon. Yes, New York, New Jersey, and Connecticut account for almost half of the country’s roughly 60,000 deaths. But Massachusetts, Louisiana, and Michigan all have per capita deaths on par with European countries such as France and the U.K. As outbreaks in meatpacking plants in the Midwest have shown, the virus easily spreads wherever there are large gatherings of people in close proximity. That said, it is increasingly clear that the virus particularly thrives in dense urban settings and may even be more deadly there. The infirm are especially vulnerable to the disease, which is why nursing homes, with large groups of infirm people living together, have been so hard hit. A Kaiser Family Foundation report finds that at least 10,378 residents and staff of “long-term care facilities” have died from COVID-19 since the epidemic began. That report counts data from only 23 states, so the true figure is surely far higher. All of this suggests that, even in this period of severe lockdowns, we were much too late in closing New York and have been too careless with nursing homes. Going forward, homes that seek to transfer infected residents to area hospitals shouldn’t be declined; in New York, they have been. Health and safety regulations shouldn’t be treated as aspirations; Maryland and Florida are admirably stepping up enforcement. On the other side of the ledger, the lockdowns have been too geographically sweeping. Not only are the states of our union vastly different, so are areas within states. There is no reason for rural areas of New York and Michigan, where many counties have a couple of dozen cases or fewer, to be subject to the same restrictions as New York City and Detroit. Likewise, statewide prohibitions on elective surgeries have, perversely, emptied hospital beds and idled medical workers in places that have had no COVID-19 surge. (The iconic Mayo Clinic has furloughed  or reduced hours of 30,000 staff members.) These procedures, often for serious illnesses such as cancer, need to resume. Overall, it’s impossible to exaggerate the economic cost of the lockdowns, which have brought on a steep recession that we will probably spend years digging out of. This is why impatience to reopen is an entirely understandable sentiment, even if it is treated by much of the media as heretical. A balance obviously has to be struck. Much economic activity disappeared when people decided, on their own, to change their habits in response to the epidemic. Consumers won’t come back in full force until they believe that the pathogen is under control. But we can’t stay locked down until the virus is entirely vanquished, or we will have destroyed the country to save it. Fortunately, we have a federal system that allows considerable leeway for states to chart their own policy paths. Texas, Ohio, and Colorado, for example, are all beginning to reopen in stages. We will be able to see what works best. Perhaps Georgia is reopening too fast, too soon. (Trump, who has blown hot and cold on reopening, rebuked its governor, Brian Kemp.) We will find out. Testing, contact-tracing, masks, and prudent distancing all have a role to play in the new normal, but the near-total cessation of economic life in swaths of the country isn’t sustainable. The best option remains developing a vaccine or therapies, which would allow us to innovate our way out of the public-health crisis. Even in the best-case scenario, though, we won’t have a vaccine before the end of the year. Of potential coro-navirus drugs, Gilead Sciences’ remdesivir is the farthest along. A randomized controlled trial of remdesivir conducted by the National Institutes of Health reportedly showed positive results, but the World Health Organization has issued a conflicting report. Until such trials are completed and definitive research is published, we won’t know for sure which treatments work, if any. In the meantime, health officials should coordinate with the private sector to build manufacturing and distribution capacity in case an effective drug does emerge. This has been a time of great testing for the country, and it is far from over. But we should welcome the resumption of everyday economic life in the places where it’s happening, and hope we can replicate it elsewhere as soon as possible.  If you enjoyed this article, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS. Members get all of our content (including the magazine), no paywalls or content meters, an advertising-minimal experience, and unique access to our writers and editors (conference calls, social-media groups, etc.). And importantly, NRPLUS members help keep NR going. Consider it? If you enjoyed this article, and were stimulated by its contents, we have a proposition for you: Join NRPLUS.

On the menu today: the much-less-discussed risks and human costs of the country remaining in full lockdown; the eye-popping, jaw-dropping leadership failures in New York City; and at long last, a look at something lighter: whether Star Trek: Picard lived up to the hype. Why Is It So Hard to Understand Competing Risks? Over in Politico, John Harris writes that everyone is willing to accept some deaths in the return to normalcy, whether or not they can bring themselves to openly admit it — which he contends represents the end of the conservative argument against “moral relativism”: Like [Colorado governor Jared] Polis, I am willing to accept that some people must die in order to accommodate the return to whatever the post-pandemic version of normal is. Perhaps unlike Polis, I have a strong preference that “some people” doesn’t end up including me. I’ll extend the same wish for anyone who happens to be reading this column. The fact that the governor—like his Republican counterpart in Georgia, Brian Kemp, like Nancy Pelosi or Donald Trump—doesn’t know specifically who will die of coronavirus makes their choice of how fast to open less excruciating but no less profound in its moral implications. I don’t think that Harris is accurately defining moral relativism, but even beside that point, he glides over the fact that people will die if we are to continue the lockdown, too. “Pediatricians across the U.S. are seeing a steep drop in the number of children coming in for appointments right now — only about 20 percent to 30 percent of the volume they would normally see this time of year.” This means kids aren’t getting the vaccinations that they normally would. Cancer patients needed to postpone most non-life-and-death treatments for about seven weeks: “The new order comes as a relief to cancer patients, many of who had to either postpone surgeries or find alternative treatment options for the time being. While some more urgent surgeries were allowed to proceed following the March 13th executive order, such as surgeries to treat particularly aggressive cancers, many patients — notably, many breast cancer patients, who are able to treat their disease temporarily with hormone-regulating medication — were forced to delay their surgical procedures.” That spiking death rate in major cities reflects the spread of SARS-CoV-2 — but it also could reflect people who would otherwise go to a doctor or hospital staying home out of fear of catching the virus at the hospital, and paying the ultimate price: Experts say it’s possible that some of the jump in at-home death stems from people infected by the virus who either didn’t seek treatment or did but were instructed to shelter in place, and that the undercount is exacerbated by lack of comprehensive testing. It’s also possible that the increase in at-home deaths reflects people dying from other ailments like heart attacks because they couldn’t get to a hospital or refused to go, fearful they’d contract COVID-19. . . . In other parts of the U.S., 911 calls for medical assistance have dropped. In Seattle, an early epicenter of the pandemic, data shows that EMT and paramedic calls dropped by more than 25% in the first 10 days of April compared with the same time frame last year. It’s unclear how much, if any, of that drop is due to people being fearful of interacting with the health care system.” Dr. Harlan Krumholz wrote in the New York Times earlier this month, “I have heard this sentiment from fellow doctors across the United States and in many other countries. We are all asking: Where are all the patients with heart attacks and stroke? They are missing from our hospitals . . . We actually expected to see more heart attacks during this time. Respiratory infections typically increase the risk of heart attacks . . . Times of stress increase the risk of heart attacks and strokes. Depression, anxiety and frustration, feelings that the pandemic might exacerbate, are all associated with a doubling or more of heart attack risks.”  For seven weeks, this country minimized human activity in order to stop the spread of the virus, a remarkable sacrifice to help protect the most vulnerable — with the asterisk that there’s always the chance that those of us who don’t think we’re so vulnerable . . . turn out to be vulnerable.  The Biggest Failures Came in Our Biggest City  Delays and unheeded warnings, a mayor bellowing to “the Jewish community” that “the time for warnings has passed,” the mayor’s wife heading up the recovery panel, decomposing bodies found in U-hauls and tractor-trailers, politicians constantly fighting with public-health officials . . . “There’s always a bit of a split between the political appointees, whose jobs are to make a mayor look good, and public-health professionals, who sometimes have to make unpopular recommendations,” a former head of the Department of Health told me. “But, with the de Blasio people, that antagonism is ten times worse. They are so much more impossible to work with than other administrations.” Ask yourself: Is it really Florida and Georgia that are beset by the worst leadership in this crisis? Are there a certain number of people who would prefer to discuss the controversial decisions of Republican governors, because the failures and bad decisions of the most prominent Democratic mayor in the country are so glaringly consequential? Finally, Something Much Lighter: Assessing Star Trek: Picard Over the last two months, this newsletter has covered some dark and depressing topics: catastrophic economic projections, problems in our food supply chain, the lies of the Chinese regime. Trust me, dear readers, I never expected to find myself researching the use of anal swabs to collect virus samples from bat guano.  With April nearly complete, let’s turn to something lighter: Did the return of Patrick Stewart to his role of Jean-Luc Picard live up to the hype? Patrick Stewart is as good as he ever was, meaning Picard the character is as good as ever. Picard the television series . . . was more of a mixed bag. The show felt like a meal where each of the component ingredients was fine but didn’t quite bake correctly. It was one more screenwriting draft away from really gelling. The creators clearly wanted to create a Farscape/Firefly/Guardians of the Galaxy “crew of misfits” around Picard, and that’s a fun concept. But from the first episode, Picard’s decision-making makes little sense. Retired and on bad terms with his old bosses at Starfleet, Picard finds himself suddenly facing a ticking-clock life-and-death crisis, unlike any he’s faced since his retirement. And he . . . spends time assembling these misfits, instead of calling up the crew and de facto family that we watched him lead for seven years on syndicated television. Geordi and Worf get mentioned once, and I don’t think Dr. Crusher or Guinan get mentioned at all. This is like the late Norman Schwartzkopf recruiting for a commando raid by just seeing who’s hanging around the unemployment office. Even odder, Picard reaches out to “Raffi,” the one former crewmate who he already knows hates his guts. There’s something of a partial explanation later once we finally see Riker and Deanna; the pair are still coping with the death of their son, and it explains Picard’s initial reluctance to involve them. But . . . he does anyway, at least for one episode. Once assembled, Picard’s new gang is generally fine; perhaps the most fun concept is that Captain Rios’s private-ship maintenance crew is a multitude of holograms that all look like him but speak with different accents. (The engineer hologram speaking with a Scottish accent was a great shout-out to the original series’ Scotty. I’d like to think that Starfleet honored Montgomery Scott by requiring all engineers to speak with that accent.)  The sudden and then considerable presence of Jeri Ryan’s old Voyager character Seven of Nine feels like either an effort to serve the fans, or test-marketing a spinoff series. Other than the fact that both her and Picard were former Borg, there wasn’t any particularly good reason to include her character; the two characters have never met onscreen before, but the show seems to presume that they have some sort of know-each-other-by-reputation built-in relationship. It might have worked better to have the crew recruit Picard rather than the other way around. Our gang of misfits finds out about some terrible plot that’s way beyond their ability to stop, Starfleet thinks it’s a bunch of nonsense, leaving them no choice but to turn to the retired, semi-disgraced Picard. Some will see the moral and institutional decline of Starfleet depicted in Picard to be a heavy-handed metaphor for the way most in Hollywood see the Trump era. But I found this mood of disappointment and disillusionment to be pretty fitting for the national moment and beyond the usual partisan cheerleading from the entertainment industry. You don’t have to be a Trump-hater to wonder if America has fallen short of its professed values. The decision of Starfleet to not help the Romulans, as their sun was about to go supernova, feels like an apt comparison to the Obama administration’s refusal to get involved in the Syrian Civil War — or Rwanda, or the Balkans, or any other time our country has lamented a faraway massacre but dragged its feet or declined to get involved. And those of us who watched enough previous Star Trek shows and movies know that in the preceding decades, the Federation has been invaded twice by the Borg and suffered serious casualties both times, and then nearly lost a war to the Dominion, as depicted on Deep Space Nine. This is a society that should be feeling insecure, wary, and less certain of that its values work because of recent difficult and traumatic events — a situation that many will find comparable to our own. The utopia of the Federation makes for boring storytelling; it’s much more interesting to see how people can hold onto their values and ideals when their circumstances challenge them the most.  Picard clearly aimed to tackle big questions such as “what does it mean to be alive” and “who defines what is really alive?” (If you squint, the villains’ insistence that synthetic beings — basically vat-grown, flesh-and-blood robots — could not possibly count as ‘alive’ looks a little like a pro-life critique of abortion.) But the first season wrapped up those questions a little too neatly and quickly in that final episode. Our protagonists witness the brief appearance of a near-omnipotent ancient malevolent race of sentient artificial life capable of wiping out “trillions” of lives . . . and once the immediate threat ends, they shrug and move on.   The problem was that this series wanted to have its cake and eat it, too. It wanted to give Picard his noble, self-sacrificing death, and to have its titular character around for another season. It wanted to depict a paranoid, fearful Federation in decline, and to have Riker show up with a state-of-the-art fleet to save the day. It wanted to have Dr. Jurati — whose name is more or less the way telemarketers greet me — accept the consequences for her cold-blooded murder of an innocent man, and to also remain a happy part of the crew. A bit like The Rise of Skywalker, the Picard series kept walking up to the precipice of a huge and consequential change, and then lost its nerve and backed away quickly. When Patrick Stewart first announced he would be returning for this series, he told an audience of fans, “he may not be the Jean-Luc that you recognize and know so well. It may be a very different individual; someone who has been changed by his experiences. Twenty years will have passed — more or less exactly the time between the last movie and today . . . It will be, I promise, I guarantee, something very, very different.”  The finished product of Picard feels like a struggle between two visions — between one of a Star Trek series showing a beloved character in an extraordinarily different set of circumstances in his life, and a reboot that would amount to Star Trek: The Next Generation, Part Two. The fans wanted to see Data, and Riker and Troi, and to see Stewart saying “engage!” And they got it! Which . . . doesn’t quite mesh with the series theme of accepting change. By the way, series creators, the insertion of four-letter words in Picard does not make the show ‘edgy.’ I always figured that the absence of profanity from previous Star Trek series meant that those words had fallen out of use in the intervening centuries.  ADDENDUM: It appears this April will be the most-read month in Morning Jolt history. Thank you for the privilege of being part of your day.  

Northwestern University’s John O. McGinnis is always worth reading. In this Law & Liberty post, he ruminates on how our schools (law schools and the rest) have failed students during the COVID-19 crisis. Money quote: It is hardly a surprise that perverse ideology and faux sentimentality pervade our educational establishment. The typical university faculty stands well to the left of the median Democrat. Flaunting of one’s concern about privilege is the common idiom of the faculty lounge. Moreover, working at non-profit institutions insulated from competition naturally weakens attachment to values like self-reliance that might otherwise be taught in a crisis. Read the whole thing.  

An additional 3.8 million Americans filed jobless claims in the past week, the Department of Labor reported on Tuesday, amid continuing economic fallout from the coronavirus pandemic. Total U.S. unemployment since the start of the pandemic has soared to 30 million, or 18 percent of the work force. States are currently formulating plans to reopen businesses initially shuttered to enforce social distancing measures, but states hit the hardest by coronavirus outbreaks, with New York at the top of the list, will likely keep certain businesses closed at least until mid May. Dr. Deborah Birx, response coordinator for the White House coronavirus task force, on Sunday told reporters that social distancing measures will likely “be with us” through the summer, which would have an additional impact on numerous businesses.  Last week the Congressional Budget Office predicted that the federal government would run up a $3.7 trillion deficit in 2020 due to massive spending on economic relief for Americans affected by the crisis. “The economy will experience a sharp contraction in the second quarter of 2020 stemming from factors related to the pandemic, including the social distancing measures put in place to contain it,” the CBO report reads. “In the third quarter, economic activity is expected to increase, as concerns about the pandemic diminish … However, challenges in the economy and the labor market are expected to persist for some time.”  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 

Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer announced a new coronavirus plan based on the GI Bill to give front-line workers free college tuition, billing it as the first program of its kind in the country. Those eligible under the “Future for Frontliners” plan would be workers including “the ones staffing our hospitals and nursing homes, stocking the shelves at grocery stores, providing child care to critical infrastructure workers, manufacturing PPE, protecting public safety, picking up trash or delivering supplies,” the state revealed in an announcement.  Whitmer said the state would use federal grant money to fund the program. It is unclear how many people would be eligible to apply or how much the state estimated it would cost. “The Futures for Frontliners program is our way of saying ‘thank you’ to those who have risked their lives on the front lines of this crisis,” Whitmer said in a statement. “This program will ensure tuition-free college opportunities and give these dedicated Michiganders an opportunity to earn a technical certificate, associate degree or even a bachelor’s degree.” As of Thursday, Michigan has over 40,000 coronavirus cases and 3,670 deaths. Whitmer has used references to World War II in public statements about coronavirus before, including comparing those protesting her state’s social distancing restrictions to those Americans who protested the World War II production effort in the 1940s.  “President Trump called this a war, and it is exactly that. So let’s act like it. In World War II, there weren’t people lining up at the Capitol to protest the fact that they had to drop everything they were doing and build planes or tanks or to ration food,” Whitmer said during an address earlier this month.  The Michigan Democrat also drew scrutiny after her administration hired a data company known for working with Democratic campaigns to track state residents’ contact information to assist the state’s effort of tracing coronavirus cases.  Send a tip to the news team at NR. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					A
				rthur T. Barbieri was the Democratic boss in New Haven from the early 1950s into the late 1970s. Sounds like a minor martinet but New Haven, the first Model City, was the urban-renewal movement’s incubator. Barbieri moved tens of millions of dollars and got the votes for this spectacular, hubristic failure, an adventure as reckless as the one we’re on now, though not as hasty. At least that mess’s masters didn’t decide over a weekend to crash an entire economy.  Yale’s there, so every politically ambitious undergraduate in the 1960s tended to wade into the swamp in which Barbieri wasn’t the kingfish — he was too discreet — but more like the Hydra of Lerna. Bill Clinton had his first political job in Art’s office. What better place to learn the art of money laundering? Google Art today, and his ties to the Mafia pop up mostly. That’s too bad. He was more than a mobster. I got to know Art well, through many family and political connections. We kept in close touch until he died in 1998, in part because I was in politics, too. My base was the small Republican towns bordering New Haven. We had our own machine, but things were more on the up and up. I couldn’t believe how much I liked him. Yes, Art was louche, corrupt, and mean. He was also funny, worldly, teasing, bashful, part con man, part psychiatrist. He’d charm a vampire from a slit throat.  Art had a special way with arithmetic. No one counted votes with such artistry, with élan, in an era with no models, algorithms, or even pocket calculators. When it came to fraud, he had “who, what, where, when, and how many” in his head. Surely the politicians, journo hacks, and experts who bungled us into the Chinese Coronavirus Depression are channeling Art Barbieri as they pad death counts, scrambling to justify what they’ve done. Dr. Birx, with her Hermès scarves and soothing, candlelit authority, let the cat out of the bag — oh, and to terrify us further, the experts say cats might be contagious. “We’re counting mortality very liberally,” she said. Anyone dying “with COVID-19” is “presumed” to have died “from COVID-19.”   In New York, with Washington the beacon light of creative accounting, deaths are attributed retroactively. Respiratory failures are lumped into the death counts. “COVID-19 or equivalent,” in New York’s parlance, goosed its death count by a third in one gruesome swoop. Seasonal flu deaths will get a makeover. Mayor de Blasio wants to count “unexplained home deaths.” Of course, we know he doesn’t want this to end until the death count meets his equity, inclusion, and diversity targets. 
 It’s a numbers game now — and all politics. How best to disguise one of the truly awful scandals in this truly awful disaster: the deaths in New York of 6,000 nursing-home residents? Nearly everyone’s on the dole now. Can we ever unwind it? “We’ll spend what it takes.” Takes to do what? It’s a virus. It’s here, and it’s not going back in the test tube at that Chinese lab that, as seems likely, negligently let it loose. Art Barbieri would be dismayed and puzzled. A living organism he couldn’t buy off. As part of the now $3 trillion plan to fight COVID-19, Congress sent $200 million in relief money to the three main federal arts agencies. Next time, I’ll write about the Institute for Museum and Library Services and the National Endowment for the Humanities. Today, I’ll address how the National Endowment for the Arts (NEA) is spending its $75 million share. The NEA has a plan that’s not going to have much bang. It’s gotten $75 million, with half going to state arts agencies as pass-through money, as Congress wants, leaving $37.5 million to spend. It’s giving lump-sum grants of $50,000 to stand-alone arts organizations and grants of $100,000 or $250,000 to sub-granting organizations. One of the big problems with NEA overall is that it dribbles bits of money to lots of organizations, so this is par for the course. NEA has great people. It needs to get out of the habit of giving little grants.   NEA prides itself for giving grants to “all 50 states.” This is nice, but counting up to 50 isn’t good or particularly inventive policy making. It’s meant to buy goodwill, lots of little grants here and there, gather-ye-congressmen-while-ye-may kind of thing. Art wouldn’t approve. He disdained people who’d take a case of booze for a bribe. “Cheap dates,” he’d snort.  The NEA won’t consider need in awarding money, either. It says it can’t, and the statute does set “artistic merit” as the main criterion, but it doesn’t say it’s exclusive to others, and if the NEA is following the exact letter of the law, it’s the only federal agency to do so.  “Need-blind” means that the Met — with a $3 billion endowment, a fundraising machine, and tons of rich donors — is as eligible for a $50,000 grant as a museum that can’t pay its electric bill. The NEA can and does, however, privilege places with poor or underserved audiences, which isn’t in the statute. Let’s just assume, this once, that a museum on the Upper East Side whose biggest fundraiser is a Fashion Institute gala run by the editor of Vogue tends not to focus on a poor and underserved audience while a museum in Seattle, Akron, Milwaukee, Worcester, either Portland, or poor little Bennington in Vermont does. A few blocks from the Met, the American Folk Art Museum does fantastic work, but it’s small and needs to hustle for donors. The NEA isn’t thinking carefully about different categories of art groups. I’d wager that the organizations suffering the most are theater companies, symphonies, and opera companies. The government, press, and experts have generated a panic in which people fear sitting next to people they don’t know. Will a sneeze or cough in a crowded theater now have the same effect as yelling “fire”? These arts venues have essentially lost the rest of this year, yet they have bills to pay, and they tend not to have endowments. They need cash. Some superb museums such as Mass MoCA show art but also offer great concerts, lectures, and stand-up comedy as a big part of their profile. They’re a special breed and need special help. The elegant Dr. Birx and the new geriatric pop star Dr. Fauci admit that quarantining an entire country and crashing a world economy to fight a virus have never been tried before. That in itself is a big red flag. NEA’s $50,000-a-pop plan doesn’t begin to address the uncharted territory museums face. I think museums are doing what they can to take care of their people. That said, a museum shouldn’t keep an army of guards or visitor-amenities staff on the payroll if there are no visitors and museums are closed. That’s an abuse of the philanthropy that pays a museum’s bills. The Met was very nice to protect its people for a few weeks on its own dime, but it’s got a big deficit to close. Unemployment insurance exists to help people who are laid off. If they’re upset, their beef isn’t with the museums. It’s with the knuckleheads who closed the economy in the most reckless adventure since we went all guns blazing in search of those weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.  The Payroll Protection Plan is the oddest program. The leaders of Congress — a big red flag, as Art certainly told me more than once that politicians are sleazy — conceived and passed this $358 billion program in about the same amount of time it takes to make a good osso buco — another big red flag. Museums are getting PPP money. San Francisco’s MoMA got $6.2 million. That’ll keep its staff on the payroll until June 30. That money is meant for small businesses, and SF MoMa isn’t a small business, but it’s a sloppy law, and the museum is entitled to the money. The staff there is circulating a petition demanding a guarantee of employment after that period. It’s one of many petitions that museum staffs are circulating, and they invariably demand permanent employment and want the director’s salary cut to zero to pay for it. Their math is challenged, but I guess you can’t beat dumb animals. And animals, except cats, tend not to be vindictive. This isn’t the NEA’s issue, but now and over the next few months, museum directors and trustees are reassessing museum staffing from top to bottom. Many tangential programs and their staffs will disappear. This isn’t a bad thing. Museum staffs have become too bloated as museums have evolved into community centers. They need to focus on core values, such as promoting their permanent collections and educating, not entertaining, people.  Museums have big expenses aside from staff. For many, the unprecedented shutdown has wrecked their financial plans. How to help? Those with big endowments should draw on their savings to pay bills. The money is for the future, I know, but it’s for emergencies, too. These museums shouldn’t clamor for federal dough, especially PPP or NEA emergency dough, while 27 million Americans are out of work. That’s immoral and tasteless. College museums like Yale’s and Harvard’s and government-owned museums like LACMA shouldn’t get any money. They have parent organizations and need to go to Mom and Dad with a tin cup rather than Uncle Sam. The NEA program provides for grants of $100,000 and $250,000 to “sub-granting agencies.” Examples are the City of Boston’s Cultural Council and the City of Phoenix’s office of arts and culture. These are local government agencies. Why carve out the biggest pots for them? They should jostle with every other municipal need. Unlike free-standing museums run through philanthropy, local governments have a captive tax base. The best way to help museums is a one-year change in the law empowering the NEA to indemnify traveling loan exhibitions. The law saves museums many millions of dollars in insurance costs every year. Rather than commercially insure high-value art borrowed for temporary exhibitions, museums apply for a federal indemnity covering loss or damage. It’s the government’s most effective arts program. I would suggest changing the law to allow the NEA to indemnify permanent collections rather than loan exhibitions for a one-year period. The law now allows the NEA to indemnify up to $7.5 billion in art each year. Indemnifying museum permanent collections would save insurance premiums. Almost all of this art is locked in vaults. Forever attentive to actual need, I’d find a way to base eligibility on endowment money so the richest museums wouldn’t get any help. In nearly 50 years of indemnifying exhibitions, the NEA has transformed culture for the better. And in those years, it’s had only two tiny claims, both under $5,000. For the Addison Gallery, the small museum I directed for ten years, this move would save over $115,000. Insurance companies won’t like it since they’ll lose premiums, but this is an emergency. “Change the law?” Yes, and it’s easy, if the NEA and the art-museum-directors’ association push for it. Nancy Pelosi slipped $25 million into the CARES Act for the Kennedy Center, which does great things, but it’s a playground for the rich. And $75 million for the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, although every liberal’s limousine has NPR on its channel scanner. Channel Art Barbieri. He’ll tell you how. He got $1 million from the feds to renovate New Haven’s flower market, a Mafia front for money laundering. Art would approve of hosing insurance companies. Connecticut’s insurance business was in Hartford, not New Haven, and its payoffs and no-show jobs went to the legislature. I’ve written about NEA’s eyebrow-raising preference for arts groups in New York, California, and Washington. Invariably, these three places get money in chunks that are trip-to-the-moon league out of proportion to their population. The NEA is in Washington so — no surprise — the D.C.-based staff likes and knows the locals. I know that Los Angeles, San Francisco, and New York City have lots of arts groups, but so do Texas, Florida, Ohio, and Michigan. Instead of “all 50 states,” which tends to mean pennies for Missouri and Maine and a bundle for Beverly Hills 90210 and environs, let’s put the money where the people are. Art Barbieri didn’t hate good government. “Not my yob, man,” he’d say, aping New Haven’s then nascent Hispanic population. His job was to grease the wheels and win elections. “Plague of Women Vipers shit,” he’d call programs that worked well and efficiently, programs the local League of Women Voters tended to push. He was practical, though, and a problem-solver in days when city jobs and other political largess put food on the tables of thousands of working-class Americans. And arts groups have big problems now, unfathomable six weeks ago. He also ran an illegal betting operation fronted by New Haven’s ice-cream parlors. The COVID-19 crisis is forcing all of us, especially in the arts, to get creative in making ends meet. Let’s help those needing it the most.   

More than three weeks after 413,000 Wisconsin voters went to the polls, there has not been the spike in COVID-19 cases attributed to the election that many feared. “The state said about two dozen people may have been infected on election day,” the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported on Wednesday. “Some have characterized these numbers as an ‘uptick,’ but the experts are cautious.”  Ryan Westergaard, the chief medical officer at the Department of Health Services, told the paper that a link could not be established between the election and the very small number of cases that had developed among the 413,000 voters who showed up to the polls on April 7. “With the data we have, we can’t prove an association,” Westergaard said. “It would be speculative to say that was definitely the cause without really investigating closely and being clear that somebody really had no other potential exposure to infected people. I don’t think we have the resources to really do that to know definitely.” “I don’t think that the in-person election led to a major effect, to my surprise. I expected it,” Oguzhan Alagoz, an expert in infectious-disease modeling at the University of Wisconsin at Madison, told the Journal Sentinel.  
 A Democratic state senator suggested last week that there had been a surge of cases because of the election, but as Politifact Wisconsin reported, the surge was due to an outbreak at several meat-packing facilities in Brown County, home to Green Bay. Even when accounting for the delays in testing and the virus’s incubation period, a spike in new cases due to the election should have showed up by now if it were going to occur.  The weekend before the election, a major fight erupted between the state’s Democratic governor and Republican legislature over postponing the vote. For several weeks after the outbreak of the coronavirus in the United States, Democratic governor Tony Evers continued to support holding the election on April 7, and presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Joe Biden seemed to back him up on April 2. On Friday, April 3, just four days before the election, Governor Evers made an about-face. He called on the state legislature to change the law so that an all-mail election could be held in May. The legislature rebuffed Evers’s request, and on April 6, the day before the election, Evers attempted to unilaterally postpone the election — an order he had repeatedly said would be illegal.  To back up Evers, the state’s health-department secretary-designee, Andrea Palm, expressed absolute certitude that in-person voting would result in more COVID-19 deaths, saying, on April 6: “In-person voting would, without question, accelerate the transmission of COVID-19 and increase the number of cases. An increase in the number of cases in Wisconsin would result in more deaths.” Republican legislative leaders challenged Evers’s order, and the state supreme court ruled in their favor.  One major factor that spurred Evers’s last-minute attempts to postpone the election were reports that the number of polling places would be greatly reduced in the cities of Milwaukee and Green Bay. While Green Bay usually has 31 polling places, it had only two open on April 7. Milwaukee’s typical 180 polling places were consolidated into five locations. Such a drastic reduction in the number of polling places did not occur in most of the state, and city officials in Milwaukee and Green Bay have faced criticism for not opening more sites with the resources they had. The mayor of Green Bay rejected dozens of volunteers who offered to work the polls, and the city of Milwaukee used more than 80 poll workers and 30 National Guardsman at each of its five polling locations. Milwaukee employs an average of eleven poll workers at each polling place during a typical presidential primary.  The official running Milwaukee’s elections said he didn’t know how many National Guardsmen would be available at the time he decided to only open five polling centers. “Had we had that information [about the National Guard] sooner, I absolutely think it could have influenced the number of voting centers,” Neil Albrecht, the executive director of the city’s election commission, said on April 7. A record 1.1 million Wisconsin voters cast ballots by mail (or voted early in person), and that allowed polling places to be sparsely populated in most of the state on Election Day. But thousands of voters in Milwaukee and Green Bay experienced long lines and waits of up to two hours — the type of mass gathering that many feared would spread the virus. Voters attempted to keep their distance from one another and mostly waited outside the polling places — perhaps another data point indicating that the virus does not spread well outdoors.  The absence of a much-feared wave of election-induced infections in Wisconsin is one small piece of good news in an otherwise grim month. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					A
				merica’s meat processing-plants are hard-hit by COVID-19. Speculation runs that the immigrant laborers are less aware of health precautions given in English and that their living situations and the “elbow-to-elbow” nature of work at these industrial butchers and packers make them especially vulnerable. Tyson’s CEO warned that closure of plants mean that “millions of pounds of meat will disappear from the supply chain.” Millions of animals that are raised for slaughter may simply be plowed under and buried alive.  For the first time since the 1970s oil crisis, Americans on a mass scale may be exposed to rationing, shortages, and long lines for a resource they consider essential to their lives. President Trump has responded by declaring meat-processing plants “critical infrastructure.” The White House will take all appropriate action to “continue operations” at meat-processing plants, he has vowed. It’s unclear what those actions might involve. Sick workers will not be able to return. Health workers may not feel safe returning to the line. Meat processing is an industrial affair, and workers are trained to follow health regulations and learn manual skills that can’t be transferred to new recruits in a moment, or to National Guardsmen drafted into service in the plants. As with the giant testing tents in Walmart and Target parking lots that was announced on the White House lawn, this may be Trump’s attempt to announce an idea and express concern, but with little in the way of follow-up. One is tempted to ask: Where’s the beef, Mr. President?   However, as is so often the case, Trump’s political survival instinct is kicking into gear at the right time. The sight of empty meat counters at supermarkets, alongside images of unslaughtered cattle or poultry falling under bulldozers, will be terrible for him. These images alone, cut into a well-narrated campaign ad, could be fatal to his reelection. 
 Why? Because it is a potent symbol. Bloomberg relays that “the U.S., Brazil and Canada account for about 65% of world meat trade.” America is meant to be a land of plenty, blessed with some of the greatest cattle pastures. Cattle ranchers are still venerated enough in our culture that we basically allow them to get away with sedition, as in the Bundy-family stand-off. Trump began his presidency talking about making the Republican Party a worker’s party — and a party for immigration restrictionists. Well, some of the workers in meat-processing plants in the Dakotas speak Amharic, Nepali, and Swahili. Smithfield was able to get their employees health guides that were printed only in English. Is the Trump White House going to endanger the health of these multinational workers for the sake of the supermarkets?  The meat shortage isn’t Trump’s fault, of course. Although better public-health messaging and an awareness of America’s vulnerabilities might have helped contain the problem, Trump did not cause the incredible concentration of the meat processing and packing industries in America. He didn’t make the industry reliant on foreign workers. The efficiency (and brittleness) of these supply chains was a feature of the modern economy he wants to restart. It’s also the reason restaurant food is so affordable in America, and why our national shift toward eating at home is leading to such quick disruption.  But Americans expect that America ought to be able to feed itself beef, pork, and chicken — that this is one area where the country was self-sufficient and where its supply chains were insulated from foreign threats. And yet it is under a nationalist president that the whole system may be breaking down.  Trump better hope that the industry finds ways to adapt quickly, that its workers recover their health, and that the store shelves aren’t empty for long. Or he’ll be the second Republican president to lose reelection and have “supermarkets” under his list of political regrets. 

Earlier this month, a McDonald’s restaurant in Guangzhou, in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong, was forced to remove a sign warning that “black people are not allowed to enter.” Upon removing it, McDonald’s told NBC News in a statement that the sign was “not representative of our inclusive values.”  That sounds like what it almost certainly is: a product of the company’s communications department, called in to do damage control. And while we can accept that the McDonald’s corporation itself is not, on the whole, racist, the sign does unfortunately represent China’s values. As NR’s Jim Geraghty has noted, the incident is an example of the “xenophobia and racism” on display just now in China. This phenomenon is not new to the PRC, but the government has an extra incentive to lean into it now, because it helps the government’s concerted campaign to deflect blame for the global coronavirus pandemic. There is ample evidence of this. A recent Reuters report noted that ambassadors from several African nations recently engaged the Chinese foreign ministry to raise concerns about how their citizens are being mistreated in China. Passport holders from African countries are subject to extreme stop-and-search practices. Many who are coronavirus-negative are being forced into 30-day quarantines anyway. Foreigners from a range of countries who can document clean bills of health are being denied entry to places of business and other facilities simply because they are foreigners.  Much of this is taking place in Guangzhou, known to some as “Little Africa” because it has the largest African-immigrant population in China. To some extent, African immigration to China is a by-product of Xi Jinping’s effort to build a global network of trade and infrastructure investment that gives the regime a perceived geopolitical advantage over the West in the developing world. Ghanaians, Nigerians, and other immigrants to China are all too happy to take advantage of the work and educational opportunities China offers. But many of them have learned the hard way just how limited the country’s kindness is.  
 In fact, China’s ill-treatment of foreign-minority populations reflects how the Chinese government treats its own citizens. Muslim minority Uighurs are being held in so-called re-education camps intended to strip them of their religious and ethnic identity, and in many cases subjected to forced labor. In Tibet, which China has oppressed since the very beginning of Communist rule in 1949, things have gotten worse under Xi: Last year, Freedom House named Tibet the second-least-free territory on Earth, behind only war-torn Syria.  It would be natural to presume that such discrimination is a regrettable result of the dominance of the Han Chinese, who are more than 90 percent of China’s population and dominate its society. (By comparison, ethnic Uighurs, for example, make up less than 1 percent of the population.)  The Han Chinese, with 1.3 billion members, are the largest ethnic group not just in the PRC but in the world. Antipathy, oppression, and discrimination toward minority ethnic groups in a country with such a dominant majority is regrettable but not surprising, and not unique to the PRC. Beijing’s response to critics who note all of this is to try to drown them out by highlighting America’s own well-documented history of racial discrimination. But that’s the point: Our historical sins are well-documented, and they inform just about every aspect of our public policy. A free press and other institutions hold up our actions for the world to see. There is no mystery about how our country continues to deal with the effects of the institutionalized discrimination that persisted for nearly two centuries after our own founding, and for a century after we fought a war to end it.   That said, there is a quality to the pattern of behavior in the PRC that transcends ethnicity. Chinese racial discrimination is horrifying in its own right, of course. But it also suggests a farther-reaching chauvinism that is emerging as the defining characteristic of the Xi era. Han Chinese make up the same percentage of the population in Hong Kong as on the mainland, and are 97 percent of the population in Taiwan. Neither Hong Kongers nor Taiwanese have suffered any less at Xi’s hands for that. Nor, for that matter, have the 400 million mostly Han Chinese living on less than $5 a day in the country outside China’s megacities, who face vicious discrimination from urban elites. In some ways, the gulf between the rich in China’s cities and the poor in its rural areas has been institutionalized through the longstanding “hukou” system of internal registration, which hampers movement between regions and creates what amounts to an economic caste system. While Xi has made hukou reform a priority in order to create greater opportunity for urban migration and prosperity, the system continues to reinforce the divide between urban haves and rural have-nots. As the former become wealthier and more global in their perspective, the disdain they frequently show for those who are different — whether from Africa or rural China — is becoming more pronounced.   Xi-era chauvinism is beginning to create a backlash around the world. One example is the cooling ardor toward the Belt and Road Initiative, Xi’s aforementioned effort to gain footholds in foreign markets. Many projects have caused host countries to take on excessive debt. In one instance, a strategic port in Sri Lanka was ceded to China when the debt burden became too high. Politicians in Sri Lanka, Malaysia, and other countries have reversed earlier positions of support because of what they see as China’s discriminatory debt diplomacy. This backlash is appearing even in European countries that once saw China as a potential counterbalance to the Trump administration. In Sweden, for instance, some cities have ended sister-city relationships with Chinese counterparts, and the country has closed its Confucius Institute schools, dealing a blow to one of Beijing’s other soft-power propaganda operations. European leaders, including NATO secretary general Jens Stoltenburg and French president Emmanuel Macron, have also called for better understanding of how Beijing handled the coronavirus pandemic and pushed back against China’s campaign to deflect blame for it.  In short, the world finally seems to be recovering from its decades-long love affair with the PRC, which peaked with the rise of Xi, who was initially viewed as a reformer who would bring China onto the world’s stage as an equal, responsible actor. The true nature of the regime is becoming more apparent, and the world doesn’t like what it sees: the dreadful treatment of ethnic minorities and the rural poor; the obvious interference in Taiwan’s recent presidential election; the belligerence toward Hong Kong as the “one country, two systems” agreement is systematically dismantled and pro-democracy leaders are arrested or just disappear; the bullying of emerging economies through debt diplomacy; and now what is very likely a global pandemic caused by Chinese negligence. For the first time since the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square massacre 30 years ago, the world has awakened to these ugly realities, and if anything good has emerged from this chaotic geopolitical era, that might be it. Here’s hoping that more aggressive action to counter Beijing comes next. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					‘W
				ho controls the past controls the future,” wrote George Orwell in 1984. “Who controls the present controls the past.” In the aftermath of the coronavirus outbreak that originated in Wuhan, China, many interested parties have attempted to rewrite recent events that are barely even history, much as happens in Orwell’s dystopian novel. These parties hope to cast in their own favor the still-congealing consensus about the sequence of events that led to the outbreak, its spread, and its severity.  The most brazen such efforts belong to the Chinese Communist Party, which is now reinterpreting recent events to exploit the outbreak that its own actions and inactions caused. One would think that, CNN — a news organization that declares itself fond of speaking truth to power, that likes to declare that an apple is an apple — would block the CCP’s attempts to rewrite recent history. But one would be mistaken. In a CNN “analysis,” James Griffiths admits that China’s leaders “have not been blind to the opportunity” that coronavirus presents to flaunt the supposed superiority of their own political model. Yet Griffiths then proceeds to toe the Beijing line on China’s handling of the coronavirus, America’s efforts, and the global implications of both. It’s propaganda thinly disguised as reporting. Griffith’s most egregious propagandizing concerns the Chinese government itself, which deserves most of the blame for the spread of COVID-19. Griffiths seems eager to whitewash that government’s conduct and undercut its critics’ valid concerns. It is “debatable how communist modern China actually is,” Griffiths offers. That may technically be true — China is no longer taking Great Leaps Forward, to be sure. But its political apparatus remains oppressive enough to send hundreds of thousands of Muslim Uighurs, a disfavored minority, to concentration camps. And, directly bearing on the crisis at hand, China engaged in typical totalitarian behavior by suppressing early knowledge of the infection’s spread. By imprisoning whistleblowers, it delayed public awareness of the virus’s spread by several weeks (something it had done before, in the 2003 SARS outbreak).  So it’s strange for Griffiths to quote German foreign minister Heiko Maas’s assertion that “China has taken some very authoritarian measures, while in the U.S., the virus was played down for a long time.” These are not mutually exclusive actions: The Chinese government took authoritarian measures to downplay the virus. The suppression of the information allowed China to publicly condone mass gatherings in a knowingly infected city and to allow thousands of citizens to leave the country  
 Griffiths takes at face value China’s self-reported figures indicating that it has dealt better with the coronavirus than other places have. But we should be skeptical of these figures; the actual number and extent of cases may be orders of magnitude higher, but China’s totalitarian control of information will probably make it impossible to learn the truth. At the very least, we should put asterisks next to the data from China. We should also condemn the truly oppressive measures the government took to contain the virus. No humane society can approve the welding shut of apartments, the home confinement of the overwhelming majority of residents, restricted travel into, within, and out of the city, and a variety of other measures. These measures would not have been necessary if the government had been honest about the spread from the beginning. One study estimates that up to 95 percent of the virus’s spread could have been reduced had the Chinese government acted earlier, when fewer cases would have made treatment easier. Despite all this, Griffiths depicts America’s response as worse than China’s. The effectiveness of the Chinese response, he writes, “could be perceived to be a strong argument that an empowered state is what is needed to respond to the pandemic.” He adds: The crisis has also highlighted the benefits of a strong government and centralized planning, while . . . exposing the limitations of private industry to respond quickly, particularly in the healthcare sector.  . . .  In the United States, which is often held up — for better or worse — as the example par excellence of a Western democracy, the alternative to the Chinese model appears to be somewhat chaotic. But where he sees an apparently disempowered state unable to do anything, a more accurate picture is an American government with plenty of resources, though too often it’s incompetent at deploying them, hamstringing both public and private efforts at fighting crises, including this one. That is a valid critique. But it is not the ironclad case for stronger government that Griffiths supposes. As it was left to Joe Biden to point out in a Democratic-primary debate, coronavirus is not itself a case for complete government control of health care; if it were, Italy, which has universal health care, would not have experienced arguably the Western world’s worst outbreak. There are other variables at play. Griffiths might have a point about America’s “chaotic” response if he were talking about the different approaches takes by individual states. But America believed in letting a thousand flowers bloom well before Mao claimed to. America’s 50 states are not mere administrative units: They are, and always have been, considerable sources of political power. In this crisis, they have also proven to be more effective — and more accessible — administrators of mitigation measures than a centralized state would have been. This is not to say that all states have handled the crisis perfectly. But their measures are implemented on a smaller scale, and in a fashion closer to the ground, because of how our political system distributes power. And America gets to benefit from seeing what works and what doesn’t, as different states try different approaches to fit different populations and conditions. The Chinese approach might appeal to tyrants, but it would have never been possible here, or desirable.  Griffiths’s bias continues when he describes China’s relationship with the rest of the world. He casts China as a newly invigorated defender of international institutions. But just maybe this is a strategy China has adopted to maximize its self-interest. He doesn’t consider the possibility. “China has emerged as the strongest defendant of the World Health Organization (WHO) as it faces pressure from Washington,” he writes. But this is the same organization whose head Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, a controversial Ethiopian politician, had China’s support in his accession to the position. After taking the helm, Tedros steered the WHO in China’s favor at every step in the first few weeks of the outbreak. He went so far as to deny the possibility of human-to-human transmission at a time when the Chinese government demanded that the WHO push this message. Griffiths also cites examples of Chinese beneficence, such as its provision of medical supplies around the world, but he fails to note that many of these products China sold are defective and don’t work. He lauds Chinese influence, such as the popularity of its Internet model in the wake of “crises around fake news and online disinformation,” but he doesn’t mention that China itself is pushing coronavirus disinformation. In light of such perfidy, it is impossible to take seriously, for example, a statement made by the Chinese Communist newspaper China Daily, which Griffiths nonetheless does: The United Nations will be 75 this year, COVID-19 is reminding countries of the continuous and increasing value of multilateralism in a closely connected world. We will only halt COVID-19 through solidarity. No country can do it alone. It is true that no country now can stop coronavirus on its own. But that is largely thanks to the behavior of the Chinese Communist Party in the first place. Amid the pro-China blather, Griffiths does make the good point that “many of the governments praised for their handling of the virus — Taiwan, New Zealand, Australia, South Korea, and Germany — are democracies.” One of that series, in particular, deserves to be highlighted. Taiwan, perhaps most of all nations in the world, has reason not to trust China, which has sought for decades to snuff it out. Excluded from the World Health Organization, Taiwan ignored its downplaying of the virus, disregarded the Chinese government’s prevarication, and acted quickly and aggressively against COVID-19. As a result, it experienced perhaps the developed world’s least severe outbreak (429 cases, 6 deaths) and looks set to return to normalcy soon. It, too, is providing medical supplies around the world — though, unlike China, it is donating them rather than selling them. Does Griffiths consider the possibility that Taiwan will emerge stronger, or in a better position, than China? Or that Taiwan’s model for political life will become more attractive? He does not; this is the only mention Taiwan receives in his “analysis.” Griffiths concludes that “Beijing also appears to have a greater appreciation than most of its rivals of the potential opportunities presented by the current crisis to emerge stronger and more influential than ever before.” This may or may not be true. But it is strange that a supposed “analysis” seems so keen on sharing the Chinese government’s assumptions and perspective, and eager to help it rewrite recent history. Maybe Winston Smith isn’t the only one who loves Big Brother. 


					
						
						NRPLUS MEMBER ARTICLE
					
					T
				he technology industry’s rapid response to the COVID-19 pandemic has renewed appreciation for platforms and tools like Facebook and Zoom and given advocates a triumphant narrative to trumpet. But the “techlash” is far from over. COVID-19 and its long-term fallout may mark only the beginning, not the end, of heightened scrutiny of tech.  The techlash comes in many forms. The industry has been operating under the gimlet eye of politicians, regulators, and the media since the 2016 election. Social-media companies face charges that they amplify disinformation or censor marginal opinions, and their executives are hauled before congressional committees. Elsewhere, critics argue that the U.S. is in the middle of a long-term technological stagnation — that despite game-changing inventions like the Internet or smartphones, the industry has failed to deliver meaningful benefits to ordinary people. The brightest minds of the Gen-X and Millennial cohorts, these critics say, are addicting children to mental-health-threatening social-media platforms and creating increasingly derivative and frivolous applications. Criticism has been bipartisan. Some on the right say that tech companies systematically discriminate against them. Others on the left say that the leading companies have become monopolies, using their power to subvert reform, subsume and destroy the competition, violate privacy, exploit gig-economy workers, and “move fast and break things” without consequence. Gone are the days when President Obama described the U.S. as “the nation of Google and Facebook” in his 2011 State of the Union address.  But the techlash, and in particular the argument that the tech industry cannot deliver tangible innovations, is momentarily on pause. During the current COVID-19 shutdown, tech companies big and small have made it possible for a considerable portion of the workforce to become fully-remote in a way unimaginable even 15 years ago, let alone during the 1960s. Gig-economy jobs are the only lifeline serving the skeletal remains of the restaurant and broader service industry. For many locked-in city-dwellers, an Amazon Prime membership, Netflix subscription, and the local Amazon-owned Whole Foods are the only stable features of their lives. Those hit hardest, including shuttered small businesses fighting for PPP loan scraps and the millions of workers filing for unemployment, are struggling precisely because they cannot avail themselves of digital tools to weather the lockdown. Neither a flying car nor a more dispersed tech industry would change that. My organization has created a Wiki highlighting the ways that the industry has mobilized to confront the virus. Initiatives vary from Apple and Google’s contract-tracing project to Discord’s offer of free, invite-only class space for educators, and Facebook’s $100 million commitment to support the news industry as it suffers from the collapse of advertising during the pandemic. Likely a result of these initiatives, polling indicates that Americans are beginning to hold more positive views of the tech industry since the start of the crisis.   This warm reaction by the market combined with the early polls illustrates an important truth: the techlash was never about mass-consumer or voter rebellion against tech companies. Instead, it was an elite-level conflict between competing industries, governments, regulators, and the media. 
 Indeed, politicians who framed their campaigns around confronting the tech industry, like Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren and Andrew Yang, failed to catch on with voters. To be sure, polls often demonstrate frustration with privacy issues and a lack of trust in the leading tech companies. But there is no evidence that such beliefs affected consumer behavior or are especially salient to American voters.  Which means that ordinary Americans’ gratitude for the tech industry is unlikely to assuage elite concerns. The current COVID-19 shutdown and forthcoming recovery will deepen, not arrest, the trends driving the techlash. First consider the fallout from the economic crisis. Small and medium-sized businesses have been devastated, furthering the anti-consolidation arguments of antitrust advocates. Right on cue, Senator Warren and New York Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez proposed legislation to prevent major mergers and acquisitions during COVID-19. In a turn from recent history and legal precedent, 21st century antitrust arguments are focusing less on consumer welfare and more on the power wielded by tech companies over industries and American society. No one is accusing Jeff Bezos and Mark Zuckerberg of price-gouging consumers. Amazon has not used its market position and the literally captive at-home audience to hike the price of Amazon Prime. As Zuckerberg has pointed out, Facebook makes money through advertising, not by charging its users. But, as critics have noted, duopoly dominance of the advertising market with Google has made it difficult for news publishers to compete for revenue. All of this occurs against the background of local, state, and federal government incompetence in the face of COVID-19. Consumers and voters may benefit from the status-quo, but tech’s elite-level critics and competition will be even more inflamed than before. Meanwhile, the virus’s geopolitical consequences will intensify the terms of the conflict over tech. The Chinese Communist Party’s obfuscation about COVID-19’s origin and spread combined with its influence over the supposedly neutral World Health Organization makes U.S.–China great-power competition all the more relevant. As the new bipartisan consensus hostile to China emerges, tech companies whose workforces refused to work with the U.S. military yet held no qualms about entering the Chinese market will be unprepared to confront this dynamic. Consider Zoom, whose meteoric rise was hampered by the revelation of its ties to China. Tech companies unable to make the mental shift from the post–Cold War era of globalization and stability to one of zero-sum competition will find themselves in the crosshairs of government and public scrutiny.  The tech industry has performed admirably over the past few months. For the moment, even the industry’s critics acknowledge the importance of its products. However, it would be a mistake to conclude such sentiments neutralize the broader dynamics that have challenged tech since 2016. Rather than alleviate the pressure, this may usher in a heightened phase of the techlash. 

Senator Elizabeth Warren and Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez have announced plans to introduce a bill that would ban company mergers during the pandemic crisis. The chairman of the House Judiciary Antitrust subcommittee, David Cicilline, is also seeking to add similar provisions to any future support or stimulus bill Congress considers in the future. On the surface, the idea may have merit — stopping companies “taking advantage” of the weakness in the economy to “prey” on smaller and more vulnerable enterprises. But beneath the surface, there is almost nothing that could be proposed that would be more counter-productive to weak companies in this challenging period than this proposed intervention.  What is fascinating is the sleight of hand the two lawmakers are using — calling their bill the “Pandemic Anti-Monopoly Act,” but then defending it on the basis of an anti-predatory rationale. Antitrust laws were not repealed when the coronavirus pandemic struck, so if there is a proposed merger that could violate them, regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission and the Justice Department already have the jurisdiction to step in. This would, of course, cover the formation of an unlawful monopoly, but Warren and AOC’s broader concerns about “predatory” behavior are worth a closer look in their own right. The bill would bar acquisitions by certain categories of purchaser (private equity firms, hedge funds, or any company with $100 million of revenues or else $100 million in market capitalization) until the FTC determined that “small businesses, workers, and consumers are no longer under severe financial distress.”  It is worth remembering that acquisitions cannot be closed without two signatures — that of the buyer, and that of the seller. To the extent that a would-be seller does not believe it is in his or her best interests to sell, a “predatory” buyer will not be able to close the deal. The principle of free exchange is still at play, as it was before COVID and will be after COVID. Now, of course, Warren and AOC may very well argue that some beleaguered companies are so bruised from the economic turndown that they lack the ability to act on what is in their best interests, particularly over the longer term. Nevertheless, the arrogance implicit in the assumption that a representative and a senator are more qualified to assess risk and reward than the principals of a business whose net worth and income are actually at stake is staggering. In fact, the cut-off from opportunistic capital for companies experiencing cash flow or strategic challenges may very well be their death warrant. The law that is supposedly designed to protect them may ensure their destruction — a destruction that trickles down to their employees, vendors, counter-parties, creditors, and shareholders. What happens if an opportunistic buyer is legally banned from taking an equity position in a distressed company? They will move up the capital structure to an infusion of debt. Is that the result Warren and AOC are seeking — the piling on of more (and presumably expensive) debt on companies that are already struggling? Why would that be a better result for the “little guy” than a voluntary strategic equity transaction?   The unintended consequences of this bill would either be (a) more business failures, meaning more debt defaults, unemployment, and contagion effects throughout that company’s vendor network, or (b) the additional leveraging of companies that are already in distress with an almost inevitably negative effect on their future growth, and with that their ability to increase wages and hire more workers. 
 An infusion of equity would be the preferred option for many companies in distress. But what about companies not in distress? What about a micro-cap biotech company who has a promising treatment for viral respiratory infections, but needs more capital, infrastructure, R&D, and distribution capacity to see it all through? The vast majority of-pre phase 3 pharma companies use M&A as their exit and monetization strategy. Could it be that this ban would actually prevent a marriage from happening which would have enabled a treatment for COVID from coming to market? That might be an extreme case, but it is highly likely that there are many small, under-resourced businesses that have developed products or identified opportunities but lack the resources to develop them for themselves. The best option for them is often acquisition by a better capitalized strategic partner. At the core of all this is the age-old “knowledge problem.” Warren and AOC’s fatal conceit is to believe that they know more about what a given small business needs or does not need than the owners and management of that business. A time of crisis only makes the stakes higher. Disconnected politicians who have no knowledge of specific company issues, sector challenges, and the countless nuances that exist within an industry can do irreparable harm by insisting that the government should get in the way.  To sum up, this particular initiative is completely unnecessary on its face — antitrust regulations are still in effect. Voluntary exchange needs to be respected. This is no time to cut off companies from the oxygen of capital markets. This bill is a statist nightmare hiding behind the mask of good intentions. 

Sweden’s more lax approach to social-distancing has generated a lot of interest. The government has banned events with more than fifty people and shut down universities and secondary schools. But it has allowed grade schools, as well as restaurants, bars, and other establishments, to remain open. (The police have shut down restaurants where social-distancing is not observed).  It remains very much worth following how much higher the fatality-rate is in Sweden compared to countries where stricter social-distancing measures have been imposed by the government (as well as how their economies compare). The New York Times has a generally favorable take on the Swedish model today. The paper notes that Sweden has a death rate on par with that of Ireland and far below that of the United Kingdom and France. One note of caution is that European countries that get a lot of international travelers seem to have been hit the hardest. I’m not sure how many people from China, Italy, Iran, or New York were traveling to Scandinavia in January and February. One thing the Times neglects to report is that Sweden has a much higher fatality rate than its Scandinavian neighbors. Adjusted per capita, Sweden has a death rate more than six times higher than Norway and Finland. Compared to Denmark, Sweden’s death rate is three times higher.  There may be reasons other than differences in government policy that explain some of the difference in Scandinavian death rates for COVID-19, but it’s worth keeping those comparisons in mind as we assess how the Swedish approach is working out.  

1. Religious freedoms in India deteriorated last year, U.S. government watchdog says 2. The First Federal Female Inmate To Die of COVID-19 3. Lives Lost: Doctor taught a generation of Italian physicians 4. Parental Consent Laws for Underage Girls Seeking Abortion Help Fight Against Human Trafficking 5. Boston priests form team to administer sacraments to COVID-19 patients    6. Little Sisters of the Poor meet pandemic with grace, humility 7. Pierre Manet: Time to Wake Up 8. Megan Mcardle: My dad’s covid-19 illness is mild. Many others aren’t so lucky. 9. Coronavirus: Switzerland says young children can hug grandparents 10. Why some kids are happier right now 11. Pressure Builds to Reopen Churches in Italy 12. In Italy, four generations in a Coronavirus Lockdown    13. Bishop Robert Barron: Three Quarantine Lessons about the Church 14. Church in South Korea Growing Slowly 15. Announcing the Little Sisters Virtual Rally! As the sisters care for the elderly poor amid the pandemic, we are gathering virtually from all over the country to support #ReligiousFreedom. Join them in one week; Wednesday, May 6th on Facebook. #LetThemServe #ProtectOurCare pic.twitter.com/WCDgGyt1xs — BECKET (@BECKETlaw) April 29, 2020  16. Flattening the Curve of Distress: How to be a Catalyst of Calm in COVID-19 17. God the Father to St. Catherine of Siena: Seven Lessons 18. Catherine of Siena: The Divine Physician is more ready to cure than we are to sin 19. Catherine of Siena and Leaving the Church 20.  The Pandemic and Times of St. Catherine of Siena 21. Bill Murray’s Sister is a Dominican Nun With a Traveling Show of St. Catherine of Siena  PLUS: Have you listened to my latest “virus-free” conversation with Sister Magdalene and Sister Agnus Dei from the Sisters of Life? And have you signed up for their virtual gala Thursday night?           

In the middle of March, New York City mayor Bill de Blasio was among those not entirely sold on social distancing as a prophylactic measure against the coronavirus epidemic. “If you love your neighborhood bar, go there now,” he famously said. A few days later, he was threatening to padlock the city’s synagogues — permanently — if social-distancing protocols went unheeded. We sympathize with those New Yorkers driven to drink or inspired to prayer by Mayor de Blasio’s incompetence, vanity, and stupidity, which have been highlighted by but are by no means limited to his response to COVID-19. For the time being, they must suffer in their households rather than in congregation. In all likelihood, the coronavirus has been spreading in New York since February. The city’s jam-packed subway system, carrying five million riders a day, should have counseled particular vigilance. But even with the examples of California’s and Washington’s cities before him, the mayor was slow to move. He dragged his staff along to a crowded YMCA for a workout even as he was ordering gyms closed around the city. The city schools remained open until March 15, and it was left to New York governor Andrew Cuomo to negotiate their closure while teachers were threatening a wildcat strike. De Blasio delayed against the advice of his own aides and health experts. A 36-year-old principal subsequently died of COVID-19. The city’s refusal to disclose infections in the schools “kept families in the dark and left more lives at risk,” as one city councilman put it. De Blasio was warned in early March that the city needed to take more aggressive action against the epidemic, but he wrote off advice from health commissioner Oxiris Barbot and others, worried that a lockdown would hurt the city’s economy. Extended deliberations controlled by political concerns rather than medical ones wasted precious time. “He has long distrusted the top brass of the health department,” Politico reports, “feeling they do not understand politics and public relations.” That may be the case, but their job is not public relations — it is public health. Ignoring the advice and recommendations of the relevant experts in order to tend to his political concerns, Mayor de Blasio effectively became a member of that class of villain most hated by his progressive allies: a denier. His refusal to concede the facts and his desire to subordinate good policy to political expediency were compounded by his general executive incompetence, for instance in leaving city agencies without necessary guidance for implementing work-from-home policies. He insisted that the city’s hospitals were well prepared for the crisis; the actual situation in the city’s public hospitals was shortly thereafter described as “apocalyptic” by one physician. De Blasio did manage to name his wife as head of a coronavirus-recovery panel. He always has time for that sort of thing. Mrs. de Blasio is fresh off of watching $1 billion walk out the door while overseeing a fruitless mental-health initiative. She has time on her hands and is rumored to be considering a run for elected office herself. De Blasio moved with much less dispatch than did colleagues in California and Ohio, among other places. And then, after dawdling for so long, de Blasio flipped. We always are happy to see a politician amend his views to accommodate new facts, but Slowpoke de Blasio’s subsequent overcompensation, and the sanctimony and viciousness he brings to the effort, is something else. De Blasio launched a broadside against “the Jewish community” after a large crowd turned out for a rabbi’s funeral in Williamsburg as though the event corporately implicated the more than 1 million Jews living in New York City, drawing criticism from the city’s ADL and other local Jewish leaders. De Blasio has instructed police to follow a “zero tolerance” rule on gatherings and has threatened to enforce his policy with arrests. Perhaps he has not entirely thought through the social-distancing implications of mass arrests. The coronavirus epidemic was a test for Mayor de Blasio, and he has been found wanting — which should be no surprise to anybody who has witnessed the dramatic decline in the quality of city life under his watch. The tricky question of balancing the consequences of an enforced economic stoppage against the risks of an unknown and poorly understood viral epidemic in a free society with democratic norms has gotten the better of better men and better mayors than Bill de Blasio. His incompetence has endangered the lives of his constituents and made the coronavirus situation worse than it had to be. But it is his tinpot-tyrant posturing and his ridiculous preening that really set him apart from your run-of-the-mill municipal bungler. Unhappily, there is no treatment for what ails Bill de Blasio, and no cure in sight for New York. 

