An overwhelming majority of American voters believe that things are “out of control” in the country, according to a new poll. The newest NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll posed the question “When it comes to the country these days, do you generally feel that things in the country are…,” to which 80 percent of respondents chose “out of control” versus 15 percent who chose “under control.” The final year of President Trump’s first term has been incredibly challenging, calling on him to handle the response to the global coronavirus pandemic as well as national protests following the death of George Floyd in police custody. As such, the poll covered several topics, including approval ratings over Trump’s handling of the current crises and election preferences between Trump and Joe Biden. Most strikingly, the poll indicated that 46 percent of voters believed the current state of the economy was “poor” and 59 percent of voters were more concerned with the actions of police following Floyd’s death than they were with the “protests that have turned violent” – a concern for only 27 percent of voters. Trump recorded a surprise victory last week when job numbers for May showed a drop rather than sharp increase as many had predicted. Still, the poll was conducted before the job numbers came out. When asked whom they would choose “if the presidential election were held today,” voters responded 49 percent for former Vice President Joe Biden versus 42 percent for Trump, with the rest unsure or choosing neither. The NBC News/WSJ poll surveyed 1,000 registered voters with a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.

A dozen new confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Pennsylvania were traced to recent Jersey Shore “beach house gatherings,” health officials said. The Buck County Health Department in Pennsylvania reported 33 new coronavirus cases on Saturday, including 11 that can be traced back to a New Jersey resident “who attended multiple house gatherings at the shore during the past two weeks.” Another Bucks County resident who became infected from the same New Jersey source was announced Friday. “This is exactly why we can’t let our guard down now, even if it feels ‘safe’ to be at the beach,” David Damsker, director of the Bucks County Health Department, wrote in a press release. “One unlucky exposure can lead to a large cascade of cases down the line.” “We want everyone to enjoy the warmer weather and have fun, but let’s keep in mind that COVID is still circulating in the community at baseline levels,” he continued. The department released information on these cases to “caution people against letting down their guard and just getting back to business as usual.” “Obviously it’s still out there, and if you have too many people in one place and somebody’s got the virus, it’s still able to be spread,” said Damsker. Officials did not disclose the locations or dates of the gatherings. There have been 5,000 confirmed cases of the coronavirus in Bucks County. As of Sunday, there are 164,164 confirmed cases in New Jersey and 12,176 residents have died in the outbreak.

Minneapolis’ boy of a mayor, Jacob Frey, proves that no matter how much you abase yourself to the mob, you can never be woke enough. In a scene reminiscent of a Maoist struggle session, he stood before two black protest organizers Saturday and confessed through a mask into a microphone that he was “coming to grips with my own brokenneness.” But the organizers, standing on a platform above him, weren’t interested in providing therapy for this 38-year-old man-child. “Yes or no?” asked a woman with a microphone. “Will you commit to defunding the Minneapolis Police Department … We don’t want no more police.” Poor Frey couldn’t bring himself to say yes so his fate was sealed. “Get the f–k out of here!” she snarled and he was forced into a ritual walk of shame through the jeering crowd as they chanted “Go home, Jacob!” The only thing missing was a sign around his neck listing his transgressions. Frey also made a spectacle of himself in front of hundreds of people in a Minneapolis chapel at a memorial service Thursday for George Floyd, the black man whose death under the knee of a white police officer has sparked nationwide protests. Kneeling beside Floyd’s golden casket, Frey’s body trembled with great heaving sobs, as people nearby looked on in wonderment. Someone should tell this half-price Justin Trudeau to stop wallowing in his own brokenness and start repairing his broken city. There is no patience for self-indulgence amid the ruins. If Minneapolis had a grownup mayor instead of a snowflake, the rioting and looting of the past two weeks might have been nipped in the bud and America spared more pain piled on top of the pandemic. Instead, the nation suffers due to one man’s inadequacies. Frey is the perfect representative of a Democratic Party that has moved so far left it is eating itself alive. His overwrought gestures are as useless as those of the white women on the streets of Manhattan last week who were tricked by a man claiming to work for Black Lives Matter into getting on their knees and apologizing for their “white privilege.” Five well-meaning women were pranked for his camera, but at least all it cost was their pride. In Cary, NC, on Saturday, the self-abasement took on religious tones when white people knelt to wash the feet of black protest organizers in a ritual described by a woman with a megaphone as “repentance on behalf of Caucasian people.” A white foot washer took over the megaphone at one point to say: “It’s our honor to be here on behalf … of all of the white race … repenting for our pride.” Seriously, the groveling is over the top and does nothing to heal racism in or mend community relations with police. It certainly won’t rebuild those black neighborhoods trashed in Minneapolis. Identity politics is the disease, not the solution. Dividing people into competing victim groups based on race, gender, sexuality and other superficial characteristics is the opposite of what America needs in order to unify. If Frey and his ilk stopped obsessing about themselves they might understand Minneapolis’ unique problems, which revolve around the country’s largest Somali-refugee population, more than half of which lives in poverty and is plagued by gang warfare. Abolishing the police force and replacing it with flying squads of social workers, as several council members are advocating, would just recreate the anarchy these refugees escaped in the 1990s. That’s not what the Somali mothers want. They’ve been begging the city not to allow another mall to be built which, they fear, will just disintegrate into another gang hangout. Guns and gang warfare in the city of 450,000 make it one of the most dangerous in the country. In the two weeks since Floyd’s death, 19 people have been shot, only one linked to the protests. That’s business as usual. Far from too much policing there has been too little that’s effective, as you can see from crime stories chosen at random from the Minneapolis Star-Tribune. Last month, 18-year-old Arionna Buckanaga died in a drive-by shooting. In March of last year, 17-year-old Abdiwasa Farah was killed when 26 shots were pumped into his car. In June, Steven Markey, 39, was shot dead by carjackers. In August, Abdullah Adeed, 40, was shot dead in a home invasion. In October, Mustafa Ali, 25, was killed in a shootout between rival gangs. In November, Somali refugee, Shirwa Hassan Jibril, 75, was beaten to death after asking a group of men on a bus to quiet down. Other victims since 2016 include Birdell Beeks, 58, hit by a stray bullet as she sat in her car with her granddaughter, and Le’Vonte King Jason Jones, 2, killed in a van with his father during a drive-by shooting. Fed-up local businesses have had to pool money for their own security because they’re not being protected by police. Violence is terrorizing a city that has been under Democratic control for most of the past 50 years. Instead of focusing on keeping residents safe, progressive mayors have attempted to social engineer police with notions of diversity and “cultural competency.” The result is a demoralized, weak, understaffed police force, with tragic consequences A city with such problems needs better policing, not no police. It also deserves a serious person as mayor. It’s about time Prince Andrew is questioned by investigators about his relationship with pedophile Jeffrey Epstein. The royal family has been tarnished by the scandal hanging over the Queen’s favorite son. Epstein’s former teenage sex slave Virginia Giuffre, 36, has accused Andrew of having sex with her between 2001 and 2002. His denials have been weak, and his refusal to be questioned by New York prosecutors suggests he has something to hide. Now that the Department of Justice has officially requested that Great Britain allow Andrew to be questioned under oath, he should welcome the opportunity to clear his name. For weeks, families were forced to leave loved ones to die alone and were forbidden to attend their funerals, all in the name of public health. But we complied with the rules because we trusted public health officials who said draconian social distancing was essential to stop the spread of COVID-19 and save lives. That trust was betrayed when 1,200 of those same health “professionals” wrote an open letter condoning mass protests in flagrant defiance of the rules because “white supremacy is a public health issue.” They just look like faithless political activists, and the next time there is a public health crisis, they won’t be able to count on blind obedience from the law-abiding.

William Morris, the NYPD’s Chief of Transportation, has succumbed to the coronavirus, department Commissioner Dermot Shea announced on Sunday. Morris was 61. “It saddens me to inform you that, after nearly 39 yrs of service to the people of NYC, Chief of Transportation William T. Morris passed away on Saturday from #COVID19,” tweeted Shea. “The condolences and prayers of the entire department are with Billy & his loved ones during this difficult time.” The tweet included a video tribute to the now 45 NYPD personnel, including Morris, now lost to the pandemic, set to the strains of “Amazing Grace” on bagpipes, fading into “Taps.” Morris, a three-star chief who oversaw traffic and highway patrol, was reportedly placed on life support in April, when the pandemic peaked.

The Big Apple will enter Phase One of reopening Monday amid the coronavirus — with retail shops set to start curbside or in-store pickup service as construction and manufacturing rev up again. “It’s a big day for New York City,’’ Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday, adding that the Apple “has met all the [health] metrics,’’ including the one involving its number of new infections, which dropped to 781 cases, or around 1 percent of those tested, Saturday — the lowest rate since March 16. The city’s subways should be at 95 percent of their pre-pandemic service by Monday to help get people around, officials have said.  Masks are required and will be handed out to straphangers as needed, although ridership is expected to be no more than 15 percent of its usual level. New York City is the final region in the state to go to Phase One. In addition to retail curbside service and in-store pickups and drop-offs, construction is allowed to resume, as is manufacturing, wholesale trade and agriculture work under the state guidelines. Retail-industry groups have predicted a trickling of city businesses starting up again Monday, as they begin to maneuver the new normal of social distancing and heightened health concerns amid the deadly pandemic. New York Post Illustration William Farrington William Farrington View Slideshow Mayor Bill de Blasio said Sunday that he is still “cautious’’ about moving into Phase Two, which would allow many workers to return to their offices, restaurants and bars to offer outdoor seated service, retail shops to operate in-store business and other places such as hair salons to reopen, although at 50 percent capacity. While Phase Two could occur as soon as two weeks from Monday, or June 22, under state guidelines, Hizzoner repeated that he wasn’t ready to commit to that date, instead saying, “Think about the beginning of July as the target. “I want to keep expectations low on that,” he said of Phase Two. “We are not like other regions of the state. We were the epicenter, and we remain the epicenter,” the mayor said. “If we don’t like what we see, we are going to slow down the pace,” he said of the reopening schedule. “If we do like what we see, we might be able to go a little faster.” He added that a decision on when to restart the city’s famed outdoor street fairs has not yet been made. Meanwhile, Cuomo said Long Island will move into Phase Two on Wednesday, while the Hudson Valley gets to go to Phase Three on Tuesday, which means such things as in-restaurant dining. Phase Four allows for the reopening of places including schools, movie theaters and museums. Among the factors deciding phases are such things as infection, hospitalization and death rates.

GOP Sen. Rick Scott accused China of trying to sabotage development of a coronavirus vaccine. “We have got to get this vaccine done. Unfortunately we have evidence that communist China is trying to sabotage us or slow it down,” Scott of Florida said Sunday on the BBC’s “Andrew Marr Show.” Scott, who was previously the governor of Florida, didn’t offer evidence of the claim, but noted that he can’t share all intelligence he sees. “It came to our intelligence community. I’m on [the Senate Armed Services Committee], so clearly there’s things I can’t discuss that I get provided information [on]. But there’s evidence that they’ve been trying to either sabotage or slow it down,” Scott said. He said Beijing “won’t cheer” if the US or the United Kingdom are first to develop a vaccine. The ruling Communist Party has “decided to be an adversary to Americans and I think to democracy around the world,” he said. Scott said the vaccine is important to getting the US economy back and that if China develops it first, “they are not going to share.” President Trump has been highly critical of China’s role in the pandemic, accusing the country of not releasing accurate information in a timely manner so other countries could take precautions against the coronavirus. The virus was first recorded in Wuhan, China, in late December.

New York will allow outdoor, socially-distanced graduations of up to 150 people starting June 26, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday. “That’s when schools, high schools, start to graduate, and it gives us a couple weeks in between now and then, God forbid, if the numbers change,” Cuomo said of the starting date at his daily press briefing, in addressing the coronavirus. New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio announced in April that the Big Apple’s public high schools would be hosting “one big city-wide virtual graduation ceremony” for their seniors. He did not say when the virtual graduation would be held.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday that the state will open 15 coronavirus testing centers solely for protesters — urging marchers to “act responsibly and get a test” amid concerns that the large anti-police-brutality rallies sweeping New York City are spreading the deadly contagion. With the Big Apple finally set to begin re-opening under Phase One of state guidelines Monday amid the pandemic, officials are worried that the large local protests over George Floyd’s death at the hands of cops in Minneapolis could send New York’s coronavirus cases soaring again, the governor said. “That is the one variable in this [coronavirus] equation that we’re not sure of — the effect of these protests, and we’re concerned about it,” Cuomo said at his daily press briefing. “I would act as if you were exposed, and I would tell people you interacted with, ‘Assume I’m exposed to the virus,’ ” Cuomo said of the protesters. He said the state will be looking at the infection rate “on a daily basis” to see whether re-openings might have to be pulled back. He said it will likely take a week to see whether the rallies had any substantial effect on the spread of COVID-19. “If you were at a protest several days ago, [infection] probably wouldn’t show up [now], but when you get at seven days, you will start to see a pop in those numbers” if the protests caused the disease to spread, Cuomo said. “If you were at a protest … act responsibly, get a test,” he said. Cuomo added that as of Saturday, statistics show that “overall, numbers are good” when it comes to the state’s battle against the coronavirus. He said 781 people, or about 1 percent, tested positive for the virus in the state Saturday out of the 60,435 people were received testing that day — the lowest rate since March 16, even before the state began closing down.

As if re-opening after being shut down for months by a pandemic wasn’t difficult enough, the governor’s office has created a clunky online guide to “help” city businesses emerging from months of being shut down. But instead of clear, simple directives, the “Reopening New York City” is full of lengthy recommendations, forms to fill out and robotic language. “Ensure 6 ft. distance between personnel, unless safety or core function of the work activity requires a shorter distance,” the writing suggests, before directing business owners to 11 pages of “interim guidance” on the variety of changes now required for companies to get back to work. With the Big Apple desperate to resume some semblance of normalcy after months of being mostly shut down due to COVID-19, Monday’s “Phase One” kick off has produced anything but enthusiasm, especially among some of the city’s high-end retail stores. Just a few of the requirements stores and businesses now have to meet include installing physical barriers between personnel, ensure social distancing, keep elevators from being crowded and use video and tele-conferencing whenever possible, according to the state.

The city has awarded an emergency no-bid contract to a controversial company for up to $46 million for new COVID-19 contact-tracing technology. The Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications clinched the deal with the MTX Group, a growing start-up whose founder and CEO Dastigir “Das” Nobel boasts he wants to buy the Dallas Cowboys. DoITT commissioner Jessica Tisch said NYC Health + Hospitals started using the system Monday. Nobel lists a modest home in Slingerlands, near Albany, as his business address, but he has moved to a mansion in Frisco, Texas. MTX, which pays the well-connected law firm Greenberg Traurig for lobbying, has had some trouble in other states, including a cost overrun scandal in Kentucky. Nobel also faces allegations in federal court in New York that he failed to pay owed commissions. Dallas recently awarded a 27-month, $295 million contract to MTX, which includes contract tracing personnel. That massive deal raised eyebrows because the firm beat out tech giants like IBM, AT&T and Accenture. An MTX spokeswoman did not address the controversies. In a statement to The Post, Chief Financial Officer Christina Bailey said the company “has a demonstrated and successful track record on public sector projects around the country.” Mayor de Blasio said Wednesday that 2,500 contact tracers would be hired by Friday to call people who test positive for COVID-19, ask them to identify who they’ve had close contact with, then call those people to check for symptoms and recommend quarantines. City Hall spokesman Avery Cohen on Saturday said 3,000 contact tracers have been hired. But H+H spokespersons would not reveal how many patients have been contacted, saying the data “is not ready” for release. In addition to contact tracers, hundreds of “monitors” are supposed to check in daily with patients and those exposed. The program also includes “reservationists” to put people in 1,200 free hotel rooms the city has booked for those who have nowhere to safely quarantine. Officials would not say how many rooms are occupied. “Resource navigators” will refer clients to various services, including free meal deliveries. Tisch said MTX will be paid a $5 million fee to integrate customer-management and call-center operations by subcontractors Salesforce and Twilio. The subcontractors will be paid according to how many contact tracers use them. Tisch said the maximum $46 million would cover 15,000 personnel.

Parts of America are already baking, even though summer doesn’t officially arrive for another two weeks. So with the heat on, everybody wants to know: Can you catch the coronavirus from the swimming pool? Well, the answer is a bit murky, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. As of now, there’s no evidence that the coronavirus spreads through pool water — and you’re even safer if you swim outside because outdoor pools have a lower risk than indoor ones. And if the water is treated with chlorine, even better. “The coronavirus doesn’t survive in chlorinated water,” Amesh Adalja, an infectious disease expert in Maryland, told Health.com. Still, Adalja warned the coronavirus travels in air droplets. “There can be crowded conditions and common touch surfaces (like the deck and the locker room) that may provide an opportunity for the virus to transmit,” Adalja told the website. Many public pools want swimmers to come in their suits to cut down on locker room time. Dr. David Cutler, who practices in California, recommended that swimmers keep hand sanitizer handy. “When you’re at the pool, always wash your hands after touching any surface, such as a doorknob or shower handle, and especially before touching your face,” Cutler told Health.com.

An education minister in one of the world’s poorest countries has been sacked after a cockamamie plan to order $2 million in lollipops for schoolchildren. Rijasoa Andriamanana, Madagascar’s education minister, had ordered the lollies to help mask the “bitter” aftertaste of a herbal remedy — still untested — for coronavirus, according to the BBC. The plan was called off and he was booted after objections from Madagascar’s president, Andry Rajoelina. Rajoelina is pushing the unproven tonic, called Covid-Organics, as a coronavirus cure in the country which has 1,000 cases of the virus and seven COVID-linked deaths. Despite the Presidential approval, Madagascar’s National Medical Academy has questioned the artemisia-based tonic, arguing that it could hurt people who take it. President Rajoelina claims criticism of the drink by Western institutions are based in racism, telling French news station France 24, “If it was a European country that had actually discovered this remedy, would there be so much doubt? I don’t think so.” According to the World Bank Madagascar is among the poorest countries in the world with 75% of the population living on less than $1.90 per day.

The NYPD is eyeing a controversial “pandemic drone” that caused so much hysteria in one Connecticut community, cops had to cancel the program. Residents in Westport successfully grounded Draganfly’s sensor-equipped drone — which can detect fever, temperature, heart and respiratory rates in humans from as far as 190 feet in the air — soon after police announced plans to deploy the “Flatten the Curve” device. “Towns and the state should be wary of self-interested, privacy-invading companies using COVID-19 as a chance to market their products and create future business opportunities,” the Connecticut ACLU said in response to the proposed program. But not all feedback was negative. Soon after Westport made its plans public, the NYPD rang. “They did reach out,” said Westport Lt. Anthony Prezioso. “They spoke to our captain. They were looking for contact information from the person over there [at Draganfly].” A company spokesman said the NYPD is in “cursory talks” about the drones. The NYPD confirmed its interest in products by the Canadian-based drone maker, but claimed “there are no plans at this time to purchase this particular product. “The NYPD regularly reaches out to various police departments and law enforcement agencies to discuss and exchange information regarding best practices and the use of various forms of technology,” Sgt. Jessica McRorie said. Similar to the reaction in Westport, the NYPD’s deployment of 14 drones in 2018 sparked ire from the New York Civil Liberties Union, which said it has “serious concerns” about the department’s plans to use the aircraft for a variety of reasons.

The men stood by themselves on Omaha Beach in the early hours of Saturday, dressed in vintage battle fatigues — with 6 feet between them. They looked out across the water where hundreds of thousands of soldiers — Americans, Brits and Canadians — came ashore on June 6, 1944, to launch the battle that changed the course of World War II. The gathering to mark the anniversary of the invasion, which came to be known simply as D-Day, was extraordinarily small, a few dozen — driven down by fear of the coronavirus, The Associated Press reported. Every other year has brought out throngs to mark the liberation from Nazi oppression. Last year, on the 75th anniversary, tens of thousands from around the globe streamed onto France’s beaches of Normandy to cheer the dwindling number of D-Day veterans. Charles Shay was one of those troops who stormed Omaha Beach, a 19-year-old Army medic who found himself dodging machine gun fire and exploding shells. “I am very sad now,” Shay, now 95, told the AP. “Because of the virus, nobody can be here. I would like to see more of us here.” After the war, Shay settled down near the beaches that came to define his life. His home is why he was virtually the only American survivor who stood on the sand Saturday — his fellow veterans could not fly in because of the pandemic. In better times, the French rolled out vintage jeep and trucks — their rumble heard for miles. On Saturday, the roads were deserted around Saint-Laurent-Sur-Mer, a town near Omaha Beach. “It’s a June 6 unlike any other,” said Mayor Philippe Laillier, who staged a small remembrance at the Omaha Beach monument. “But still we had to do something. We had to mark it.” The pandemic has wreaked havoc worldwide since late last year, killing nearly 400,000 — a quarter of the deaths in the US — and devastating economies, numbers show. The elderly, like the surviving D-Day veterans, are particularly at risk of becoming infected with the coronavirus. Even the young generations who turn out every year were barred from traveling to Normandy. Ivan Thierry is a local who makes his living by catching sea bass around the wrecks that still litter the waters. Thierry attends the observance every year — and this year was no different. He was holding Old Glory in tribute. “There is not nobody here,” Thierry, 62, told the AP. “Even if we are only a dozen, we are here to commemorate.” In Washington, President Trump remembered the day with a tweet saluting those who served so valiantly. “Today, we pause to remember and honor all the brave soldiers, sailors and airmen whose selfless sacrifice catalyzed the deliverance of oppressed people and secured freedom for decades to come. May we always be true to the virtues and principles for which this D-Day generation — the Greatest Generation — paid so dearly.”

A 77-year-old Michigan barber won a legal battle with Gov. Gretchen Whitmer over her coronavirus shutdown orders — in a stinging unanimous decision of the state Supreme Court. “It is incumbent on the courts to ensure decisions are made according to the rule of law, not hysteria,” Justice David F. Viviano wrote Friday, MLive.com reported. The court’s 7-0 decision vacated a lower court’s order upholding the state’s attempt to shutter the barbershop owned and operated by Karl Manke in Owosso, Mich. Manke reopened his shop May 4 in defiance of Whitmer’s orders keeping salons closed to prevent the spread of coronavirus. “Either Jesus comes, they cut my hands off or she resigns, one or the other,” he said Wednesday. Manke has argued that he has a right to work — and kept cutting customers’ hair as the legal fight raged. He has racked up thousands of dollars in fines, and the state has rescinded his licenses. The ruling returns the case to the appeals court for a full hearing scheduled for Thursday. But the case will soon be moot: under Whitmer’s orders, barbershops will be permitted to reopen fully on June 15.

A Maine factory said they will discard COVID-19 nasal swabs made during a visit by President Trump on Friday. “The running of the factory machines is very limited today and will only occur when the president is touring the facility floor,” Company marketing manager Virginia Templet told USA Today. “Swabs produced during that time will be discarded.” It was unclear why the swabs made during the visit will have to go. During his tour of Puritan Medical Products in Guilford, Maine, Trump touted the swabs, saying it was proof positive that American could handle its own medical supply needs. “Made in the USA. I’ve been saying it for a long time,” Trump said during the visit in which he toured the factory. He did not wear a face mask, in-keeping with his usual custom.

Coronavirus-stricken Broadway star Nick Cordero has undergone stem cell treatment to help improve his lung health, his wife Amanda Kloots revealed. “We have started stem cell treatment for Nick and that just finished. We decided on this a couple of days ago,” Kloots said in her latest Instagram update on Cordero’s health. Cordero, 41, has been hospitalized since April at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in LA with COVID-19 symptoms. His leg was amputated due to complications of the virus, and he has struggled with a lingering lung infection. Kloots, a 38-year-old fitness trainer, said Thursday there are “no guarantees” the treatment works, but they hope it will “help repair, help strengthen Nick’s lungs and get him better. So finger’s crossed. That’s the news.” She also asked her followers for advice on medical treatments that could aid “the release of carbon dioxide from the lungs. “If you think you know of a doctor or trial to help ONLY THAT please reach out to me. Real medically based information from credited sources please!”

While Prince William himself has been keeping it quiet, the royal family confirmed Friday that the heir to the throne has been lending his time to a crisis text line as the world continues to cope with the effects of COVID-19. Alongside wife Kate Middleton, the prince marked Volunteers’ Week by speaking to volunteers across the UK via video chat. Posted to the Kensington Royal Instagram page, the clip’s caption reveals that William himself has also been doing his part. “The Duke has been volunteering for #Shout85258, the UK’s first 24/7 crisis text line, launched in 2019 by The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge and The Duke and Duchess of Sussex — as one of more than 2,000 Crisis Volunteers trained to support anyone, anytime, whatever their crisis may be.” “It’s National Volunteering Week and I want to say a big thank you from both of us,” Prince William said during the call. “Thank you for all the volunteering you’re doing, thank you for all the time and effort you’re putting in. It’s been hugely rewarding and important that you guys are doing that and you have been a lifeline to all the people who you’ve helped in the area.” Middleton added, “One of the things that would be amazing is if everyone in their communities was to carry on and still celebrate volunteering in a way that they have been during the pandemic. Everyone’s got something to give back.”

The World Health Organization is now advising everyone to wear face masks in public when they can’t practice social distancing — an about-face from its earlier guidance on stopping the spread of the coronavirus. WHO director-general Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced the shift Friday, citing new evidence that showed face masks worn by healthy people could be “a barrier for potentially infectious droplets,” the BBC reported. WHO had always advised that sick people and their caretakers should wear medical face masks. The new guidance advises healthy people to wear non-medical face masks. WHO officials for months have stood firm that a healthy person would get a false sense of security from wearing a mask and would use up supplies needed by medical professionals. New York already has a mandate for everyone to wear a face mask if they can’t stay at least 6 feet apart. New studies, however, show people can be highly infectious in the few days before they show symptoms or can catch the virus and never show symptoms. EPA REUTERS View Slideshow Governments should encourage the general public to wear masks where there is widespread transmission and physical distancing is difficult, such as on public transport, in shops or in other confined or crowded environments,” the director-general said. The guidance comes as transmission rates are accelerating in South America, the Middle East and Africa, CNN reported. The number of confirmed cases is climbing at a rate of more than 100,000 a day over a seven-day period, the outlet reported. The number of new cases topped 100,000 for nine of the past 10 days. In April, new cases never topped 100,000 in one day.

At the peak of the COVID-19 crisis in Manhattan, ambulance sirens wailed all day long outside the two-bedroom apartment where Stefanie Trilling lives with her husband, two children, aged 5 ½ and 2, and their dog. “It was really upsetting. Because my daughter is old enough to understand what was going on, she’d ask, ‘Do the people in the ambulance have coronavirus? Are they going to die?’ ” says Trilling. “I didn’t have the answers. The best I could do was say, ‘I don’t know, but we’re going to do the best we can to stay safe as a family, and that’s why we’re staying inside.’ So then I went to the distraction technique.” She found it in art: Specifically, in reworking children’s book covers. “One day I took out the paint,” says Trilling, who had never previously painted much. “I see one of the Elephant and Piggie books [the children’s series by Mo Willems]. I started painting the characters, and I started painting in a cartoonified coronavirus and I changed ‘Piggie’ to ‘COVID-19.’ ” She posted it on Instagram to share with her friends, who loved it and demanded that she do another cover. So she did “Pete the Cat and the Bad Corona.” Then her ideas started snowballing, one cover after another. “Green Eggs and Wash Your Hands,” “The Berenstain Bears and Too Much Time Home,” “Llama Llama Hasn’t Changed Pajamas.”  And that’s how Children’s Books for Pandemics, now a wildly popular social media phenomenon, was born. (“Multimedia parodist finding the best in a collectively bad situation,” reads Trilling’s Instagram bio.) While painting helped the time go by, the colorful covers provided Trilling with a non-threatening way to discuss the situation with her daughter. “We talked about what viruses are and why we were staying in. It gave her the context in which she could ask questions.” She hopes to sell prints and use a portion of the proceeds to help children in hard-hit neighborhoods. And as for whether this has made her see the city differently? “I see a lot of friends who are leaving, just packing up their apartments,” says Trilling. “But this is my home. This is where I’ve built my family. This is where I live, and this is where I love. It’s in a state of transition, but I know we’re going to come out on the other side, and I want to be a part of it.”

Infamous art dealer Mary Boone is a free woman, according to ArtNet’s gossip column, Wet Paint. It reports that Boone — who was sentenced in 2018 to 30 months in jail for tax evasion — has been released after serving just 13 months in prison in Danbury, Connecticut, because of the pandemic. Apparently Boone, a once almighty dealer who worked with Jean Michel Basquiat, Julian Schnabel and Roy Lichtenstein, among others, is now in a Brooklyn halfway house, awaiting final release. The outlet figured out that Boone’s on the outside again because she downloaded Citizen, an app that alerts users to police activity in their area. “The app pings you with a notification when someone in your contacts has joined,” which allowed them to see that Boone was back in possession of a smart phone. Wet Paint says it confirmed her release with the Department of Corrections. “The move appears to be a response to the threat Boone and fellow older inmates faced after several prisoners tested positive for COVID-19,” it reported.

Just when it felt like the country was completely falling apart comes great news: surprising, unprecedented job growth along with clear signs that the national pandemic has ebbed far from its peak. This doesn’t resolve the convulsions following the killing of George Floyd, but at least America is finally starting to put the previous crisis behind. Even as much of the nation has begun to reopen, economists predicted that the May jobs numbers would continue to depress. Many predicted US unemployment to reach Depression-era levels of around 20 percent. Instead, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported May’s unemployment rate was 13.3 percent, dropping from 14.7 percent in April (the highest since the Second World War). The 2.5 million jobs added last month made for the biggest jump in US history. That’s quite the rebound after the quickest drop ever, thanks to the three-month lockdown that, out of the blue, put tens of millions out of work. Plus, these are last month’s numbers: June, when even hard-hit New York City will start to reopen, should be better still. All of which raises real hope the entire national recovery will be a rapid bounce-back — instead of a slow, years-long plod to reach the heights America knew in February. More grounds for hope: All indications are that the virus is losing. The city says there were zero coronavirus deaths one day this week, the first time since March 11. At its peak, COVID-19 was killing 500 residents a day. Statewide, deaths have been dropping since early April, and total hospitalizations are also plummeting. The national infection numbers are trending down, too. The country’s still recording around 20,000 new cases a day — but that’s largely because testing has finally scaled up to where it needs to be. Most important: The percentage of tests coming back positive is falling — even in states like Florida that led the way in reopening. Anthony Fauci, the White House infectious disease expert, is now optimistic, too, announcing that it’s “a bit of a reach” to say schools need to be shuttered through fall. Masks and social distancing won’t go away soon; attending indoor concerts and the like is still far off. But hotels, entertainment and even the airlines — some of the hardest-hit industries — are all coming back. Americans are putting the pieces of their economy and their society back together. What a relief.

Fox and The CW have proactively shaken up their fall schedules — compromised by the industry-wide shutdown in place since mid-March. Both networks have been importing series that weren’t originally on their fall slates to fill the gaps until their regularly scheduled programming can return. (The CW has pushed the official launch of its “fall” season to early 2021.) Fox has snatched up “LA’s Finest,” which previously aired to a more limited audience on Spectrum in 2019. A spinoff of the “Bad Boys” movie franchise, the crime drama (currently two seasons) stars Gabrielle Union and Jessica Alba as LA-based cops. “It has a diverse cast, two great stars … and we felt like it checked a lot of boxes of a show that could be connect with our viewers,” Dan Harrison, Fox’s executive vice president of program planning and content strategy, tells The Post. “So that was a conversation we engaged in early, recognizing the pandemic was not going to be a one-week or two-month situation and would impact life for some time and therefore production for some time. We thought we ought to be smart and aggressive about filling those [scheduling] holes.” In addition to “LA’s Finest,” Fox has tweaked its schedule in other ways. It will air repeats from Season 3 of National Geographic’s “Cosmos: Possible Worlds,” hosted by Neal deGrasse Tyson, and has moved new entries “Filthy Rich” and “NeXt” from their spring/summer rollouts to the fall. “Filthy Rich” stars Kim Cattrall (“Sex and the City”) and Gerald McRaney (“House of Cards”). It’s based on a New Zealand format and follows a wealthy Southern family who made their fortune through a Christian TV network. After the network’s founder is killed in a plane crash, complications arise when three unknown family members emerge from the woodwork. “NeXt,” starring John Slattery (“Mad Men”) is a sci-fi thriller akin to “Mr. Robot” and “Westworld” that follows a Homeland Security team trying to fight and track a rogue AI (artificial intelligence) entity. “Both of those shows we had scheduled to premiere in the late spring and play into the summer,” says Harrison. “We made the strategic decision early on in the pandemic to pivot, and we had the luxury of being able to be nimble there.” With the bulk of The CW’s new shows now premiering next year, “Supernatural” — in its 15th season — won’t end anytime soon. Its finale, which was originally slated to air this spring, has been pushed to an unannounced date. The network has added the eerie anthology series “Tell Me a Story” — which streamed on CBS All Access from 2018-2020 — to its fall schedule, along with “Swamp Thing,” which was canceled by DC Universe after one troubled season. The CW is also importing the British series “Devils,” starring Patrick Demsey (“Grey’s Anatomy”) as a ruthless London bank CEO who ends up in an international battle of wits and financial intrigue when his protege (Alessandro Borghi) is accused of murder. “We’re having discussions on how to responsibly resume production as quickly and as reasonably and safely as possible,” says Fox’s Harrison. “Speed is not the key factor, it’s about doing this in the right way. “We want to be sensitive to everything that is going on.”

At City Journal, Rafael A. Mangual sees irony in gripes that attention paid to “the relative handful” of violent agitators distorts the image of an otherwise peaceful movement — even as the violence by cops that sparked the protests similarly doesn’t fairly “characterize” law enforcement. Police are “not perfect,” he admits, but to bridge the gap between protesters and cops, “destructive hyperbole” about police violence “needs to be recognized for what it is.” Data on police use of force “predominantly reveal professionalism and restraint,” suggesting, for instance, that in 2018, police in America “applied deadly force with a firearm in just 0.003 percent of arrests.” To prevent more “destruction and anarchy,” the debate needs to be grounded in “data rather than hyperbole.” While President Trump rails against mail-in voting, many Republican election officials are “expanding it anyway” — as well they should, argues RealClearPolitics’ A.B. Stoddard. For one thing, Trump’s claim that “vote-by-mail is rife with fraud” is false: The conservative Heritage Foundation found “only 204 cases of the fraudulent use of absentee ballots” out of the “250 million ballots cast in the last 20 years.” And mail-in voting can benefit Republicans in places like Florida, whose many senior citizens are “a critical bloc of Trump’s support” and the most susceptible age group to COVID-19. Even though many Republicans back the change, though, “any effort to scale up mail-in voting will be difficult” — especially without pressure from Trump and the Republican National Committee. Reason’s Matt Welch rolls his eyes at the The New York Times, supposedly “the serious journalistic institution in the United States,” which published an article claiming “its own employees were scared” that a Times op-ed by Sen. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.) would “threaten their very lives.” Such a claim just shows how many in the media “are noisily abandoning liberalism”: Even outlets that “once waved the flag of provocative viewpoint-diversity” have “long since become barely distinguishable enforcers of a joyless orthodoxy.” If an editor dares to commit “the sin of expressing a Wrongthink or publishing a Deplorable,” he or she now has to make a “full public confession or a cowed explanation.” If that “cramped cowardice is the future of journalism,” warns Welch, “journalism has no future.” Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms has been “telling protesters things they don’t want to hear,” applauds National Review’s Jim Geraghty: They’re “risking their lives by gathering in large numbers” during the pandemic, and their “violence and looting” are tainting the “cause they claim to stand for.” Many elected leaders who “keep insisting they stand with the protesters and support them” are “playing along with the fantasy” that the protests are “somehow less dangerous” than other gatherings, even when we have direct evidence to the contrary. Geraghty wonders: Do our leaders really “love” the protesters, as they claim? If you love someone, after all, you do as Bottoms is doing: “Tell him the truth” — especially when “he doesn’t want to hear it.” “Mars is within reach,” cheers Kevin Mooney at the Washington Examiner, and it’s “thanks in no small part to the public-private partnership between NASA and SpaceX.” The successful launch of the SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule and docking at the International Space Station mark a “turning point.” As aerospace engineer Robert Zubrin, who founded the Mars Society, explains in his book “The Case for Space,” breakthroughs in rocketry are opening “new avenues for the commercialization of space” and manned missions leading to the colonization of the Red Planet. Zubrin believes “we can establish our first small outpost on Mars within a decade.” That’s “optimistic,” concedes Mooney. But over the past days, the “case for space” has “suddenly become more compelling, exciting and believable” than since the Apollo program — which was “a while ago.” — Compiled by Karl Salzmann & Adam Brodsky

LONDON – The GAVI vaccines alliance said on Thursday it had raised $8.8 billion from international donor governments, companies and philanthropic foundations to fund its immunization programs through to 2025. At a funding summit in London, GAVI said the pledges had exceeded its target of $7.4 billion, and would “help immunize 300 million more children in the world’s poorest countries against diseases like measles, polio and diphtheria”. The vaccines alliance also said it had raised $567 million towards an initial goal of $2 billion from international donors for an Advanced Market Commitment to buy future COVID-19 vaccines for poor countries. The deal would help secure enough COVID-19 vaccine doses – when the shots have been developed – for poor countries to immunise healthcare workers and those at high risk, it said, as well as creating a “buffer of doses” for use when needed. GAVI, the World Health Organization and the United Nations children’s fund UNICEF have warned that 80 million children under the age of one are at risk of disease due to disruptions to vital immunization programs because of the COVID-19 pandemic caused by the new coronavirus.  Britain, which hosted the summit, was among the largest donor to GAVI’s core $8.8 billion funding, pledging the equivalent of $416 million per year over the next five years, GAVI said. British Prime Minister Boris Johnson said GAVI could count on the UK’s full contribution to help “the triumph of humanity over disease, now and for the generations that follow”. Other top donors included the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which gave $1.6 billion for the period up to 2025, and the governments of Norway, Germany and the United States. “To beat the COVID-19 pandemic, the world needs more than breakthrough science. It needs breakthrough generosity. And that’s what we’re seeing today as leaders across the public and private sectors are stepping up to support GAVI,” Bill Gates, co-chair of the philanthropic Gates Foundation, told the summit. He added that when COVID-19 vaccines are ready, the AMC funding would ensure people all over the world can access them. GAVI said eight of the government donors were countries making their first ever pledge to the vaccines alliance: These were Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Finland, Greece, New Zealand, Portugal and Uganda. GAVI is a public-private partnership backed by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the WHO, the World Bank, UNICEF and others, which arranges bulk buys to reduce vaccine costs for poor countries.

At the beginning of the pandemic, Mykaela Browne took her last bit of cash and splurged on some roller skates. “I’d go to roller rinks as a kid, but I never had my own pair,” says the 20-year-old Crown Heights resident. “I had $100 in my account, and thought, ‘You know what? Why not?'” The Rite Aid employee was inspired by Ana Coto, a 29-year old actress from Southern California who has gone viral on TikTok for infectiously fun videos of herself skating (often backward) while basking in sunshine. “She just made me want to do it,” says Browne. “Quarantine started, and I was looking for a new hobby, because we can’t go anywhere or do anything.”  What? Like it’s hard?  ♬ nursery – bbno$    Along empty streets, inside vacant parking lots and even through the ghost town that is Times Square, roller skaters rule again. Google search interest for the retro footwear started picking up in March and rocketed to a five-year high in early May — about the time lockdown doldrums also started peaking. A pastime that dates to the Great Depression and was revived again in the disco-loving ’70s, roller-skating means gliding with each foot balanced atop two sets of wheels, like a car. That’s in contrast to inline skates, or blades, whose wheels are set in a straight line. Coto tells The Post that she’s been trying to get friends to take up roller-skating for years. When COVID-19 hit, they finally listened. “Lots of those people are coming out of the woodwork like, ‘OK, you convinced me,’ ” says Coto, a former dancer who now lives in Los Angeles. “You can do it alone and have fun, and it’s exercise.” It’s no coincidence roller-skating, blading and skateboarding — all solo sports that also double as transportation alternatives — have taken off during the coronavirus pandemic. Biking has seen a similar renaissance, with long lines spilling out of shops in New York City. Akin to the run on bikes, snatched up by city dwellers eager to get outside safely, throwback “quad” skates are in high demand. One TikTok video shows a teen taping her sneakers to a skateboard and attempting to groove like Coto, with a caption that laments “roller skates sold out everywhere, so we had to improvise.” Browne originally opted for a pair of $94.95 skates from 2-year-old Australian brand Impala, but recently upgraded to wheels from Moxi, a company Coto and other pros love. Moxi’s site, along with that of other roller-skate retailers Riedell Skates, Planet Roller Skate and Roller Skate Nation, were among the e-commerce websites that experienced the most traffic growth in May. The Big Apple’s veteran hobbyists are happy to share the asphalt with newcomers. Longtime practitioner Lola Starr says lately she’s seen “a big comeback” in the “quad skating” that she’s been doing since she was 11. “The retro quality, and the fashion sense of it, attracts a younger generation discovering skating for the first time,” says Starr, a Ditmas Park resident who runs Dreamland Roller Disco, which hosts themed skating parties at the rink in Prospect Park. “The popularity has increased tremendously. So many people have been asking me where to get skates because they want to skate outside. It’s exercise, but it’s also therapeutic and healing.” A new generation is discovering a lively leisure sport elders have long waxed nostalgic for. “Your grandparents, parents, they all have history with [skating],” Coto tells The Post. “Lots of young people are seeing that it’s a connective thing now . . . Especially in quarantine, everyone’s feeling a little more aware of how important human connection is.” A pro tip from Starr: Invest in the proper wheels. Popular Brooklyn shop Five Stride is reopening Tuesday and taking orders for curbside pickup. “Skates with hard wheels that are marketed for both indoor and outdoor skating will make your ride bumpy,” Starr says. “Soft outdoor wheels will make skating much more fun.” If you can get your hands on a pair of skates, there are plenty of open roads to practice on, even though indoor rinks are off-limits for now. Browne, for instance has kept close to her neighborhood, practicing in her apartment building’s basement garage, her hallway and in a nearby park. “Skating is really calming,” says Browne, adding that the quieter-than-normal streets allow her to take in the cityscape sans pedestrians, traffic and general hubbub. Posting mood-boosting videos of her new tricks — on her new Instagram account, @urskatebae, to chart her progress — help “lift her spirits.” “I’m mainly focusing on jam-skating, which combines skating and dancing,” says Browne. “I like to focus on transition and footwork tricks, and when you add it all together it looks like a dance, and you can add in your own flavor.” Browne adds that she also laced up in the hopes of losing some weight, and says constant rolling “stretches out my limbs.” However, the newbie balks about commuting to work at the Rite Aid by roller skate until she has honed her skills a bit more. Says Browne, “It’s uphill, and I don’t want to hurt myself.”

The NYPD has lost its sixth detective to the coronavirus pandemic, The Post has learned. Christopher McDonnell, a 54-year-old first-grade detective in the Intelligence Division, was confirmed Friday as the 44th member of the department, and the sixth detective, to succumb to COVID-19, according to the president of the Detectives’ Endowment Association. McDonnell left behind a wife and 14-year-old son Trevor — both of whom his friend and former partner said the detective adored. “Not only [was he] one of the finest detectives I’ve ever worked with, but one of the kindest human beings I’ve ever met,” Detective Jeffery Ward told The Post. McDonnell joined the NYPD in 1991 and worked in Staten Island, lower Manhattan and the Narcotic Division, according to the union. Ward, who worked with McDonnell in the late 1990s through the early 2000s, said McDonnell “definitely earned the distinction of a first-grade detective. “We call ourselves the greatest detaches in the world, and Christopher truly exemplified that,” he said. The detective died May 6, but his positive-test result for the virus didn’t come back till  Friday. DEA President Paul DiGiacomo described McDonnell as a “constant professional” and the union will help his family as if he died on the job. “This COVID virus is the invisible bullet, and we will treat [it] no different than if he was shot in the line of duty,” DiGiacomo said. Seven uniformed members of the force, as well as 37 civilian employees of the department, have died from COVID-19, according to the NYPD.

Fans may still get a chance to let the Astros have it this season for the 2017 sign-stealing scandal. They just may have to go to Texas to do it. According to a report in the Dallas Morning News on Thursday, Major League Baseball is “inclined to allow local and municipal governance to take precedence when it comes to allowing fan attendance at games.” Since Texas Gov. Greg Abbott said Wednesday Texas-based teams could permit attendance up to 50 percent of a stadium’s capacity, the two teams in the state — the Rangers and Astros — would be able to play in front of half-filled stands. The Rangers are set to move into their new stadium, Globe Life Field, but the more interesting scene would undoubtedly be Minute Maid Park in Houston, where the Astros have yet to play since MLB’s investigation found the team took part in a sign-stealing scheme on their way to the 2017 World Series title. The investigation led to the firings of Houston manager AJ Hinch and general manager Jeff Luhnow. Alex Cora was also let go from his job as manager of the Red Sox, while Carlos Beltran never even got to step in the dugout as Mets manager after being singled out in MLB’s report. Of course, for either team to play in front of fans at all in 2020, MLB and the players association have to reach an agreement on a shortened season and so far have been unable to do so. In a statement released by the Rangers following the governor’s announcement on Wednesday, the team said is “in the process of operational planning for if and when we have a spring training and regular season games at Globe Life Field. The health and safety of our players, staff, and fans are a top priority and we will await further information and guidance from Major League Baseball and the appropriate health authorities in the coming days and weeks.”

STOCKHOLM – Scientists in Sweden are hoping an alpaca named Tyson can help deliver a knockout blow in the fight to develop a treatment or vaccine against the novel coronavirus that has killed nearly 400,000 people worldwide. After immunizing Tyson, a 12 year-old alpaca in Germany, with virus proteins, the team at the Karolinska Institute have isolated tiny antibodies – known as nanobodies – from his blood that bind to the same part of the virus as human antibodies and could block the infection. They hope this can form the basis of a treatment for COVID 19 or eventually a vaccine against it, though the work is at an early stage. “We know that it is the antibodies that are directed to the same very, very precise part of the virus that are important and that is what we have engineered with this antibody from Tyson,” Gerald McInerney, head of the team at Karolinska said. “In principle, all the evidence would suggest it will work very well in humans, but it is a very complex system.” Llamas and other members of camel family – as well as sharks – are known to produce nanobodies, which are far smaller than the full-size antibodies produced by humans, and therefore potentially easier for scientists to work with. A vaccine may still be some way off. “We will now move forward to going into in-vivo studies, maybe with mice or hamsters or other animals that can be used as a model for COVID 19 disease, but the next step after that we really can’t say,” McInerney said. As for Tyson, he has done his job. “Tyson is 12 years old, I believe, and he may be looking at retirement soon,” McInerney said. “So he’ll live out his life on his farm back in Germany.”

Returning safely back to work after lockdown will be a challenge for Sarah Stephenson-Hunter, who started losing her sight aged seven, and is now completely blind after more than 50 eye operations. The half-marathon runner says friends received verbal abuse for not social distancing, despite their white cane or guide dog. This is her story. I have lived with a visual impairment all of my life and lost all my remaining vision in 2011. Being visually impaired had a major impact on my childhood, including disrupting my education and making it more difficult to do the things after school that my sighted friends would. The pandemic has highlighted to me just how little awareness there is in society of what it is really like to live with a visual impairment and I’m more committed than ever to try to change this. I find the daily task of traveling to and from work stressful and often emotionally exhausting. But over the years I have successfully used public transport to commute between Nottingham and Birmingham, and more recently around Oxford. I can tell you that getting around Oxford as a totally blind person using a white cane is no mean feat. It may well be a beautiful historic city but it is a nightmare to get around with its often-narrow cobbled streets, randomly abandoned bicycles and swarms of tourists. More often than not I would arrive at work feeling emotionally drained, and in need of a lie down. Life under lockdown has been tough for everyone, but I think the specific needs of blind and partially-sighted people have been ignored. Working from home for the past few months has most certainly had its upside, and I’m in no hurry to return to the old “normal.” The switch to permanent working from home was therefore quite an easy one. I have a laptop fitted with a screen reader, which lets me access all of the things I need to do, and aside from having had my ergonomic chair and keyboard at home, I have not really needed any other specific equipment or adaptations. The switch to video meetings has also proved relatively straightforward. Platforms such as Microsoft Teams and Zoom have good levels of accessibility, so I’ve been able to use these in much the same way as my sighted colleagues. Although I do have to check on occasions that I’m looking into the camera and not facing the opposite wall! I have very mixed feelings about returning to the workplace. I have been shielding since the start of the outbreak, with other health conditions, so I have missed face-to-face contact altogether. But as much as I miss impromptu chats with colleagues in the kitchen, the thought of using public transport to return to the office doesn’t fill me with desire to change my current work situation anytime soon. I have already heard from many of my visually impaired friends that they have found getting out and about during the lockdown incredibly difficult. It is great that some of the restrictions are being lifted but I still have serious concerns around how I’ll be able to get out and about. It has been particularly hard knowing that others have been able to go out and exercise when I’ve not been able to, especially as I’m a keen runner and can’t see myself running outdoors with a guide for a long time yet. Even with some vision, sticking to social-distancing rules is incredibly difficult. As many of the tools used to keep us apart are visual cues such as markings on the floor, many colleagues don’t go out at all or find themselves incredibly stressed, and are sometimes humiliated on a simple trip out for daily fresh air. Where members of the public were once so happy to help and take you by the arm and guide you, they are understandably much less willing to do so in the current context. Some friends have even reported getting verbal abuse from people for not keeping their distance, even when they have a white cane or guide dog. If I do manage to make it safely to work, the thought of trying to adhere to possible one-way systems on staircases, not coming too close to other people, waiting to use the shared kitchen, and so on, all seems like a layer of stress and anxiety that I don’t want to have to deal with anytime soon. So, it is with a great deal of relief and acknowledgment of my privileged position that the signal I’m getting from my employer is that there is absolutely no sense that I will be forced to return to the office anytime soon. When the time does come, I will only return when I feel it is safe and realistically doable, given my specific situation. This pandemic has shown the benefits of working from home, and I will be interested to see the long-term impact on employers’ attitudes to working from home as a reasonable adjustment for people with disabilities. It may not be right for everyone, but I could certainly see myself adopting working from home as a more regular practice going forward. I hope that, going forward, people are more willing to try to put themselves in the shoes of others and not take for granted the freedoms and opportunities they have even in a lockdown.

Sarah Stephenson-Hunter advises disabled staff at the University of Oxford in the U.K. This essay is part of a MarketWatch series: ‘Dispatches from a pandemic.’

The outbreak of the coronavirus has dealt a shock to the global economy with unprecedented speed. Following are developments Friday related to the national and global response, the workplace and the spread of the virus.
  JOB CONCERNS: Bombardier said most of the cuts will impact its manufacturing operations in Canada and will occur throughout the year. It has almost 60,000 total employees. The company anticipates an approximately $40 million charge related to the job cuts. The company, which is part of Germany’s Volkswagen Group, said it is looking to make the initial job cuts under a voluntary scheme but that future job cuts may be on a compulsory basis. Bentley said it has informed its 4,200 workers of a program to significantly reduce the size of the business. TRAVEL: Willie Walsh, the chief executive of International Airlines Group, which runs the British flag carrier, told Sky News he is reviewing the situation with lawyers. He said the “irrational” quarantine rules would “torpedo” the airline’s chances of flying in July. Slovak Prime Minister Igor Matovic says the move becomes effective on Friday. It also enables citizens of Austria and Hungary to travel to Slovakia without any restrictions. On Thursday, Slovakia reopened for travelers its common border with another neighbor, the Czech Republic. CENTRAL GOVERNMENTS & BANKS: The state continued to loosen its virus-related restrictions Friday. The changes allow retailers, restaurants, salons and churches to serve more customers at a time and let other shuttered businesses reopen with limitations. The easing of restrictions won’t take effect in New Orleans. Officials in the state’s original virus hot spot want more time to determine when they’ll allow a wider reopening of businesses. Labor Minister Jana Malacova says unemployment reached 3.6% in May, 0.2% more than the previous month. A total of 266,144 Czechs were unemployed in May, 12,104 more than in April. Analysts have predicted that the unemployment level might reach up to 10% later in the year. MARKETS: Stocks are rushing higher Friday after a much better-than-expected report on the US job market gave Wall Street’s recent rally another shot of adrenaline.

President Trump is expected to sign an executive order that will bypass environmental reviews to spur economic growth after the coronavirus pandemic through infrastructure projects. By declaring an economic emergency, the president will issue the order to expedite construction project permits of highways, mines, pipelines and other projects, The Associated Press reported. The order would direct federal agencies to seek workarounds from environmental laws, such as the National Environmental Policy Act and the Endangered Species Act, the report said. It would also expedite civil works projects run by the Army Corps of Engineers and instruct the departments of Interior, Agriculture and Defense to use emergency and other authorities to accelerate projects on federal lands. “Unnecessary delays in timely agency actions will deny our citizens opportunities for jobs and economic security and will hinder our economic recovery from the national emergency, keeping millions of Americans out of work,” the order states, according to a draft obtained by The Associated Press. Democrats denounced the order before it was even signed. “The President’s Executive Order waiving critical environmental protections is a direct threat to the environment and to countless vulnerable communities who are disproportionately impacted by the climate crisis,” said House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. “Without these important safeguards, American taxpayers could spend billions of dollars on projects that destroy endangered ecosystems, are unable to withstand the effects of climate change and threaten the safety of American families.” Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer said Trump’s order made clear his “total disregard for those speaking out and fighting for racial justice and a sustainable environment.” “Environmental reviews are critical to the protection of public health and one of the last lines of defense to give communities of color, indigenous people and the poor a voice in major infrastructure projects that happen in their backyards,” Schumer said. In May the president signed an executive order aimed at making hundreds of deregulations in the age of coronavirus permanent. Fox News was told the executive order tells regulatory agencies to look at more than 600 regulatory actions — mostly deregulations, but also regulations and guidance — taken during the coronavirus pandemic and tell the White House which ones should be made permanent. “We had cases where it would take 20 years to build a highway, you had to go through various agencies to get the same permit,” the president said while signing.

“Jeopardy!” will soon be in all-encore mode. TVLine has learned that the iconic Alex Trebek-hosted game show — which halted production roughly three months ago due to the coronavirus pandemic — will air its last original episode on Friday, June 12. Reruns begin airing on Monday, June 15, and will continue until the show deems it safe to resume production. The syndicated phenom was able to delay running out of new episodes by rebroadcasting the primetime “Greatest of All Time” tournament during the first two weeks of May (bookended by reruns of champ Ken Jennings’ first and last episodes from his legendary 74-game winning streak). “Jeopardy!”‘s two-week “Teachers Tournament,” production of which was completed just prior to the shutdown, concludes tonight. A decision on when to restart production on “Jeopardy!” is further complicated by Trebek’s immunocompromised condition; the multi-Emmy winner is battling Stage 4 pancreatic cancer. In January, Trebek told reporters at the Television Critics Association winter press tour that he has no plans to sign off the long-running quiz show “in the near future.” Two months later, he announced that he had beaten the one-year survival rate for the disease. “The one-year survival rate for Stage 4 pancreatic cancer patients is 18 percent,” he said. “I’m very happy to report that I have just reached that marker.” Meanwhile, fellow Sony-produced game show “Wheel of Fortune” — which airs immediately following “Jeopardy!” in many US markets — will continue to mix new episodes with reruns throughout the summer, according to a studio insider.

BOGOTA, Colombia — Television. Sewing machine. Motorcycle. These are the things Edda Marchan’s children sold to keep their mother breathing. In the far stretch of northern Peru where the family lives, medicinal oxygen to treat the coronavirus has become a scarce commodity. Eventually, they could not find any. “It’s the greatest desperation in the world,” said her daughter, 39-year-old Fiorella Sorroza. “We are praying to God not to abandon us.” In the South American nation wracked by COVID-19, one of the world’s most abundant elements is now in short supply. Exasperated relatives are racing to fill overpriced tanks. Long neglected hospitals are running empty. And President Martín Vizcarra has issued an emergency decree ordering industrial plants to ramp up production or purchase oxygen from other countries. “Peru, with the Amazon, has the lungs of the planet,” said Iván Hidalgo, academic director of the Institute of Government and Public Management in Peru’s capital of Lima. “And we’re dying because of lack of oxygen.” Regional health directors say the shortage has already cost lives and is so severe that even by turning industrial plants that typically produce oxygen for mining into medicinal production, Peru will fall short of what it needs. Defense Minister Walter Martos said Thursday the country needs 173 tons of oxygen per day. The dean of the Medical College of Peru estimates the nation is producing about 20% of that. The problem is a consequence of decades of underinvestment in hospitals, corruption and poor management, several medical leaders said. The hospital in Tumbes, near the border with Ecuador, where Marchan’s family resides, has a plant that has been inoperative for years because someone stole an electronic card needed to operate it. Officials are hoping to get it back up Saturday. In the meantime, Tumbes health workers have imported oxygen from Ecuador and trucked in tanks from the nearest Peruvian plant, five hours away. The biggest public hospital usually utilizes 30 tanks a week but now needs about 200. Many also blame Peru’s governments for failing to prepare earlier. “This exposes failings throughout the country,” said Dr. Harold Burgos, regional health director for Tumbes. “It was coming and no one took it seriously.” Other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are facing – or soon likely to encounter – oxygen shortages. In Colombia’s Amazon, doctors have had to airlift patients to Bogota because the only oxygen plant in the region is barely functioning. Haiti is heavily reliant on one oxygen plant for a population of over 11 million. About 15% of all COVID-19 patients experience severe illness that requires oxygen therapy, while another 5% need ventilation, according to the World Health Organization. By the time many patients are critical enough to seek hospital attention, they often have low blood oxygen levels that require immediate attention. That was the case for Armando Ancajima’s uncle, who was taken Sunday to a hospital in Talara, an oil producing city near Peru’s northern coast. Struggling to breathe, his nails purple, he had just 35% oxygen saturation on arrival. The family was told the hospital had no oxygen, suggesting that they rapidly find a way to buy it themselves. Ancajima said he saw 10 people die during the night he spent with his uncle. “This is the inheritance of 30 years of inattention,” he said. Peru was one of the earliest nations in Latin America to institute a strict lockdown, but that failed to stop infections from skyrocketing. With nearly 185,000 cases, the country has the second-highest number in the region. Peru’s large informal sector — about 70% of the economy — means many have to break quarantines to earn money and buy food. But the oxygen shortages are also symptomatic of the overall difficulties Latin America encountered in ramping up medical supplies during the pandemic. By the time the first cases were diagnosed in late February and early March, global supplies were drying up. Unable to buy from the U.S. or Europe, many turned to China for ventilators, which have been slow to arrive. “The opportunity to buy goods had already passed when the first cases were diagnosed,” said Dr. Ciro Ugarte, director of the Pan American Health Organization’s health emergencies department. Aid groups have tried to fill some of the gaps. The U.K.-based Hope Health Action will soon opena COVID-19 ward with 10 oxygen concentrators in the port city of Cap-Haitien in Haiti. The concentrators produce medicinal oxygen using electricity and ambient air. Nonetheless, they have limitations. The machines typically supply up to 10 liters per minute and severe COVID-19 cases can require more, said Rob Dalton, an emergency nurse with the organization. Each concentrator can serve just one patient. “We need even more,” Dalton said. “We need as many as we can get.” In Peru, Vizcarra on Thursday announced nearly $25 million to purchase oxygen and $3.2 million to develop plants and generators. “If we can meet the demand nationally, we will,” he said. “If plants and generators cannot be secured that way, we’ll go wherever necessary.” Perhaps the most severe shortages have been in Peru’s Amazon, where doctors in Iquitos were tending to 500 patients in a hospital meant for 225. With no oxygen plant, health workers were depending on outside shipments until recently. The government promised 60 tanks a day by air, though only 24 were arriving. With the help of the church and local communities, two plants have since been purchased and overall need and shortages have gone down. But the oxygen scarcity is increasingly being felt outside the Amazon as well. In recent days, lines of people waiting to fill oxygen tanks for loved ones with COVID-19 have been seen even in better-equipped Lima. And in northern Peru, where Marchan’s family lives, many say price gougers are taking advantage. The family was spending about $150 a day on oxygen until recently, hoping to avoid taking her to the hospital, which doctors warned was on the verge of collapse. But as she grew worse and no oxygen could be found, they decided to seek help. A day after admitting her to the hospital, Sorroza said a doctor called, saying they didn’t have oxygen and asking the family to bring some. Later that night, she said, one doctor called a cousin offering to sell them a tank for around $120. Three days later, she was dead. The family was alerted at 6 a.m. on a Saturday that she’d passed and was told she’d be buried four hours later at a newly created cemetery. They rushed to say a hasty goodbye, enlisting a carpenter cousin to construct a simple white cross out of wood. “I didn’t get to see her,” Sorroza said. “Nothing.”

The coronavirus crisis has Americans yearning for long weekends. Four of every five US workers favor switching to a four-day workweek as the pandemic forces them to renegotiate their relationships with their jobs, a new poll shows. Some 82 percent of employed Americans say they would be somewhat or very willing to work more hours over four days instead of working fewer over five, according to The Harris Poll’s survey conducted last weekend. And 71 percent of those workers think the switch would make them more productive. “Americans are sort of rethinking everything” amid the coronavirus crisis, Harris Poll CEO John Gerzema told The Post. “They’re rethinking their relationships with their neighbors, they’re rethinking health care … In this time of a rethink, maybe a three-day weekend sounds pretty good.” The data suggest support for a compressed workweek has grown from May 2019, when 63 percent of workers said they would prefer working four 10-hour days instead of five shorter ones, according to a Marketplace-Edison Research poll. Former presidential candidate and entrepreneur Andrew Yang recently urged the US to “seriously consider” a four-day workweek because it would benefit the economy and public health. New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern made a similar call last month, saying it could help revitalize the country’s economy and boost domestic tourism. The shift comes as companies move their employees to at-home work to prevent the coronavirus from spreading. That has come with its own set of challenges for US workers, Gerzema said — more than half of those working at home say they’re working more now than when they were in the office. Support for a four-day week likely reflects workers’ desire to set some boundaries in the work-from-home era while grappling with their continued worries about the virus, according to Gerzema. Only 48 percent of Americans say they’ll return to the office within a month once the government indicates it’s safe, while 39 percent of urban residents say the virus crisis has made them consider moving to a less dense place, recent Harris surveys have found. “It’s a real fact that we see in our data — people become good at working from home, they understand it,” Gerzema told The Post. “Could this whole thing really be a negotiation for a new lifestyle change that might also provide a little more economic shelter?” The Harris Poll survey was conducted online from May 29 to 31 with a sample of 1,965 US adults, 1,076 of whom said they were employed.

A Florida man is accused of pointing a gun at a nurse and security guard last Friday after he was denied entry into a hospital to see his wife due to COVID-19 visitor restrictions, according to a report. Eric Reitz, 57, was arrested that afternoon and remains in custody. He originally got in an altercation with the guard due to the visitation policy at Santa Rosa Medical Center in Milton — where his spouse was a patient, according to the Pensacola News Journal. When asked to leave twice by the guard, Reitz repeated “you will see,” before he returned from his vehicle with a shotgun, the arrest report stated. A nurse, who was standing next to the guard, told police he “racked” the weapon as if he was loading it and pointed it at them, the paper reported. Around that time, a security guard told a nearby patient to get behind cover. After hearing police sirens in the distance, Reitz allegedly put the firearm back in his truck. Police said they found a 12-gauge shotgun and a .22 caliber rifle in Reitz’s vehicle, according to the Pensacola News Journal. The arrest report said a bullet was in the chamber of the rifle, but the shotgun wasn’t loaded. Reitz was charged with aggravated assault and booked into the Santa Rosa County Jail at 3:27 pm, according to jail records. His bond was set at $20,000. It’s unclear if he has an attorney.

BANGKOK/DHAKA – Rohingya refugees in Bangladesh with symptoms of the novel coronavirus are not coming forward to get tested because they fear being separated from their families and held in isolation, community leaders and aid workers say. Only one death from the coronavirus has been recorded in the crowded camps in southeast Bangladesh, where some 730,000 Muslim Rohingya fled in 2017 to escape a military crackdown in Buddhist-majority Myanmar. But aid workers fear the coronavirus may be spreading faster through the world’s largest refugee settlement than the 29 cases confirmed since mid-May would indicate. Only 339 tests have been carried out in the camps, officials said, partly because people were simply not going to health facilities to get checked. “Camp hospitals are empty and illegal doctors’ shops are full,” said 23-year-old refugee Mujef Khan, a community organizer, referring to pharmacies in the camps run by refugees where people buy pills to treat themselves. “Many people are getting sick day by day – in every shelter,” he said. Three Rohingya leaders interviewed by Reuters said coronavirus symptoms were prevalent in the camps that sprawl out over hills near the border with Myanmar. The camps are more densely populated than the most crowded cities and sanitation is poor and social distancing impossible. While new testing facilities and treatment centers are being built, a surge in cases could overwhelm the camps, aid workers said. “How long?” Like the majority of refugees, Khan fled from Myanmar in 2017 after his home in Rakhine State was burned to the ground during a military crackdown that the United Nations has said was executed with genocidal intent. Myanmar denies genocide, saying its forces were responding to a legitimate security threat from Rohingya militants who attacked security posts. While some refugees put the increase in illness in the camps – fever, dry cough, colds – down to the onset of the rainy season, many suspect it is the coronavirus. “They don’t want to get tested,” said refugee Nurul Amin. “We’re very scared. By the grace of Allah, we’re fine so far but how long can we hold out?” Two research teams said they had found evidence to show refugees with coronavirus symptoms were reluctant to go to doctors. Yale University researchers spoke to hundreds of refugees in April and found about a quarter reported at least one symptom of the coronavirus, while symptoms were twice as common in the camps compared with the surrounding Bangladeshi community. Because testing is so limited and refugees fear going to the doctor, it was difficult to know the true spread of the disease, report author Ahmed Mushfiq Mobarak, professor of Economics at Yale, told Reuters. “All the other complementary indications in our data is that disease prevalence is likely much higher,” he said in an email. Rumors
Researchers from the International Organization for Migration found that visits to clinics dropped by 50 percent in March, while some coronavirus patients tried to hide from health workers. “People don’t bother to get tested for the coronavirus. They are afraid of being isolated and quarantined,” said a Bangladesh government official who declined to be identified. Mahbub Alam Talukder, Bangladesh’s refugee relief and repatriation commissioner, said authorities were working around the clock to expand testing, isolation and treatment facilities and improve communication with the community. A lab handling 200 tests a day should soon be able to process 500 a day, said Louise Donovan, a spokeswoman with the UN refugee agency, while 12 treatment centers with 1,900 beds are planned. Two have been built. But in the event of a major outbreak, patients may have to be treated in their homes or other places in the community rather than at medical facilities, said Muriel Boursier, head of mission for the Medecins Sans Frontieres (MSF) aid agency in Bangladesh. “The health capacity might be challenged and there might be a need for a community-based type of approach.” Another problem was that Bangladeshi restrictions on internet and mobile phone access in the camps has contributed to a climate of fear, refugees said. Some people even believed rumors that coronavirus patients were being killed to stop the epidemic. Furquan Mirza, a refugee helping to show a video door-to-door to educate people about the coronavirus, said it was as if people in the camps were blind and deaf. “They can’t see what’s happening around the world,” Mirza said, as he prepared for another day showing the film titled “A Scared Community.”

SINGAPORE – Singapore plans to give a wearable device that will identify people who had interacted with carriers of coronavirus to each of its 5.7 million residents, in what could become one of the most comprehensive contact-tracing efforts globally. Testing of the small devices, which can be worn on the end of a lanyard or carried in a handbag, follows limited take-up of an earlier smartphone-based system and has further fuelled privacy concerns about contact tracing technology. The tiny city-state, with one of the highest COVID-19 caseloads in Asia, is one of many countries trying to use technology to allow them to safely reopen their economies. Singapore will soon roll out the device, which does not depend on a smartphone and “may then distribute it to everyone in Singapore,” Vivian Balakrishnan, the minister in charge of the city-state’s smart nation initiative, said on Friday. The government did not specify whether carrying the device would be mandatory. The government’s earlier TraceTogether app encountered problems, especially on Apple devices where its operating system suspends Bluetooth scanning when the app runs in the background. Balakrishnan said repeated discussions with Apple failed to resolve the problem. The pivot to wearables is a signal that Singapore has no immediate plans to adopt contact-tracing technology from Apple and Google rolled out last month, which has several restrictions designed to protect users’ privacy. Michael Veale, a lecturer in the law on digital rights and regulation at University College London who has been involved in developing contact-tracing apps, said Singapore’s move into wearables presented “accountability and privacy concerns.” “Users will likely find it hard to scrutinize what the device is actually doing, or what information the back-end server uses or links,” Veale said. Singapore has said data collected through its earlier app is encrypted and stored locally in the user’s phone and will only be transferred to authorities if the individual is confirmed to be infected with COVID-19. Some businesses have already adopted wearables for contact tracing in locations where smartphone usage is restricted, while governments like Bahrain and Hong Kong have used them for monitoring people under quarantine. Vendors pitching wearables include Accent Advanced Systems, Kerlink, Microshare Inc and TRACEsafe Technologies Inc, though the companies have declined to comment on potential customers. David Su, CEO of wireless chips firm Atmosic, said he expected “multiple governments, if not all governments in Asia” to adopt wearables because they are an affordable and reliable way to ensure widespread automated contact tracing. A simple wristband with a Bluetooth chip, battery and some memory could cost about $10, or possibly less, according to vendors.

Apple is reportedly offering coronavirus tests to employees at its Bay Area campus as they begin to return to the office after months of working from home. In addition to having their temperature taken and being required to wear a mask at One Infinite Loop, Apple workers will have the option to get a nasal swab test as well, according to Bloomberg. Apple was one of the earliest companies to send its employees home, doing so on March 8. But unlike other Silicon Valley giants like Facebook and Twitter — which have publicly spoken about allowing employees to work remotely permanently — Apple needs people in the office to work on its hardware products. In March it was reported that the launch of the next iPhones may be delayed by “practical hurdles” caused by the coronavirus. Apple traditionally needs to send engineers back and forth from its offices to its factories in China to finalize designs in the lead-up to the product’s release. But the coronavirus has led Apple to restrict employee travel to hotbeds of the disease, including China. The Cupertino, Calif., company recently announced that it would be reopening more than 100 of its US retail locations after a months-long closure due to the pandemic. Shares of Apple closed up 2.9 percent Friday morning, trading at $331.50.

At the height of the coronavirus pandemic in mid-April, used-car dealer Alex Tovstanovsky had vehicles jammed six rows deep on his lot in the western Chicago suburb of Naperville. But the seeming oversupply was not a mistake. Despite plummeting sales at his store, Prestige Motor Works, Tovstanovsky was betting on a recovery, buying dozens of cars in early April as auction prices for used vehicles dropped. That bet is now paying off. Tovstanovsky can offer cars cheaper than local competitors and his sales jumped 38 percent in May from the year-ago period. “This is an election year and I felt the Trump administration and the Republicans in Congress would do whatever it took to keep the economy strong,” Tovstanovsky said. Rising demand has now pushed used-vehicle prices about 20 percent higher than when Tovstanovsky made his bet. “I just wish I’d bought more cars when prices were low,” Tovstanovsky said. As America shut down in March to combat the spread of COVID-19 and its economy tanked, US new-vehicle sales plummeted. Sales were down around 30 percent in May, an improvement from a 47 percent drop in April. But used-vehicle sales have rebounded faster. Dealers are now competing to buy vehicles, even as the US economic outlook remains uncertain. “We actually have an issue now, which is that we don’t have enough inventory,” said George Arison, co-CEO of online used-car seller Shift. Shift’s sales rebounded to pre-COVID-19 levels by late April. Americans typically become more frugal and favor used cars in uncertain times. Cars remain a vital commodity in a country where getting to work without a vehicle is impossible in all but a few large cities Rising used-car sales increase competition for automakers who must sell new cars to offset cash burned during a two-month shutdown for the North American auto industry. According to Cox Automotive, new-vehicle sales for the week ending May 28 were down 28 percent, but sales of used vehicles were up 6 percent. According to Cox unit Manheim, wholesale used-vehicle prices rose 5.74 percent in the first half of May from the previous month. Carmax, the No. 1 used-car dealer, has already called back about two-thirds of the 15,500 employees it furloughed in April. “We expect to come out of this in a position to take advantage of the resiliency of the used-car industry,” said chief marketing officer Jim Lyski. While dealers say access to financing is plentiful, Wells Fargo said this week it will stop offering loans to most independent dealers due to economic uncertainty. Used-car dealers say recent customers have ranged from deep subprime borrowers using their $1,200 federal pandemic relief checks for a down payment, to prime borrowers with pristine credit who saved money working from home since March. “I’ve seen a lot of down payments this month of exactly $1,200,” said Scott Allen, owner of Auto Land in Fort Worth, Texas, which sells older used vehicles. After being closed for nearly a month from March 23, Allen’s sales in May were up 55 percent over his average for that month. The US used-vehicle market has distinct layers. At the top, in terms of price, are vehicles returned after short-term leases that look nearly new. Those are a concern for the industry. More than 4 million off-lease vehicles are due to return to the market this year, at a rate of around 340,000 per month. Automakers and their finance arms are trying to slow the pace at which those vehicles hit auctions to avoid flooding the market. KAR Auction Services has bought 200 acres of land and is seeking another 100 acres to store cars for major customers. Tom Kontos, chief economist at KAR, which alongside Manheim dominates the US used-car auction market, calls these vehicles “melting ice cubes.” They lose value every day, and cannot be held back for long. Franchise new-car dealers are driving demand for used cars to fill lots short of inventory because the coronavirus shut down assembly plants. Ten of the top 15 models sold at US franchise dealers were used rather than new from May 22 to May 28, according to automotive marketing platform PureCars.

As casinos in Las Vegas reopened Thursday for the first time since March amid the coronavirus pandemic, many customers gambled with their health — rolling the dice by not wearing masks or maintaining social distancing, according to reports. “Wash your hands while saying, ‘Vegas Baby!’ 20 times,” a video marquee displayed along the famed Las Vegas Strip as hotel-casinos opened right after midnight Thursday. Dozens of people eager to let the chips fall where they may waited impatiently at The D Casino and Hotel on Fremont Street to have their temperatures checked at the door. The casino quickly filled with happy high rollers while a bartender danced, wearing lingerie and a surgical mask as Nevada continued its second stage of reopening. To reopen, casinos must submit a plan to the Nevada Gaming Control Board explaining how they plan on keeping proper hygiene and social distancing, according to Business Insider. MGM Resorts-owned Bellagio, New York-New York and other casinos planned to increase cleaning and require social distancing — but when the doors were flung open, some proved better than others at enforcing safety protocols. A swarm of customers rushed onto the gaming floor of The D, where a video posted by Las Vegas Review-Journal reporter Mick Akers shows packed crowds, though dealers and dancers are wearing masks, Business Insider reported. REUTERS/Steve Marcus RONDA CHURCHILL/AFP via Getty Images Ethan Miller/Getty Images Ethan Miller/Getty Images View Slideshow Many customers also ignored spacing at slot machines, but surfaces appeared to be cleaned regularly. Hotel guests at The D — whose owner, Derek Stevens, offered free one-way flights to jump-start the tourism recovery — were treated to free champagne at check-in and a ribbon-cutting on the casino floor, USA Today reported. Bobbi Carlisle, a truck driver from Phoenix who hoped to snag a souvenir piece, was recognized by an employee as the first guest to check in that morning. The staffer pulled a memento out of his suit jacket pocket and presented it to her as a belated 60th birthday present. “It’s just been months of us trying to get here,” Carlisle told the news outlet. “Now we’re here, and we’re so excited. We’re hoping to get a keno machine, and we’ll play there for days.” Stevens said the visitors arriving this week tend to be younger Vegas fans who may be more comfortable traveling, since older people are in a group at higher risk for severe illness related to the deadly bug. “This will be a very fun, gregarious group,” Stevens told USA Today. “These are people that want to get out of their hometown and come visit Vegas.” Jeff Hwang, a gambling enthusiast and blogger, planned to visit every casino in town that was scheduled to reopen. He said he was given face masks, including one with a Golden Gate logo at the city’s oldest existing downtown casino. “Walking around, not many people were using them,” he noted. “Just employees.” Ethan Miller/Getty Images David Becker/Getty Images RONDA CHURCHILL/AFP via Getty Images Ethan Miller/Getty Images Ethan Miller/Getty Images View Slideshow Johnny Lujan, 29, flew in from Los Angeles on Wednesday so he could gamble on the first night casinos reopened. “I love gambling,” he said before rushing, without a mask, to a $15 roulette table the second The D Casino reopened. With Post wires

The number of hospital admissions across the city spiked to 84 Friday, a day after just 48 were recorded, according to Mayor Bill de Blasio. But it’s unclear whether the startling increase is related to the mass protests and spread of coronavirus, the mayor said. “That’s a meaningful movement in one day. We’re going to keep a close eye on that,” said de Blasio. “We do not see evidence that it’s related to everything that happened over the last few weeks because of the time it takes for the disease to manifest.” The mayor said it would take a week to 10 days to see any manifestation of the coronavirus. The city has been the scene of numerous crowded protest gatherings in the wake of George Floyd’s police-involved death in Minneapolis. On Wednesday, the Big Apple recorded zero confirmed deaths from COVID-19 for the first time since March 12.

Are you broadcasting your room on Zoom? Make sure there’s good lighting, symmetry and depth in the frame — because your space may be rated “hot or not” on a scale of zero to 10. Room Rater, a buzzy Twitter account that has amassed nearly 214,000 followers since launching in mid-April, seeks to do just that: post a number of Zoom- and Skype-based news and talk show appearances to offer a snap, yet funny, judgment on what viewers take in. At first, it began as simple commentary between 56-year-old Claude Taylor and his 51-year-old girlfriend Jessie Bahrey at the start of the coronavirus quarantine. “It occurred to us that it would be fun to make a Twitter account and start tweeting these observations,” says Taylor, who heads up a liberal PAC in Washington, DC. “We were just really looking for some light-hearted content to share with the people to help them get through this period.” One of the account’s most recent tweets includes a shot of Wanda Sykes appearing virtually on “Jimmy Kimmel Live!” seated on an aubergine chair with a plant in the background. The rating: 8 out of 10. Love the bright chair and plant. Is that art on the wall? Raise the camera so we can see the rest. 8/10 @iamwandasykes @jimmykimmel pic.twitter.com/IzYv79FWtb — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) June 5, 2020  “Is that art on the wall?” they tweeted. “Raise the camera so we can see the rest.” Another tweet, which gave a 10 out of 10 rating, shows journalist Jeff Jarvis in a yellow-painted room with wooden bookcases, French doors and large windows letting in lots of natural light. Books. Depth. Chairs. French doors. Would prefer 1-2 big pieces on left but I quibble. 10/10 @jeffjarvis pic.twitter.com/cfAbINga5L — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) June 5, 2020  “Would prefer 1-2 pieces on left but I quibble,” the tweet reads. It doesn’t hurt to show off a little, either, they say. Piano. Depth. Art. Between two Emmys. 9/10 @TheJetOnTNT pic.twitter.com/NI9ea4m0Np — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) June 5, 2020  “We’re not interior decorators — we just pretend to be on Twitter,” quips Taylor. But Taylor has an eye for working with a frame. He’s also a decadeslong travel photographer. Among the elements that he and Bahrey look for: depth in a room, books, artwork, plants and good lighting. Not all of those features are necessary, but using them well in a frame can take someone to a perfect 10. “The zero tends to be what we call the ‘hostage video,’ ” adds Taylor, which shows someone against a flat, bare wall at a bad camera angle. “They really do look like hostage videos.” Hmm. One wonders if he’s free to go. Is that door locked? Is this rehab? 5/10 @Montel_Williams pic.twitter.com/0lnkX5x3GD — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) June 4, 2020  Sometimes it’s a combination of bad rooms and differing political thoughts that can lead to a zero rating. On Thursday, the account tweeted a photo of right-wing firebrand Jack Posobiec that received a “solid 0.” “Alt Right Nazi F - - ks generally don’t do well on Room Rater . . . dorm room look with posters,” they tweeted. Obama, on the other hand, got a 10 out of 10 — but not for any home decor reasons. 10/10. No bunker mentality. Just empathy and a desire to move forward. A bright shining example of how to president. @BarackObama https://t.co/FVc4ZpZKp1 — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) June 3, 2020  As for being stuck in the middle with a four, five or six rating, that’s usually about camera angle. “It’s usually too low,” says Taylor of the view of the person’s face, adding you can put six fat books under the laptop to fix it. “You want it at eye level.” The other issue with a low angle is getting a view of the person’s ceiling, but sometimes that’s permissible. In an April broadcast, political consultant James Carville has showed his dark wooden-slat ceiling, which earned him a nine. Between @JamesCarville and @WalterIsaacson, Louisiana is crushing it. 9/10 9/10. pic.twitter.com/MOsX5WLdQj — Room Rater (@ratemyskyperoom) April 17, 2020  “Most of us, including myself, don’t have a ceiling like that,” says Taylor. The profile, which also serves as a fund-raising arm to provide PPE and masks to multiple US states and Native American communities, has seen shots improve since it launched. “We’re seeing countless examples of reporters who started at very low places and worked their way up to being eights, nines and tens,” says Taylor. “So that’s been very fun to watch and everyone’s taking it with the spirit that’s intended.”

New York City’s first step to reopening its economy after the coronavirus pandemic will allow 32,000 city construction sites to reopen and put hardhats back on the job, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday. “That means a lot of New Yorkers will come back to work but it has to be safe, it has to be healthy,” Hizzoner told reporters during his Friday press briefing. The reopened construction sites will be required to shake up their worksites to better protect employees from potential exposure to COVID-19, including making hand sanitizer available and requiring workers to wear face coverings. However, de Blasio added that the Buildings Department would hold off on issuing fines for noncompliance for a month to allow the worksites to voluntarily come into compliance. “I don’t want to give a single fine,” he said. “I don’t want to take money from anyone.” Gov. Andrew Cuomo shut down construction sites for projects that were deemed non-essential in March as officials struggled to slow the spread of the coronavirus across the state. His decision came after The Post revealed that construction workers were still showing up to work sick, even as the pandemic grew worse.

COLOMBO, Sri Lanka — The tourists came to see the magical waterfalls and mountain views of the lowland jungle and rainforest. But then the pandemic hit, and they were stranded in Sri Lanka. When flights were canceled and the airports shut down, Darshana Ratnayake came to the rescue. Ratnayake, a cafe owner in Ella, a former colonial hill station in Sri Lankan tea country, organized free food and shelter for dozens of stranded tourists. “We were totally blown away,” said Alex Degmetich, a 31-year-old American cruise line entertainment director. “It’s pretty remarkable,” he said. “Coming from Western society, where nothing is really given to us and we have to pay for everything which is fine. But here, locals providing us — tourists — free food and accommodation, is really humbling.” The Sri Lankan government imposed a nationwide curfew on March 20 to curb the spread of the virus, sealing off entire regions of the Indian Ocean island nation. Degmetich was among 40 tourists from 11 countries stranded in Ella, 200 kilometers (120 miles) east of the capital, Colombo. Ella’s famous treks tend to draw a young backpacker crowd and Darshana knew they’d soon be out of money and the small bed-and-breakfast lodges out of food. He was right: Many of the tourists had just enough money to pay for the trip and broken supply chains meant the lodges were running low on provisions. Darshana established his Chill Cafe as a juice bar with two tables 13 years ago. The business has grown to a full restaurant and boutique hotel with 72 employees. Just after the curfew was imposed, Darshana prepared a list of those staying in lodges and began boxed dinner deliveries. And he convinced lodge owners to let their guests stay on for free. “Our livelihood depends on tourism. We must help tourists when they are in trouble. Money isn’t everything. We must help and share at difficult times like this,” he said. He said he also donated $27,000 to tour guides who lost their income when tourism came to a standstill. Darshana said Sri Lanka’s bloody, decades-long civil war had a huge impact on tourism in Ella. Any time a bomb went off in the country, he said, tourist arrivals fell sharply. For 25 years, separatists from the minority Tamil community fought for a separate state. By the time government forces crushed the rebellion in 2009, UN estimates say some 100,000 people had been killed. With the war’s end, Ella’s visitor numbers rose sharply, averaging a thousand people a day, he said. Darshana has expanded his support to both lunch and dinner each day — without, he insists, sacrificing on quality or customer service. Rebecca Curwood-Moss, a tourist from England, felt hopeless when Sri Lanka’s curfew was imposed. She said Darshana’s meals have done more than fill empty stomachs. “In the box, we didn’t just find the delicious homemade rice and curry, but we found hope,” she said.

The coronavirus pandemic in the US has had the inadvertent effect of shining a light on something that’s fascinated me for some time now. It’s the second act of Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, who at 64-years-old has transformed himself from the wonky, acerbic, PC-loving foil to Apple’s Steve Jobs and into one of the leading philanthropists in the world. That’s included committing billions of dollars from his personal fortune, through his family foundation, to advocating for specific issues like enhancing health care around the world. As part of that work, he’s also been a vocal advocate for the last several years about countries needing to take more steps to prepare themselves to fight coming pandemics — and, now that the deadly COVID-19 pandemic is upon us, he’s pumping tens of millions of dollars into the race to find a successful vaccine for the virus. In addition to doing what he can to augment the government’s fight against COVID-19. Which is why Gates says he kind of can’t understand how he’s become the target of outlandish and moronic conspiracy theories, telling reporters on Thursday that the misinformation that’s out there about him is “so stupid” that it’s hard to know how to address it. Gates was on a call with reporters ahead of an announcement by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation that it’s pledging another $1.6 billion to the Gavi vaccine alliance — “to deliver lifesaving vaccines to the world’s poorest countries,” according to the foundation. That’s in addition to $100 million set aside specifically for COVID-19 vaccines. “If the current pandemic has reminded us of anything,” Gates’ wife Melinda said, “it’s the importance of vaccinating against deadly diseases. The pledges that leaders are making today will help Gavi save even more lives.” Meantime, Gates did take a moment Thursday to address some of the bizarre myths about him that have been circulating and finding new audiences since the outbreak of the coronavirus: A must see 4 part documentary about Bill Gates globalist agenda. Extremely well researched and sourced. Anyone writing this off as a "conspiracy theory" after watching it is in serious denial #EXPOSEBILLGATES https://t.co/Lq905uvPGF — Christopher M (@Christo39321718) June 4, 2020  I have a very good friend who told me she thinks Biden is senile and will not vote for him. She said she will write some name in. She also said Bill Gates is working with big pharma and vaccines are going to be mandatory. How do I get through to her? 😳I am so sad……. — SandeeDee (@Dharma53) June 4, 2020  Q is promoting a conspiracy that Bill Gates, working with the new world order and Illuminati, will implant chips in COVID vaccines.  These chips will have the ability to track thoughts and control people. Look it up. It's quite insane #ID2020 😂😂😂 — 🦇 The Batman 🦇 (@thebatman_2020) June 4, 2020  The same kind of thing also circulates on Facebook, especially with Facebook groups like this one. During the call with reporters, Gates was asked about a recent Yahoo News/YouGov poll that purported to find 44 percent of Republicans polled saying they believed the Microsoft co-founder is, according to Yahoo News, “plotting to use a mass COVID-19 vaccination campaign as a pretext to implant microchips in billions of people and monitor their movements.” Responded Gates on Thursday: “In a way, it’s so bizarre, you almost want to view it as something humorous, but I guess it’s really not a humorous thing. I’ve never been involved in any sort of microchip-type thing. “It’s almost hard to deny this stuff because it’s so stupid or strange that to even repeat it almost seems to give it credibility.” Related to this, Gates did allow that while he thought that kind of thing is mostly silly and absurd, he thinks there could be a small chance it actively harms efforts to get a coronavirus ultimately out to everyone who needs it. “If you don’t get a broad uptake, then you wouldn’t have the dramatic effect you want to have, meaning that the risk of reintroduction is so low that you can go back to having things like big sports events,” Gates said. “The misinformation could hold us back at some point, but I wouldn’t say that that’s hurting us at this stage.”

Chinese smartphone giant Huawei this week announced a new phone with built-in sensors that can take a person’s temperature. The Honor Play 4 Pro has a sensor built into the phone’s rear camera array, and can take the temperature of humans and objects alike. The infrared tech can measure temperatures ranging up to 212 degrees Fahrenheit all the way down to -4 degrees. In a video posted to its Weibo social media page, Huawei demonstrated how the phone works on a person, pointing the sensor at their forehead for several seconds until it delivered a reading. The heat-seeking phone will only be available in China, and will retail for $420.

President Trump said Friday that “we’re opening with a bang” after surprising economic news that the US added 2.5 million jobs in May as states reopened from coronavirus lockdowns. “It’s an affirmation of all the work we’ve been doing really for three and a half years, this isn’t just over the last few months,” Trump said in the White House Rose Garden, later adding: “Our body was so powerful that we could actually close our country, save millions of lives.” The rebound reported by the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows the unemployment rate fell from 14.7 percent in April to 13.3 percent in May. Experts had expected the jobless rate to be near Great Depression levels around 20 percent as new unemployment insurance claims grew due to widespread government-ordered business closures to prevent the spread of COVID-19. The Labor Department admitted Friday that it counted 4.9 million furloughed workers as employed, meaning the real unemployment rate would have been 16.1 percent in May. The department, however, used the same counting practice in April, and the rate then would have been more than 19 percent, indicating many people are indeed returning to work. Some states began allowing a phased return to normal in late April, but companies that furloughed or laid off workers in most places still face strict limitations. The rebound follows an aggressive federal effort to keep businesses afloat. In two tranches, Congress authorized $670 billion in forgivable small business loans that can cover labor and overhead. A separate $500 billion fund managed by the Treasury Department was used for larger businesses, including airlines. Since March, 42.6 million people — or a quarter of the workforce — filed new unemployment insurance claims, including another 1.87 million people last week. COVID-19 has sickened nearly 2 million Americans and killed almost 110,000. Those left jobless have benefited from a $600-per-week federal boost in unemployment pay, intended to keep stable the income of most people impacted by the pandemic. Trump spoke after a bleak week with the White House besieged by anti-police brutality demonstrators protesting the killing of George Floyd by Minnesota officers. On Saturday and Sunday, protests gave way to arson and citywide looting. Trump said the economic rebound “is a tremendous tribute to equality” and said the pre-pandemic economy had the lowest rates of unemployment for many groups, including African Americans. “Hopefully George is looking down right now and saying this a great thing that’s happening for our country. There’s a great day for him. It’s a great day for everybody. It is a great, great day, in terms of equality,” Trump said. White House spokesman Ben Williamson said Friday afternoon that Trump was “talking about the fight for equal justice and equal treatment under the law” and not about the economy when he mentioned Floyd’s possible thoughts in heaven.

Canadian plane and train maker Bombardier Inc said on Friday it would cut 2,500 jobs, or about 11 percent of the workforce at its aviation unit, as the coronavirus pandemic’s crushing impact on the air industry adds to its long list of problems. The aviation industry has been among the worst hit by the pandemic, which has dented travel demand and forced several aircraft manufacturers, including planemakers Boeing Co and Airbus SE, to cut production as customers defer deliveries. “We are now faced with the difficult decision to adjust the size of our business, considering both disruptions in our supply chain as well as industry-wide forecasts calling for approximately 30 percent year-over-year drops in unit deliveries due to the pandemic,” David Coleal, president of Bombardier Aviation, said in a memo to workers about the layoffs which was seen by Reuters. Bombardier Aviation spokesman Mark Masluch said the company is starting to scale back production, but he would not give specifics. Bombardier, which has nearly 60,000 employees at its aviation and rail units, said it would book a $40 million charge related to the job cuts. The company, which recently exited the commercial aircraft business, is in the process of selling its rail business to French train maker Alstom for up to 6.2 billion euros ($7.02 billion). The sale would leave Bombardier as a “pure play” business jetmaker. The International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers said the layoffs would affect 717 of its members in Montreal who are now benefiting from an emergency wage subsidy program implemented by the Canadian government to counter the fallout from the outbreak of COVID-19, the respiratory illness caused by the novel coronavirus. The union said in a statement that “Bombardier had the means to avoid the layoffs today,” if it extended the program, which runs through the end of August. Masluch said the company needed to act now to give required notice about the layoffs.

PARIS – French police have banned a demonstration planned to take place in front of the US Embassy in Paris on Saturday as protests mount around the world over the death of George Floyd in Minneapolis. The Paris police department said on Friday it had decided to ban the demonstrations because of the risks of social disorder and health dangers from large gatherings due to the coronavirus pandemic. Trouble had broken out at another anti-police demonstration in the French capital on Wednesday. Thousands had turned up despite a police ban on the event in memory of Adama Traore, a 24-year old black Frenchman who died in a 2016 police operation which some have likened to Floyd’s death. Unrest has broken out across the United States after the killing of Floyd, a 46-year-old African American who died after a white policeman pinned his neck under a knee for nearly nine minutes in Minneapolis on May 25.

RIO DE JANEIRO – Brazil’s total COVID-19 death toll blew past that of Italy on Thursday, as the Health Ministry reported 1,437 deaths in the last 24 hours and 30,925 additional coronavirus cases. The Latin American nation has now reported 34,021 deaths from the coronavirus, trailing only the United States and the United Kingdom.

Ten long weeks after a massive coronavirus outbreak sidelined one of the Navy’s signature warships, the U.S.S. Theodore Roosevelt has returned to sea and is conducting military operations in the Pacific region. Lining the flight deck in their dress white uniforms, sailors wearing white face masks stood a virus-safe 10-feet apart in a final, formal thank you as the ship sailed out of port in Guam Thursday and headed into the Philippine Sea. “We manned the rail, which we don’t normally do. There was a lot of symbolism in that,” Navy Capt. Carlos Sardiello told The Associated Press in an interview from the ship Thursday. “They’re excited. They’re fired up to be back at sea doing the mission.” The Roosevelt pulled into Guam March 27, with a rapidly escalating number of sailors testing positive for the virus. Over time, more than 1,000 were infected with COVID-19, setting off a lengthy and systematic process to move about 4,000 sailors ashore for quarantine and treatment, while about 800 remained aboard to protect and run the high-tech systems, including the nuclear reactors that run the vessel. Slowly, sailors were methodically brought back on board, while the others who had remained went ashore for their mandated two-week quarantine. And in late March, the ship with only about 3,000 crew aboard went out to sea for roughly two weeks of training, including the recertification of the flight deck and fighter squadron, such as takeoffs and landings on the carrier. Earlier this week, the Roosevelt wrapped up training and returned to Guam to pick up nearly 1,000 sailors who had been left there to either complete their quarantine or to manage and work with those still on the island. As the ship sailed into the port, it was flying a flag with the words “Don’t Give Up the Ship,” a famous Navy battle cry from the War of 1812. “Our sailors didn’t give up the ship. They fought and got it back. So I thought it was appropriate,” said Sardiello, who asked one of the other Navy ships to borrow their flag. “The ship was clean and the ship was healthy with no COVID cases. So I said, ok, we’re going to fly that one time on the way into Guam as a symbol to bolster their morale.” RS1 Katie VanDrimmelen was one of the sailors left ashore during the two week training. She had tested positive for the virus and was in quarantine for about five weeks. Walking back onto the ship, she said, was like being welcomed home from a deployment. “It was amazing,” said VanDrimmelen, of Ogden, Utah. “It was very comforting to be back in our normal atmosphere. Everybody was happy.” Sardiello said that watching the sailors board the ship was a great feeling, But he knows he’s not done yet. There are still about 350 sailors on Guam who are either in isolation or are there as support staff. “More and more of those sailors are meeting the return-to-work criteria, and we’re flying them on board every single day. So we’re whittling down that number day by day,” said Sardiello. “But I really want those 350 remaining back. And we’re working hard on that.” He said that any sailors who don’t recover in time will be transported back to the U.S. The ship is expected to continue operations in the Pacific, and then would likely head home to San Diego later this summer. The Roosevelt has been at the center of a still unresolved controversy that led to the firing of the ship’s previous captain, the resignation of the Navy secretary and an expanded investigation into what triggered the outbreak and how well top naval commanders handled it. Sardiello, had previously captained the Roosevelt, but was abruptly sent back to the ship in early April to take command after Capt. Brett Crozier was fired for urging his commanders to take faster action to stem the virus outbreak onboard. After a preliminary review last month, Adm. Mike Gilday, the Navy’s top officer, recommended that Crozier be reinstated as ship captain. But the Navy decided to conduct a broader investigation. That review, which effectively delays a decision on Crozier’s reinstatement, was finished and submitted to Gilday at the end of March and he is still reviewing the extensive report, which includes several hundred pages of interviews, documents and recommendations. Cmdr. Nate Christensen, spokesman for Gilday, said it will take time for the admiral to finish his review and make any decisions.

Tennessee must give all of its 4.1 million registered voters the option to cast ballots by mail during the coronavirus pandemic, a judge ruled Thursday. Davidson County Chancellor Ellen Hobbs Lyle ruled that the state’s limits on absentee voting during the pandemic constitute “an unreasonable burden on the fundamental right to vote guaranteed by the Tennessee Constitution.” The judge wrote that any eligible voter can get an absentee ballot to avoid contracting or passing on COVID-19 in the “upcoming elections during the pendency of pandemic circumstances.” The decision upends a determination by Republican Secretary of State Tre Hargett’s office that fear of catching or unwittingly spreading the virus at the polls wouldn’t qualify someone to vote by mail. The state argued such an expansion wouldn’t be feasible for the 2020 elections, claiming lack of money, personnel and equipment for increased voting by mail, among other concerns. The decision requires the state to “prominently post on their websites and disseminate to County Election Officials that voters who do not wish to vote in-person due to the COVID-19 virus situation are eligible to request an absentee ballot by mail or that such voters still have the option to vote in-person during Early voting or on Election Day.” The judge wrote that the state has taken an “unapologetic” position and has relied on “oddly skewed” assumptions — including assuming preparations for 100% of registered voters to vote absentee if all were allowed — that go against its own expert and industry standards. Eleven other states, meanwhile, have taken a “can-do approach” by relaxing voting by mail restrictions for the 2020 election, while two-thirds of states have allowed vote by mail for everyone for years, Lyle wrote. “When, however, normal industry-recognized assumptions are used, the evidence establishes that the resources are there to provide temporary expanded access to voting by mail in Tennessee during the pandemic if the State provides the leadership and motivation as other states have done,” the judge wrote. Hargett spokeswoman Julia Bruck indicated that the fight is expected to head for an appeal. The attorney general’s office blasted the court’s decision as failing to appropriately consider the “extensive safety measures” within the state’s COVID-19 election plan. “It is yet another court decision replacing legislation passed by the people’s elected officials with its own judgment, largely ignoring the practicalities of implementing such a decision, and doing so in the midst of a pandemic and budget crisis,” Attorney General Herbert Slatery said in a statement. Tennessee has more than a dozen categories that qualify someone for an absentee ballot, from being sick to being 60 or older. The Republican-led Legislature and GOP Gov. Bill Lee have dismissed the idea of offering absentee ballots to all voters, with lawmakers voting against Democratic expansion proposals more than once this week as they meet during pandemic times. Instead, state election officials have recommended preparations as though all 1.4 million registered voters 60 and older — about 1 of every 3 registered voters — will cast mail-in ballots in the Aug. 6 primary. Historically, Tennessee has historically seen less than 2.5% of votes cast by mail, the state has said. Several states who have refused have been sued, including Texas, where a federal judge last month ordered absentee voting be made available to any voter in the pandemic. Tennessee’s voter turnout was 14% in the August 2016 primary, then almost 62% for the November 2016 general election, featuring the presidential election. In the 2018 non-presidential year, about 30% of registered voters turned out for the August primary, and 54% in the November election. Tennessee’s August election will be another test case as U.S. states try to safely prepare for the fall general election highlighted by the re-election bid of President Donald Trump, who has been staunchly against opening up absentee voting to everyone during the pandemic. The state court lawsuits were led by #UpTheVote901 and by the American Civil Liberties Union of Tennessee. “This is a major victory for voting rights, said Dale Ho, director of the ACLU’s Voting Rights Project. “This ruling eliminates the excuse requirement for the 2020 elections, meaning Tennesseans will not have to risk their health in order to vote.” The Lawyers’ Committee for Civil Rights Under Law and the Campaign Legal Center have filed a similar federal lawsuit.

Doctors at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) said Thursday that the coronavirus appears to be declining both in virulence and infection rate. “The virus may be changing,” Dr. Donald Yealy said Thursday during a news conference. “Some patterns suggest the potency is diminished.” Yealy said UPMC has successfully treated more than 500 patients with coronavirus since March, and fewer patients are requiring ventilators to help them breathe. People seem to be contracting the virus less easily and cases appear to be less severe than when the pandemic first began, he explained. “We’ve tested 30,000 and the positivity rate was less than 4 percent. We tested 8,000 with no symptoms and only 21 came back positive,” Yealy said. He also said the risk of being in a car crash on the Pennsylvania Turnpike “is greater than the risk of testing positive for asymptomatic COVID symptoms.” The chief medical officer of UPMC Senior Communities, Dr. David Nace, said that thanks to the measures taken by medical officials in the hospital, there were zero reported cases Thursday in the UPMC long-term care and senior care facilities. “We’ve followed the basics of infection control that others have also tried to follow,” Nace said. “Including attention to surveillance of patients who exhibited signs and symptoms.” “We can’t test our way out of COVID-19,” he added. “Testing is a tool, not a cure.” Researchers at UPMC are unsure at this point why they are seeing lower infection rates, but said it could be a variety of factors including weather and the fact that “viruses tend to mutate with time.” “And, finally, we are probably making better decisions about who needs what kind of care,” Yealy added. Elsewhere in the world, Central and South America are now seeing higher rates of infection with the biggest rise in caseloads in Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Haiti, Mexico and Peru, according to the United Nations.

Citi Field, which has been closed due to the coronavirus, has been slapped with a “junk” rating amid fears that it won’t be able to pay its debts. Ratings agency Standard & Poor’s on Thursday downgraded Citi Field from an investment grade “BBB” rating to “BB+”, or junk status, saying it may need to tap its debt reserve to make a $22 million payment due in December — and warning that it could run out of money next year if there’s a baseball strike. Citi Field makes two $22 million payments annually to the New York City Industrial Development Agency, which issued $612 million in bonds to build the stadium, completed in 2009 as home to the Mets. The Wilpon family-owned Mets are technically separate from the stadium, which is paid for through sales of luxury suites, party suites, club seats, concessions and merchandise. S&P says the Mets may seek to help the stadium make the December payment to keep its lease intact.

There remains no outward signs MLB and the players’ association are moving toward each other in time to begin the regular season with the optimum start, Independence Day weekend. The MLB Players Association released a statement Thursday evening saying that its executive board and more than 100 players talked via conference call and recommitted to wanting to play this year. Importantly, though, not under the key demand of owners that they take a pay cut from their prorated salaries for games played. “The overwhelming consensus of the Board is that Players are ready to report, ready to get back on the field, and they are willing to do so under unprecedented conditions that could affect the health and safety of not just themselves, but their families as well,” executive director Tony Clark said in a statement. “The league’s demand for additional concessions was resoundingly rejected.” On Wednesday, MLB spurned a union proposal delivered Sunday that namely called for a 114-game season (MLB had proposed 82) and full prorated pay (MLB asked for major concessions with a sliding scale that would particularly impact the highest-paid players). At the Sunday meeting, MLB told the union of a concept to implement a season of roughly 48-54 games with full prorated pay. MLB believes the sides’ March 26 agreement empowers commissioner Rob Manfred with the power to decide scheduling and a number of games as long as key economic and health/safety issues have been considered by the league. The union is against such a schedule and could try a variety of tactics to block the implementation, such as refusing to accept a key national TV money maker for the owners — the expansion of the playoffs. “Earlier this week, Major League Baseball communicated its intention to schedule a dramatically shortened 2020 season unless Players negotiate salary concessions,” Clark said in his statement. “The concessions being sought are in addition to billions in Player salary reductions that have already been agreed upon. “This threat came in response to an Association proposal aimed at charting a path forward. Among other things, Players proposed more games, two years of expanded playoffs, salary deferrals in the event of a 2020 playoff cancellation, and the exploration of additional jewel events and broadcast enhancements aimed at creatively bringing our Players to the fans while simultaneously increasing the value of our product. Rather than engage, the league replied it will shorten the season unless Players agree to further salary reductions.” MLB has claimed its financial losses will be too overwhelming to pay full proration on a season of much longer than 50-ish games. The union already considers its concession to not be paid for games not played this year a substantial sacrifice and see the owners asking for more as a request that goes too far. All of this imperils the most ideal restart date of the July 4 weekend, when MLB would be able to best try to renew its historic place as the national pastime. But to do so, the sides were likely going to need to be able to complete a negotiation by early next week at the latest to still give three weeks for a spring training 2.0. But at this point, the sides publicly remain entrenched in positions that not only threaten the best start time, but maybe the whole season.

President Trump is taking heavy criticism for his announcement last week that the United States is “terminating its relationship with the World Health Organization.” But evidence is mounting that the $450 million America spends yearly on the WHO is money down a rat hole. This week, the Associated Press revealed how the WHO lied to the world about China’s initial coverup of the coronavirus outbreak. Those lies, which delayed other countries’ responses to the virus, caused hundreds of thousands of needless deaths. The AP gained access to recordings of internal WHO meetings in January. Those recordings capture WHO officials discussing keeping China’s secretive conduct under wraps, even as the WHO kept praising China publicly. That sugarcoating left the world unaware and unprepared for the pandemic about to hit. Even without this damning new information, Trump would have been right to pull American dollars and prestige out of the WHO. The organization has an abysmal record dealing with previous global diseases, from SARS to H1N1 flu and Ebola. In the aftermath of the Ebola outbreak in 2014, the Harvard Global Health Institute’s director, Ashish Jha, wrote of the growing skepticism toward the WHO because it “often fails to perform when the world needs it most.” Look at how the WHO spends its money. Only 4 percent goes for medical supplies, but double that goes for air travel and 10 times on salaries and perks. The agency is a bloated, cushy, underperforming bureaucracy. It spends hundreds of millions a year on meetings, business-class travel and top hotels and turns a blind eye when senior staff go “with girlfriends on fabricated missions,” according to an AP investigation. Why should US taxpayers pay for global junkets? Don’t confuse the WHO with the Red Cross, Doctors Without Borders or other organizations delivering care to the sick. On Sunday, Trump’s national security adviser, Robert O’Brien, suggested the US will shift its support to such front-line care. In the AP’s latest revelations, the WHO’s top staff are recorded discussing behind closed doors how China is concealing the virus, while publicly the agency praised China for transparency. China had mapped the genetic makeup of the virus by Jan. 2 but withheld the information until Jan. 11. Worse, it concealed until Jan. 20 that the virus is contagious, even though Wuhan hospitals were flooded with patients. By the time China locked down the city of Wuhan, some 5 million residents had fled, carrying the disease across the world. “It’s obvious that we could have saved more lives and avoided many, many deaths if China and the WHO had acted faster,” explains the University of Washington’s Ali Mokdad. Yet here is WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus on Jan. 30 whitewashing China’s deception: “The speed with which China detected the outbreak, isolated the virus, sequenced the genome and shared it with WHO and the world are very impressive and beyond words.” He called it a “new standard of outbreak response.” The Communist standard — lie and let hundreds of thousands die. Just like China tried to hide SARS in 2003. When Trump suspended the WHO’s funding in April, Tedros pompously lectured: “Don’t use this virus as an opportunity to fight against each other or score political points.” Tedros needs to look in the mirror: He’s the one playing politics, barring Taiwan from participating in two emergency coronavirus meetings. Taiwan had some of the earliest cases and was the first to tip off the WHO that the coronavirus was likely contagious. But any concessions to Taiwan infuriate Beijing, and that’s where Tedros’ loyalty lies. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi claims the president doesn’t have the constitutional authority to hold back WHO funding or leave the organization without Congress’ approval. Let the lawyers haggle over that. Trump’s got the big picture. The organization is not worthy of US support. It puts politics ahead of global health and blows our tax money on travel boondoggles and high living for its staff. Betsy McCaughey is a former lieutenant governor of New York, the chairwoman of the Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths and author of the forthcoming book “The Next Pandemic.” 

The Big Apple marked a major turning point in its battle against the coronavirus pandemic Wednesday with no new confirmed deaths from COVID-19 for the first time since March 12. “In the face of extraordinary challenges, New Yorkers have gone above and beyond to keep each other safe throughout the crisis,” said City Hall spokeswoman Avery Cohen. “With hope on the horizon, we will continue to do everything we can to reopen safely without losing sight of the progress we’ve made,” Cohen said. By Friday, city health officials had revised the overnight death count from zero to seven as additional information became available. There were zero additional deaths between Tuesday and Wednesday, according to the city’s Health Department data, which is reported with a 24-hour lag. During that same period earlier this week, the city saw just three probable deaths of people who never tested positive for the virus but showed telltale symptoms. Those probable deaths could be reclassified as confirmed deaths in the coming days, Cohen said. There were 500 new fatalities each day during the pandemic’s peak in early April. The city’s current COVID-19 death toll of 21,752 includes 16,992 confirmed fatalities and 4,760 probable ones.

The head of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Thursday that police crowd-control chemicals cause coughing that could spread the coronavirus — and he will raise the matter with the White House task force. CDC Director Robert Redfield told the House Appropriations Committee he fears George Floyd protests across the nation will become a “seeding event” for COVID-19 and noted high pre-protest transmission rates in some cities where demonstrations are taking place. “Definitely coughing can spread respiratory viruses, including COVID-19,” Redfield said. He agreed with Rep. Mark Pocan (D-Wis.) that crowd-control chemicals can make people cough. “That’s been my experience,” he said. “I think you raise an important point,” Redfield told Pocan. “I’ll pass on this comment to the next task force meeting.” Outside the White House and across the country, police have used capsaicin-based compounds including pepper spray and pepper balls among the tightly packed crowds. Getty Images Getty Images AFP via Getty Images Los Angeles Times via Getty Images Getty Images View Slideshow Smoke canisters, similar-appearing tear gas and flash-bang grenades also have been common, resulting in a range of respiratory symptoms. Protesters themselves have lit fireworks and set fire to buildings and garbage bins full of plastics, emitting foul fumes. “We have advocated strongly the ability to have face coverings and masks available to protesters so that they can at least have those coverings, but you do raise an important question,” Redfield told Pocan regarding police chemicals. The CDC director told lawmakers he’s concerned about how the protests will impact the pandemic, which has sickened nearly 2 million Americans and killed almost 110,000. Redfield said protesters should go get tested for the virus. “The first thing that I would like to see is those individuals who have partaken in these peaceful protests or been out protesting, particularly if they are in metropolitan areas that really haven’t controlled the outbreak to the extent we want — Minneapolis happens to be one that is still having significant transmission, DC is another one — we really want those individuals to highly consider being evaluated and get tested,” Redfield said. “I do think there is a potential, unfortunately, for this to be a seeding event.”

This was bound to happen. When schools began opening up their campuses for voluntary football workouts, positive tests of the novel coronavirus were sure to follow. Early on, Alabama has been hit the hardest, with at least five players testing positive, 247Sports.com reported. The names of those players were not known, and it is uncertain if they were showing symptoms. The workouts were set to begin on Monday, after the SEC announced in May all teams were able to do so. Under the conference’s guidelines, players had to be tested within 72 hours of entering the facilities and daily after activities begin. Student-athletes who test positive would be isolated immediately. Alabama, of course, isn’t alone. Three Oklahoma State players have tested positive – they were asymptomatic — leading the school to tell freshmen not to report this week, and a member of the Iowa State athletic department was also a positive case.

The authors of a study published in the medical journal The Lancet that said taking hydroxychloroquine to treat coronavirus could be fatal retracted their findings Thursday after multiple reports questioned its data. The database belonged to a small Illinois company called Surgisphere, which is owned by Dr. Sapan Desai, one of four co-authors of the study, and which has a science fiction writer and an adult content model on its small staff, who have little or no medical or science backgrounds. The other three co-authors, including Dr. Mandeep R. Mehra, a professor at Harvard Medical School, retracted the article after their attempt to verify the data’s accuracy and authenticity were thwarted by Desai, who did not return requests for comment from The Post. “We launched an independent third-party peer review of Surgisphere with the consent of Sapan Desai to evaluate the origination of the database elements, to confirm the completeness of the database, and to replicate the analyses presented in the paper,” their statement said, The New York Times reported. “Our independent peer reviewers informed us that Surgisphere would not transfer the full dataset, client contracts, and the full ISO audit report to their servers for analysis as such transfer would violate client agreements and confidentiality requirements,” the authors continued, referring to a type of audit that seeks to determine whether Surgisphere, in this case, actually did what it claimed to do. The World Health Organization and several world governments changed their coronavirus policies and resumed trials of hydroxychloroquine because they got questionable data from the company, The Guardian reported Wednesday. Data the Chicago-based company claims to have obtained from more than a thousand hospitals worldwide formed the basis of scientific articles that led to changes in coronavirus treatment policies in several countries. The company also influenced the decision by the WHO and other research facilities to halt trials of hydroxychloroquine, which President Trump has touted and took as a precaution against coronavirus. The WHO announced Wednesday that those trials of the anti-malarial drug would now resume. The Lancet on Tuesday released an “expression of concern” about its published study. The medical journal said in a statement Thursday that “there are many outstanding questions about Surgisphere and the data that were allegedly included in this study.”

COPENHAGEN – Danish researchers have developed a fully automated robot that can take coronavirus swabs so that health care professionals are not exposed to the risk of infection. Researchers from Southern University of Denmark (SDU) and Lifeline Robotics hope their prototype ‘swab robot’ can soon be deployed to relieve health professionals of the potentially risky task of testing patients. When a patient presents an ID-card, the robot prepares a sampling kit, performs the swab and puts the sample in a container ready for testing, explained Thiusius Rajeeth Savarimuthu, professor of robotics at SDU. In a video, Savarimuthi tested the robot on himself. He positioned his face with his chin in a plastic frame, opened his mouth wide and allowed a robotic arm to stick a swab into the back of his throat and rotate it. The robot, powered by artificial intelligence, uses cameras to find the right part of the throat and is programmed to swab it gently, the developers explained. “You get exactly the same procedure repeated again and again which will give better quality of the samples,” Savarimuthu said. “There’s going to be a global demand, a global need for more testing, more automated testing, to protect and shield those that are in the front line,” said the chief executive of Lifeline Robotics, Soeren Stig.

JOHANNESBURG – When Zinzi Lerefolo was sent home from her fee-paying girls’ school in a leafy Johannesburg suburb in March, her family set up a virtual classroom that allowed her to continue studying uninterrupted. The 13-year-old has access to the internet and her school has the means to provide online teaching during the coronavirus lockdown. For Phuti Ngoetjana, 14, it has been a different story. Her state school has no resources to make the leap to cyberspace and even if it did her family could not afford the data to access lessons in the one-room brick home in the east Johannesburg township of Tembisa where she lives. The contrast between the black girls’ education during the pandemic has played out the world over. In South Africa, it is especially acute and sensitive. Although elite schools that were open only to white South Africans under apartheid are now integrated, most black pupils can’t afford them and the country has struggled to bridge huge inequalities 26 years after the fall of white minority rule. The country remains one of the world’s most economically divided, with the top 10 percent of households owning 71 percent of the wealth, according to World Bank data from 2018. As schools prepare to partially re-open from Monday, the educational gap risks widening and government ministers, teachers’ unions and parents are worried. Those institutions built under apartheid in predominantly black townships and rural areas are the least well equipped to cope with the pandemic, with poor internet access, crowded classrooms and sparse amenities. “COVID-19 has exposed the divide,” said Lerefolo’s father Simon, now a church pastor who escaped the townships to a top university in 1994 and who was able to pay for an elite education for his daughter. “And it’s got us thinking: what have we done, us who are privileged, to reduce this divide?” When to re-open? Schools were supposed to have resumed this week, but some teachers and unions argued it was not safe to do so until the government did more to ensure employees were safe from COVID-19. Government officials have countered that a generation of school children risks losing a key part of their education and the future opportunities it brings, even though the virus affects them far less than the sick and elderly. In Western Cape, the opposition Democratic Alliance, which unlike the governing party is not beholden to unions, has defied orders from Basic Education Minister Angie Motshekga to delay opening for the last grades of primary and secondary school. That’s despite the province accounting for two-thirds of the country’s coronavirus cases. Western Cape education chief Debbie Schafer said that schools there had taken the necessary precautions and she would not wait for another week to start. They re-opened on June 3. An education department spokesman did not respond to a request for comment on this article. ‘Two-tier’ system  South Africa’s education system has left millions of children without basic skills. Literacy tests carried out by the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement in 2016 found that 78 percent of South African pupils could not read for meaning by the age of 9 or 10, compared with 64 percent in Morocco and 4 percent in the United States. Of 100 students who start school, 40-50 will pass their final high school exam and 14 will go to university, Amnesty International said in a report in February. “We still have … two South Africas living side by side,” said Nic Spaull, an education expert at Stellenbosch University in Western Cape province. “The two schooling systems have de-racialized, but you still have two systems.” Under lockdown, these inequalities are being enlarged by disparities in digital access. International Telecommunication Union data shows just 22 percent of households have a computer in South Africa, while 60 percent have internet access. Since the end of apartheid, the governing African National Congress has brought electricity and piped water to millions and slashed poverty by a third. Education has also improved: in the two decades since 1994, the number of black university graduates quadrupled to 48,600, Spaull said. But for the poorest, the situation remains dire, which he put down in part to a failure to improve the quality of teachers – many of whom were themselves a product of apartheid education. “I’m not connected”
Zinzi Lerefolo has used the dining room in her spacious family home to attend classes held via videolink and do homework handed out using social media. “It wasn’t really an issue going online,” she told Reuters, taking a break in her lounge with a view of the pool outside, before positioning her phone for a virtual art class. About 35 km (20 miles) away, Ngoetjana sat in her parents’ single room – where they rest, eat, wash clothes and dishes – trying to study. Noise from traffic and people talking outside was ceaseless. “The teachers didn’t give us any homework during this lockdown,” she said, looking up from her maths exercises. “I haven’t learned much because I’m not connected online.” Most black South Africans depend on cash-strapped free schools like hers. Under the former apartheid system, they were designed to provide only limited education: their role was to prepare black children for lower-paid jobs and keep them subservient to whites. But the all-race democracy introduced in 1994 was supposed to change that. Whether Ngoetjana’s school resumes on Monday, when classes are meant to restart for the crucial last years of primary and secondary school, is unclear. Teachers’ unions are adamant they will not go back until all schools are equipped with masks, hand washing facilities and sanitizer. That is a tall order given that, according to Spaull, more than a quarter of schools don’t have running water. Many rural schools lack bathrooms – they use outdoor pit latrines instead. Dozens of school buildings were also vandalized or burned during the lockdown. “The consequences are huge,” said Zama Mthunzi, of the Equal Education activist group. “Learners might not end up finishing or going to university … They’re going to be left behind very badly.” Unlike Lerefolo, the fortunes of Ngoetjana’s father, Julius, have not changed much since apartheid ended. He said in some ways his daughter’s school reminded him of his: 60 kids jammed in a classroom making learning challenging. “Things have improved but not enough,” he said.

British drugmaker AstraZeneca has doubled manufacturing capacity for its potential coronavirus vaccine to 2 billion doses in a handful of deals involving Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates that guarantee early supply to lower-income countries. The deals with epidemic response group CEPI and vaccine alliance GAVI are backed by the World Health Organization and aim to quell concerns that the company was committing all initial supplies of the vaccine to the developed world. It is unclear if vaccines will work against the coronavirus but dozens of companies are in the race to develop one, and AstraZeneca’s partnership with Oxford University is one of a handful to be backed so far by the US COVID task force. The White House last month secured 300 million of the first doses of the potential vaccine, named AZD1222, in a deal that also committed more than $1 billion in backing to testing and manufacturing. UK has booked another 100 million. Under Thursday’s deals, the company will supply 300 million doses, starting this year, to CEPI and GAVI as it aims at fair and equitable distribution of the vaccine, Chief Executive Pascal Soriot said. He said AstraZeneca had also agreed terms with Serum Institute of India, the world’s largest manufacturer of vaccines by volume, to supply one billion doses for low and middle-income countries. Part of the vaccine doses produced by Serum will be used in India, with the remainder allocated to GAVI, the company said on a call with journalists. That leaves AstraZeneca with 300 million doses in planned production capacity, which has yet to be earmarked for use. Experts predict a safe and effective vaccine could take 12 months to 18 months to develop. The vaccine, previously known as ChAdOx1 nCoV-19, was developed by the University of Oxford and licensed to AstraZeneca. Immunity to the new coronavirus is uncertain and so the use of vaccines is unclear. “You can’t spend your time wondering is it going to work. We have to commit. That’s what we do in the industry — we bet on something. We are completely committed to the vaccine program to deliver,” Soriot said.

Keep your distance from the wildlife… and other people! As local restrictions are lifted and states gradually reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic, the National Park Service (NPS) is reminding visitors to avoid close contact with other parkgoers through a creative new poster series encouraging social distancing. The park service recently unveiled the artwork to improve visitor communication as NPS sites proceed with phased reopening plans, Mother Nature Network reports. “A little space goes a long way,” one clever graphic reads, illustrating the six-foot mark of safe social distancing space recommended by the Centers for Disease Control as a moose’s antlers, one grizzly bear, two picnic tables between friends, or a national park sign. “Observe wildlife rules… but with people!” another sign orders, reminding visitors to frequently, thoroughly wash their hands with soap and water, stay home when sick and cover sneezes or coughs with a tissue – as well as, playfully, not “use slower friends as bear bait.” Another poster explains the “right” and “wrong” ways to social distance, showing that 6 feet is a good distance to keep from a friend, and 300 feet is a safe space to keep from wildlife. Get any closer to the wild animals, the graphic warns, and you’ll need “good luck.” Other graphics ask fans to recreate responsibly by avoiding crowded areas, carrying out personal items carried in and perhaps even consider virtual visits from home. Before heading out into the great outdoors, be sure to confer with evolving NPS guidance to see if your local park is open and heed these safety tips to protect yourself inside the parks amid the COVID-19 outbreak.

It’s now for real. The NBA Board of Governors voted 29-1 Thursday to bring back their season, with training camp beginning June 30 and the season reopener July 31 with a 22-team format in Orlando, the league announced. “The Board’s approval of the restart format is a necessary step toward resuming the NBA season,” commissioner Adam Silver said in a press release. “While the COVID-19 pandemic presents formidable challenges, we are hopeful of finishing the season in a safe and responsible manner based on strict protocols now being finalized with public health officials and medical experts. We also recognize that as we prepare to resume play, our society is reeling from recent tragedies of racial violence and injustice, and we will continue to work closely with our teams and players to use our collective resources and influence to address these issues in very real and concrete ways.” The players association is expected to rubber-stamp the decision Friday, but how the league will sort out coronavirus testing has not been established. “‘I’m ready to go,” Mavericks owner Mark Cuban told The Post. “We have more work to do, because safety will always be our primary focus, but it’s going to be fun to have the guys back on the court.” The Nets and the other 21 clubs will begin training camp for a week on June 30 then continue it in Orlando after July 7. The additional six teams beyond the playoff quaifiers based on the March 11 standings are the Trail Blazers, Pelicans, Kings, Spurs, Suns and Wizards. That’s five teams from the West and one from the East — based on the formula of teams having to be within six games of a playoff spot. It also worked out those teams have the league’s 22 best records. The Blazers, ninth in the West, were the lone dissenting vote — they pushed for just 20 teams, according to a source. After eight regular-season games called “seeding games,’’ there will be a play-in event between the Nos. 8 and 9 seeds in each conference — but only if the ninth seed is within four games of the playoff spot. The NBA Finals could conclude as late as Oct. 12, with training camp for next season not commencing until Nov. 10, according to the NBA. The season opener for 2020-21 would “likely’’ be Dec. 1, the NBA said.  Teams will be secluded in a bubble atmosphere at Disney World with a series of protocols. The NBA statement read: “The NBA and the NBPA are working with infectious disease specialists, public health experts and government officials to establish a rigorous program to prevent and mitigate the risk related to COVID-19, including a regular testing protocol and stringent safety practices.” As previously reported, the Knicks won’t be part of the Disney World fun and can embark on a coaching search, with Tom Thibodeau penciled in as favorite. The Knicks have always been ambivalent about a restart with their record finishing at 21-45 — officially now seven straight seasons out of the playoffs. The Nets, seventh in the East, will partake in the eight-game regular season that will be followed by a potential play-in series then the playoffs. One report stated the 2021 Finals would be in July, so as to ensure NBA players would be available for the postponed Tokyo Olympics, which are scheduled to begin late that month. The NBA was the first sports league in America to shut down and now is ready to officially be the first up and running.There were doubters in March that the NBA would play again, with Jeff Van Gundy among those predicting the season was over.

A Miami plastic surgeon is offering drive-through Botox for quarantined residents. Michael Salzhauer, otherwise known as “Dr Miami,” has been running a clinic for injections in the garage of his Florida home. The plastic surgeon told Reuters he came up with the idea when he was sitting in his car at a drive-through site to get tested for coronavirus antibodies. Salzhauser said while waiting for a patient: “The areas that we inject Botox are the upper face, exactly the parts of the face that aren’t covered by the mask so it’s really ideal.” Per Reuters, patients who want drive-through Botox sign up for Salzhauser’s services online — paying an average of $600. A client of Dr. Miami’s, Arman Ohevshalom said the idea was “very creative.” “After seeing how they’re running it I feel just as comfortable as I would in the office,” he added. As of Thursday, Florida had more than 58,700 coronavirus cases and at least 2,500 deaths. Gov Ron DeSantis ordered all “non-essential elective medical procedures” to be stopped as of March 18 because of the pandemic. But in early May, Florida eased up slightly on coronavirus restrictions. Cosmetic and elective medical procedures, like Botox injections, were allowed to begin again. Hospitals were allowed to resume surgeries and doctors in South Florida said they were separating plastic surgery patients from COVID-infected ones. “We are not overwhelmed. We screen every patient that walks through the door and we test every patient that goes upstairs,” Dr Randy Katz, medical director of emergency services at Memorial Regional Hospital in Hollywood told WFOR-TV. “We keep patients separate and we keep people safe — our patients and healthcare providers.” The chief of general surgery, Dr. Brett Cohen, added: “We have rearranged our schedules. We have spaced outpatient care so that they have an individual appointment and won’t run in to anybody else.” “The patient waiting rooms have been changed, so chairs are spaced out.” As noted by Reuters, tattoo artists in the Sunshine State — of which there are around 10,000 — remain frustrated that they can’t open up, too. A Miami-Dade spokesperson said local officials haven’t set a date for tattoo shops to reopen, but said they’re working on it.

Al ULA, Saudi Arabia – Abeer al-Howayan despaired of ever working after spending eight years trying to find a job that would put her chemistry degree to use in the Saudi Arabian town of Al Ula. She eventually abandoned her scientific ambitions and turned to selling homemade cakes, before she was chosen last year for a government training program to support a $20 billion flagship tourism project in the kingdom’s northwestern region. The 31-year-old learned how to make artisanal soap from French experts flown in by Saudi authorities and in late December started selling her creations at a booth near the rock-hewn tombs of Madain Saleh, site of an ancient civilization. She also started offering her wares online. Then the coronavirus struck. Even after all her compromises, Howayan’s future is uncertain once again. The pandemic has hammered Saudi Arabia’s nascent non-religious tourism industry – among the few new sectors to have emerged under Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman’s drive to diversify the economy from oil and create millions of jobs. “It is very tough, but I keep telling myself things will get better after corona. One has to remain optimistic,” Howayan, whose online business has also slowed, told Reuters. Women in the United States and Europe have taken an outsized hit from the wave of unemployment caused by the coronavirus, but for women in Saudi Arabia the downturn is particularly damaging because it struck just as their efforts to enter the workforce and gain greater financial independence were gaining traction. Howayan is among nearly one million unemployed Saudis – 12 percent of the working-age population – pinning their hopes on the prince’s vision to modernize the conservative and patriarchal country with ambitious projects. Women make up about 83 percent of the jobless, according to the Saudi statistics office. And it’s an educated group; 70 percent of those women have high school diplomas or university degrees. And many were counting on the new sectors such as tourism to provide their entry to the workforce. Private sector squeezed 
Tackling unemployment is a main pillar of Prince Mohammed’s plan. He promised in 2017 “better unemployment numbers by 2020” and to cut the jobless rate to 7 percent over the next decade. But the rate has fallen by less than 1 percentage point. A tough task has become even tougher as coronavirus disruptions and austerity measures have squeezed the finances of the private sector. “To reduce unemployment, the private sector will need to create at least 500,000 to 1 million jobs for Saudis, said John Sfakianakis, a Gulf expert at the University of Cambridge, “But this year alone, the private sector will unavoidably contract by 7 percent … and that’s just this year.” Finance Minister Mohammed al-Jadaan told Reuters that the government remained committed to job creation targets and was still funding training and capacity building. “Coronavirus is with us this year and possibly for a part of next year, but then it will go away and when it goes away we need to make sure that we have seized this time to build more capacity and train more people to be ready when we start offering services again,” said Jadaan. He did not specifically address the issue of women. According to regional experts, a faltering of the reform drive could lead to the public questioning the social contract between the ruling Al Saud family and the people in a country where 80 percent of the population is under 30. Oil wealth is shared across the kingdom in exchange for popular submission to absolute monarchical rule. However there could be some social discontent if jobs do not materialize and Saudis find themselves paying more taxes with less state benefits, according to Yasmine Farouk at the Carnegie Middle East Center. “It will eventually guide the country into a political discussion that the leadership doesn’t want,” she said. Ending gender segregation
Saudi Arabia has largely struggled to lure foreign capital outside the energy sector as many investors hesitate over Riyadh’s human rights record and the commercial viability of some domestic mega projects. But the entertainment and tourism industries started taking off last year, accompanied by social reforms to open up the kingdom, including ending gender segregation in most public places and introducing public entertainment. Thousands of jobs were created and Saudis flocked to concerts, festivals and sporting events. Last year, the kingdom attracted international acts from Cirque du Soleil to Mariah Carey, Italian tenor Andrea Bocelli and Greek musician Yanni. Saudis also cheered female WWE wrestlers in Riyadh and heavyweight boxers Anthony Joshua and Andy Ruiz Jr in a custom-built 15,000 person stadium. However, the Saudi tourism minister told Reuters in April that the industry, including Muslim pilgrimages, could decline by 35-45 percent this year due to coronavirus measures. Abeer Mohammed Jumuah is another example of a woman who benefited from the prince’s reform drive. She spent years looking for a job as a teacher after graduating from university in home economics and eventually joined a government training program last year to learn cooking skills in Paris. The 31-year-old has returned to a catering role in Saudi Arabia helping Michelin-starred chefs, but it is only temporary and she will eventually need to find new work – something that has become a trickier proposition in the wake of the pandemic. “I hope that one day I can open a café where I can offer a breakfast menu with lots of French pastries,” she said. “I want to be financially independent and I want my two daughters, aged four and seven, to have a better living standard.” Changing expectations 
Analysts said they expected a recovery in tourism and entertainment to start in the first half of 2021, with the sectors requiring government support for at least a few years. The Royal Commission for Al Ula, set up in 2017 to carry out reforms in the crown prince’s drive, said it planned to reopen in October this year and a spokesman said it was committed to job creation. Some are hopeful for the future. Madiha al-Anazy, 29, joined a five-month tour guide training program when she returned from Florida in May 2019 with a masters degree in biotechnology and now has a permanent job as a tour guide. Her 33-year-old husband, Mohamad, was temporarily taken on as a part-time “ranger” to protect heritage sites and the couple is betting on a revival in the tourism sector. “We hope he will find a permanent job one day,” Anazy said. Private-sector job creation is partly intended to wean citizens off reliance on the state as more than two-thirds of the Saudi workforce is employed by the government and their salaries account for roughly half of 2020 budget spending. Low oil prices would make it difficult for past state largesse to continue. This could lead to many young Saudis taking lower-income jobs typically relegated to foreigners, in a societal shift, according to Karen Young, a Gulf analyst at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. “People’s expectation for income and lifestyle are going to be different to their parents,” she said.

Whether you’re a freshman coming to college or a returning student, there isn’t much certainty about the fall semester. Individual colleges are periodically announcing plans — often subject to change — for courses that are fully online, largely in-person or some kind of hybrid. In addition, it’s hard to envision what the experience of attending college in the midst of a global pandemic and accompanying economic recession will look like — and whether it’s worth the hefty investment. But students and families can control how they react. The unknowns have some students considering taking a gap year, transferring to a different institution for a period or even changing their college choice overall. By gathering the right data, they can make an informed decision about their plans for the fall. Here are questions to consider and pose to universities as families think through their options: Are you living on campus with certain restrictions? Students and families need to determine what factors matter to them the most in making their decision, said Jayne Fonash, the president of the National Association for College Admission Counseling. Are students worried about how being on campus might affect their health? Are they comfortable living on campus with certain restrictions? How have the family’s finances changed? These are some of the questions students and families can put to themselves that can help them define their priorities before asking for information from their colleges. In addition, students should think about what kind of resources — including, technology, food assistance and academic help — that they might need to be successful in school, said Teresa Steinkamp, the advising director at the Scholarship Foundation of St. Louis. Students should also be thinking about how the fall semester may fit into their broader plans and goals. “We have an obligation to the students who are considering enrolling or who are continuing their education this fall to really think about the cost-benefit analysis and understand that pausing right now is not necessarily indicative of a failure or a personal flaw on their end,” she said. What happens if you get sick on campus? Jean Chin, an associate clinical professor of medicine at the University of Georgia, who is also chairing the American College Health Association’s COVID-19 task force, said there are a whole slew of pandemic-specific questions, including: How are you going to support my physical and mental health? What will happen if the student gets sick in the residence halls? Does the school have its own health service? If not, where will they send students who need their health care needs met?” Parents and students should also try to get an understanding of how a college will handle a situation where one student is infringing on another’s health, Chin said. “What’s going to happen if a student doesn’t want to wear a mask or doesn’t respect my six-foot physical space?” In addition, if a student is medically high-risk, ask whether the college has a plan for keeping them safe, she said. Chin also suggests families look at individual colleges’ websites to see what plans the schools have already communicated and whether they sound reasonable to the family. Her committee has released a set of guidelines for colleges looking to bring students back on campus. Access to widespread testing for students, faculty and staff with symptoms as well as the ability to contact-trace and quarantine infected individuals are key to minimizing the spread of the virus on a campus, according to the document. “Anybody who posts a well-documented plan to me seems like they’ve got their ducks in a row,” Chin said. “They may not have thought of everything — it tells you that their process of thinking is really sound.” Students and families may also want to get a granular understanding of the safety measures schools with in-person courses are taking to protect students, Fonash said. Will masks be required in certain settings and, if they’ll be provided, how big will classes be? And what will a room in residence look like? Families may also want peace of mind about the social aspects of the college experience. “I don’t know that a campus can monitor 24/7 every party, every gathering, every individual decision, but certainly knowing what the policy is going to be on the campus, is a legitimate question,” she said. How does the pandemic impact your expenses? College costs and financial aid always play an important role in students and families’ decisions of where to attend school, but economic considerations are particularly crucial during a period when so many are out of work and the product colleges are delivering is noticeably different than what students expect. “It’s important for a student to understand completely the cost of their education, the aid that they’ve been offered and what, if any, unmet need remains,” Steinkamp said. “That’s really important this year because students are being asked to commit to institutions where there’s still a lot of uncertainty.” Are financial-aid offers are final or an estimate? Steinkamp says students should be sure the offer is final before committing to a school. In addition, students and families should reflect internally about what it means to attend an institution during this period that requires parents or students to take on a sizable loan, she said. Her organization is advising students to make parallel plans, laying the groundwork to attend a community college if — for health and finance reasons — it makes sense to go to a less-expensive school close to home, while also keeping track of deposit deadlines — and crucially when those deposits can be refunded — at other colleges they’re considering. How will financial aid be impacted by the current environment? The CARES Act, one of the stimulus bills passed by Congress earlier this year, temporarily suspended the requirement that colleges match the money provided by the government for work-study programs. “Either the average work-study job is going to be less money or they’re going to have fewer of them,” said Mark Kantrowitz, the publisher of savingforcollege.com. In addition, if certain campus facilities are closed, students may not be able to get hired for a typical work-study gig, like staffing the library desk or swiping students into the cafeteria. What does that look like in the fall if you can’t do your work-study position? Do you have all the resources necessary to cover your expenses? If not, how does that affect your ability to continue at that institution? If students are considering taking a gap year or signing up for courses at a local community colleges, how might that affect your eligibility for financial aid when you return? Need-based financial aid will always be based on a college’s assessment of a student’s free application for federal student aid or FAFSA, Fonash said. Will merit-based scholarship or grants be the same if you return to their school six months or a year from now? Will you have to reapply for financial aid if you take a gap year or enroll elsewhere for a period? It’s also often the case that colleges make less financial aid available to transfer students, Kantrowitz said. What is the average award for transfer students versus a first-year student? Given the economic uncertainty surrounding so many families, students and parents should also find out from colleges how they’ll help them afford the cost of school if their financial situation changes. That may already be the case for some students since need-based financial aid is based on income information provided by families from the 2018 tax year. Students always have the option to ask colleges to reassess their financial-aid packages, Kantrowitz said. How can you appeal for more financial aid? Typically, schools will issue a form or they’ll tell students to write a letter about their change in circumstances, he said. In addition, the Seldin/Haring-Smith Foundation, a nonprofit focused on higher education and immigration issues, launched SwiftStudent last month, a free tool students can use to streamline the process of writing to their schools for more financial aid. How is the school handling increased demand for financial aid? In addition, get a sense of whether the amount students will be asked to pay will change if the campus experience does, Kantrowitz said. Will housing deposits, room/board and tuition will be refunded if classes start or move online? When campuses were forced online in the spring, many schools offered at least pro-rated refunds on room and board, but very few provided tuition rebates. If a college promises some kind of refund, will it be a cash refund or a credit? Cash won’t affect students’ eligibility for financial aid the following year, but a rebate will, he said. Understanding changes to the academic experience
Regardless of whether courses are delivered mostly online or largely in-person this fall, a student’s academic experience will be different from previous years. The way colleges approach this new learning environment could impact students’ decision to attend. For many students and colleges, the rush to convert courses from in-person to remote was disappointing. How will virtual courses in the fall look different than those in the spring? Steinkamp also suggests students reflect on how the online learning experience went for them in the spring and factor that into their decision-making in the fall. Will they change their course load or pick different classes? Were they able to access tutoring and the other academic resources that they might need to succeed online? Depending on the answers, it may make sense for some students to take a semester off if the experience is fully online, Steinkamp said, particularly if they’re borrowing for those courses. Ultimately, never agree to attend a college without these two questions answered: What do you need to be successful as a student? And what are you hoping to get out of your education?

BEIJING – From outbreak to lockdown and reopening, the Chinese city of Wuhan, where the novel coronavirus emerged late last year, has been through all stages of dealing with the health crisis. Specific characteristics allowed Wuhan to impose some of the tightest restrictions in the world on its 11 million residents until the outbreak was under control. This interactive graphic takes you through how’s it’s currently working to lift those restrictions.  Much of the city, the capital of Hubei province, is organized in residential compounds of apartment blocks, outdoor spaces, convenience stores and other basic services. The compounds are often walled off from the street and gated. People were restricted to their compounds from Jan. 23 when Wuhan went into a lockdown that lasted 76 days. Extensive surveillance infrastructure and strict housing registration rules already in place helped to facilitate the implementation of the restrictions and the easing of them later. Now, Wuhan residents live and move under the auspices of colored QR codes embedded in WeChat and Alipay smartphone apps that use automatically-collected travel and medical data. A green rating allows for unrestricted movement in and out of residential compounds and public areas, while orange and red signify a quarantine for seven and 14 days respectively.

Hong Kong’s Legislative Council passed a law banning residents from dissing China’s national anthem — a bill that sparked confrontations between rival lawmakers that turned physical, Bloomberg reported Thursday. Pro-democracy lawmakers and activists opposed the law as part of the mainland’s Communist government to thwart dissent following violent protests in the territory over a feared loss of liberty. The law will go into effect June 12, Secretary for Constitutional and Mainland Affairs Erick Tsang said. “We’ve reiterated that we hope the public respects the national anthem, which is the symbol and sign of our country,” Tsang said, speaking after the law had passed, according to the news service. “Critics have said that this is an evil law that would suppress freedom of speech. That’s not true. If you do not publicly and deliberately insult the national anthem, you don’t have to worry that you’re breaking the law.” The harsh new law carries a prison sentence of up to three years for people convicted of insulting the anthem or singing it in a “distorted or derogatory” manner, either online or in public — even at a sporting event. The legislation prompted demonstrations in last month, and comes as China seeks to enact new national security legislation on the former British colony. Chief Executive Carrie Lam had pushed ahead with the anthem bill despite the opposition, saying in May that it would get priority in the legislature. At sports events in the semi-autonomous city, residents often boo the Chinese national anthem, “March of the Volunteers,” and protesters last year came up with their own anthem, “Glory to Hong Kong.” The passage of the bill came on the June 4 anniversary of China’s 1989 crackdown on activists in Tiananmen Square, a milestone that is usually marked by protests in Hong Kong. But Hong Kong authorities barred the event this year, citing social distancing measures taken to combat the coronavirus pandemic. Authorities cited the need for social distancing amid the outbreak, despite the recent reopening of schools, beaches, bars and beauty parlors, Fox News reported. Hong Kong has had comparatively few cases of the virus and life has mostly returned to normal in the teeming city of 7.4 million. Hundreds or possibly thousands of people were killed when tanks and troops assaulted the center of Beijing on the night of June 3-4, 1989 to break up weeks of student-led protests authorities called a threat to authoritarian Communist Party rule. “We all know the Hong Kong government and the Chinese government really don’t want to see the candle lights in Victoria Park,” said Wu’er Kaixi, a former student leader who was No. 2 on the government’s most-wanted list following the crackdown, referring to the location of the commemoration for the past three decades. “The Chinese Communists want us all to forget about what happened 31 years ago. But it is the Chinese government themselves reminding the whole world that they are the same government which 31 years ago suppressed the peaceful demonstrators and in the last year, the same government doing the same in Hong Kong,” he told The Associated Press in Taiwan, where he lives. Other vigils, virtual and otherwise, are planned elsewhere, including in Taiwan, the self-ruled island democracy whose government has criticized Beijing for hiding the facts of the massacre. Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson Zhao Lijian called the statement “complete nonsense.” “As to the political disturbance that occurred in the late 1980s, the Chinese government has had a clear conclusion. The great achievements that we have achieved … have fully demonstrated that the development path China has chosen is completely correct, which conforms to China’s national conditions and has won the sincere support of the Chinese people,” Zhao told reporters at a daily briefing. Meanwhile, police pepper-sprayed some Hong Kong protesters on Thursday who defied the ban to stage rallies. Scuffles broke out briefly in the working-class Mong Kok area where hundreds had gathered and some demonstrators tried to set up roadblocks with metal barriers, prompting officers to use spray to disperse them, according to Reuters witnesses. Several protesters were arrested, police said. Earlier, a few thousand people joined a peaceful main rally in Victoria Park, many wearing masks and chanting slogans such as “Liberate Hong Kong, revolution of our time” and “Fight for freedom, stand with Hong Kong.” “We are just remembering those who died on June 4, the students who were killed. What have we done wrong? For 30 years we have come here peacefully and reasonably, once it’s over it’s ‘sayonara’,” said Kitty, a 70-year-old housewife. The ban on the vigils also comes as Chinese media and some Beijing officials voice support for protests in the US against police brutality, and as relations between the world’s two largest economies continue to sour. With Reuters

As if the coronavirus pandemic wasn’t enough of a circus already. An enterprising Polish aerialist has managed to both pass the time and sharpen her skills during lockdown by practicing her gravity-defying feats at home in las Vegas. Since performers around the globe have been sidelined, with circuses canceling shows over COVID-19 concerns, Aleksandra Kiedrowicz has been posting her tricks on social media for her fans. In an impressive montage, the 25-year-old performs her high-flying routine using everything from cars to teacups. In one shot, the Season 8 winner of “Poland’s Got Talent” can be seen making herself a mug of coffee using only her feet while contorted on the counter in an awkward crab position. Another shows Kiedrowicz — known on social media as Flexy Alex — doing splits between a parked car and one driving in reverse, like the modern equivalent of the rack. Needless to say, the social-media masses have been applauding the acrobat’s impromptu displays. “I could watch this for days,” commented one fan on an Instagram video of Kiedrowicz busting out a spine-bending routine on top of a car. “Oh my goodness! I’d get sick!” said another of a clip of her spinning while dangling precariously from chains attached to her ceiling. This isn’t the entertainer’s first rodeo — er, circus. Kiedrowicz has strutted her stunts for places like Cirque Paris and Italy’s prestigious “Alis” show by Le Cirque: World’s Top Performers, according to her Facebook page. She also appeared on both “America’s Got Talent” and its British counterpart as half of a knife-throwing duo with her now-fiancé, Alfredo Silva, reports the Sun. Of course, Kiedrowicz’s isn’t the only entertaining work-from-home video out there. Dancer Conor McKenzie went viral in April after performing an elaborate runway show while wearing only a blanket.

PHILADELPHIA — Mayor Jim Kenney kicked off a recent briefing on Philadelphia’s coronavirus response with an unusual request for residents: Be careful what you flush. Between mid-March, when the city’s stay-at-home order was issued, and the end of April, most of the 19 sewer and storm water pumping stations in Philadelphia had experienced clogs from face masks, gloves and wipes residents had pitched into the potty, Kenney said. “Please do not flush any of these items down the toilet,” the mayor said. Officials in other US cities and rural communities — and the US Environmental Protection Agency — have issued similar pleas as wastewater plant operators report a surge of stopped-up pipes and damage to equipment. The problem has sharpened the longstanding clash over whether wipes are suitable for flushing. While drain clogs aren’t new, most of the more than 15 cities contacted by The Associated Press said they’ve become a more costly and time-consuming headache during the pandemic. Home-bound Americans are seeking alternatives to bathroom tissue because of occasional shortages while stepping up efforts to sanitize their dwellings and themselves. “When everyone rushed out to get toilet paper and there was none … people were using whatever they could,” said Pamela Mooring, spokeswoman for DC Water, the system in the nation’s capital. Sanitary sewer overflows jumped 33 percent between February and March in Houston because of clogs from rags, tissues, paper towels and wipes, said public works department spokeswoman Erin Jones. In Murfreesboro, Tennessee, crews are cleaning sewage pumping stations a couple of times a week that previously needed it once a month, said John Strickland, manager of the treatment facility. At Beale Air Force Base in Northern California, a squadron that usually deals with airfield maintenance and weaponry disposal has been yanking wipes from the base’s plumbing. “Our airmen are working 16-plus hours to unclog the pipe systems and that takes them out of the mission and puts a strain on the rest of the team,” Master Sgt. Destrey Robbins said in an article on the Beale website. By flushing the wrong things, people are taxing infrastructure that’s already deteriorating, said Darren Olson, vice chairman of the American Society of Civil Engineers’ Committee for America’s Infrastructure. “Your latex glove may not be the thing that causes a clog, but you are adding to the burden.” Hundreds of areas, like a portion of Philadelphia, have combined sewage and stormwater systems so sanitation officials say that means discarded masks and gloves that litter sidewalks and parking lots can also reach and help gum up treatment plants. Olson said masks and gloves thrown in the street can travel through storm drains in separate systems to lakes and other waterways. George Leonard, Ocean Conservancy’s chief scientist, said he’s concerned discarded personal protective equipment could wash out to sea and eventually add to “the plastics burden that the ocean is already suffering from.” Costs of clearing, cleaning and restarting equipment are mounting for utilities. To reduce the likelihood of clogs, WSSC Water — a wastewater utility that serves nearly 1.8 million customers in Prince George’s and Montgomery counties in Maryland — installed about 27 debris grinding pumps over the last decade at a cost of $1.5 million. “At one wastewater pumping station alone, one that does not have grinder pumps, we have seen an increase of 37,000 pounds of wipes during January–March 2020 compared with the same time period in 2019,” said utility spokeswoman Lyn Riggins. Michigan’s Macomb County spent $50,000 in 2018 removing a “fatberg” of debris, oils and grease that was 100 feet long and 11 feet wide, said Candice Miller, public works commissioner. The suburban Detroit community also spent millions to install screens that snag thousands of pounds of wipes weekly. Municipal officials say the solution’s simple: Put nothing in toilets but human waste and toilet paper. “Don’t be fooled by wipes packaging claims that these products are flushable,” DC Water said in a March advisory. “They are not.” The Association of the Nonwoven Fabrics Industry, which represents hundreds of companies including major wipes producers, agrees most wet wipes are unsuitable for toilet disposal and says they’re labeled as such. But one type is designed to perform the same functions as toilet paper and merits the “flushable” label, said Dave Rousse, president of the industry group. These cellulose wipes begin breaking down immediately and dissolve within hours, Rouse said. “These wipes are incapable of causing the kinds of problems that wastewater operators are accusing them of,” he said. Critics contend “flushable” wipes don’t biodegrade as manufacturers claim.  In Macomb County outside Detroit, maintenance workers are removing two tons of wipes per week from one pump station and officials say some clearly are the “flushable” variety. This month, the county sued wipe manufacturers, alleging voluntary flushability standards are based on testing that doesn’t reflect actual conditions in a sewer system. In March, Washington became the first state to adopt requirements for the size, placement and visibility of “Do Not Flush” warnings on wipes that manufacturers and local officials agree should not go down toilets. Similar legislation is under consideration in California. Meanwhile, many cities are using public education campaigns to make their case against flushing pandemic debris. The message may be getting through, says El Paso, Texas water utility spokesman Carlos Briano. Before the media blitz, emergency maintenance teams were dispatched about seven times a day to clear pipes. Now, it’s once a day. “It’s slowed, but it’s still not pre-pandemic,” Briano said.

Mayor Bill de Blasio on Thursday said that city restaurants will be able to temporarily create an influx of seating on sidewalks, in parking spaces and in open streets during Phase 2 of the Big Apple’s reopening from its coronavirus-induced shutdown when outdoor dining only will be allowed. “We will provide a massive expansion of curbside seating, a big expansion of open space,” de Blasio said during his daily City Hall press briefing, in explaining how the city will accommodate Big Apple eateries financially-ravaged by the coronavirus crisis. Outdoor dining at restaurants will be permitted in Phase 2 of reopening, Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Wednesday — and de Blasio, who maintains that the city is still slated to enter Phase 1 on Monday, said Thursday that the Big Apple could move into Phase 2 “as early as the beginning of July.” However, under the state’s reopening schedule of two weeks per phase, the city should, if on track, hit Phase 2 by June 22. Under the city’s new “Open Restaurants” initiative, the de Blasio administration will make it easier for food joints to set up sidewalk seating and allow restaurants to convert adjacent parking spots into more seating. To use curbside seating =, restaurants must comply with guidelines that include: accessible seating, not blocking bus stops or fire hydrants and seating located away from intersections. And eateries must provide their own vertical barricades, planters, tables and chairs. For curbside seating, there will be a simple process for restaurants to register and self-certify online, according to the mayor’s office. Under the outdoor dining plan, restaurants will also be allowed to create seating areas directly in front of their establishments in the more than 45 miles of open streets across the city. The city is looking to identify new open streets on commercial strips with a high number of restaurants and bars as it continues to roll out more open roadways in the coming weeks and months as part of a goal to open up 100 miles of streets. “We’ll do what it takes to help this key part of life in New York City,” the mayor said, adding, “This is going to be another important step,” but that “health and safety” comes first. Big Apple restaurants must adhere to the state’s outdoor dining rules, which say that tables must be spaced six feet apart and all staff must wear face masks. Customers must also wear face coverings when not seated. “Monday, June 8, Phase 1 begins and we are resolute that we will continue this restart process,” Hizzoner said, noting, “We must have health and safety as the priorities in this restart.” Meanwhile, during a City Council Consumer Affairs committee hearing on legislation to expand outdoor dining Thursday, Department of Transportation Commissioner Polly Trottenberg discussed the possibility of restaurants using pedestrian plazas and parking lots for seating. She promised any application process will be simple and streamlined. In order to speed up the process, restaurants will not need approval recommendations from local community boards like they did in the past, she said. “We don’t want to be heavy-handed. Enforcement will be a light touch,” Trottenberg said. Trottenberg noted there will not be a “one-size fits all” approach to outdoor dining and there could be “whole block solutions” where all restaurants on a block agree to an outdoor dining plan. Prior to the coronavirus pandemic, there were 27,000 restaurants in the Big Apple with 42 percent in Manhattan, 24 percent in Brooklyn, 22 percent in Queens, 8 percent in The Bronx and 4 percent on Staten Island, according to Trottenberg.

China on Thursday said it will let American airlines resume flights to the mainland after the Trump administration moved to bar Chinese carriers from entering the US. Some 95 foreign airlines that are currently banned from flying to China will be allowed a single flight per week into one city starting Monday, the Civil Aviation Administration of China said. Airlines will be able to run two flights to China if they go three straight weeks without any passengers testing positive for COVID-19, Beijing regulators said. Their service will be suspended for a week if at least five passengers have the virus and for four weeks if at least 10 passengers test positive, according to officials. The move came a day after the US Department of Transportation said it would ban Chinese passenger carriers from flying in and out of the US in an effort to punish China for shutting American airlines out of the country. In late March, Chinese regulators told foreign airlines they could only run one flight a week based on schedules they were using on March 12. That effectively banned US carriers from entering the country because they had already halted flights to China by that date, according to the feds. Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said Beijing officials “deeply regret” Washington’s decision and that they would submit “stern representations” to their US counterparts. The Department of Transportation has said it would reconsider the looming ban if China changed its policies affecting American airlines. “We hope the US will not create obstacles for resolving this issue,” Zhao said at a news conference, according to a transcript the foreign ministry released. The airline spat comes amid growing tensions between the US and China over the Beijing’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic and its recent crackdown on Hong Kong’s autonomy. President Trump last week moved end the US’ special treatment for Hong Kong after China passed a national-security law targeting the territory. With Post wires

BARCELONA, Spain — For florist Laura Gómez and many other Barcelona residents, the COVID-19 pandemic has one silver lining, amid all the death and suffering. For the first time in decades, locals won’t feel outnumbered by the throngs of foreign visitors that flood Spain’s top tourist destination each summer. No one doubts that their absence will deepen Spain’s pandemic-induced economic slump, but those like Gómez who have avoided infection hope to enjoy at least a few weeks’ respite from mass tourism, which they believe is ruining their hometown. “Las Ramblas are ours again,” Gómez said, tending the flower stall her family has run for four generations in a prime location on that iconic Barcelona promenade. She reopened it last week after two months of lockdown due to the coronavirus outbreak that has killed more than 27,000 in Spain. Where caricature artists normally hawk their works and the incessant chatter of the flowing crowds masks all gentler sounds, you can now hear something unfamiliar: birdsong. “You can’t imagine how annoying it is” with tourists, Gómez said. “People asking you all day long where the cathedral is, where the beach is. I am not a tourist information office!” She still sells her dwindling number of local clients cut roses and sunflowers, bouquets, seed packets and potted geraniums, shunning the cacti in souvenir mugs that are a staple of other flower stalls. “Tourists only want to take a photo, why would they want to buy flowers?” said Gómez. “No one lives here anymore. Go to the outer neighborhoods and you see people in the street. Here the people couldn’t take it any more and left.” Some, however, miss the vibrancy they say tourists provide. “It is a pity to see Las Ramblas like this,” said José Montero, who works nearby and lunches daily at an outdoor restaurant on the street. “Las Ramblas needs life.” The city’s other top site, Antoni Gaudí’s La Sagrada Familia Basilica with its sandcastle-like spires, remains closed. Without the gawking multitudes, the only sign of life outside was an elderly man dozing on a bench. But whatever their feelings on tourism, Barcelona’s residents are about to feel the economic pain of living without a huge chunk of the 10 million foreigners who visit each year. Unlike Italy, which is opening up to foreign tourists, Spain is waiting until July to lift its 14-day quarantine on incoming travelers — despite pressure to restart its economy that relies on tourism for 12 percent of its activity. The national statistics office said on Monday that zero tourists arrived in April. A year earlier, 7 million tourists spent 7 billion euros ($7.8 billion) in Spain. While Europe considers how to safely resume continental travel during a pandemic, Spain’s government is encouraging Spaniards to vacation domestically. Catalonia’s separatist-led regional government has even launched a tourism campaign to attract people from elsewhere in Spain. Many business owners and workers, however, fear they may not make it without foreigner customers. Jesús Martín runs the Can Ramonet restaurant specializing in paella near Barcelona’s seaside. He is unsure whether he can cover his costs with local clients. “This place has been in my family for three generations, so staying open is about more than just money,” Martín said. “We depend on foreign tourists… I am not sure if we can get by with just Spaniards.” Barcelona became one of the world’s top destinations after using the 1992 Summer Olympics to showcase its Mediterranean climate and cuisine, mesmerizing architecture and liberal lifestyle. Visitors kept on coming, despite a terror attack on Las Ramblas in 2017 and rioting by Catalan separatists last year. The city of just 1.6 million people welcomed a record 11.9 million tourists in 2019, almost 10 million of them from abroad. But even though the sector provides Barcelona with 15 percent of its economic activity and 10 percent of its jobs, a growing number of citizens have soured on tourism. A survey of 3,600 residents by the city hall last year found that 61 percent felt Barcelona could not handle greater inflows. Graffiti saying “Tourists, go home” popped up, along with protests against short-term rental platforms like Airbnb which residents blame for driving up real estate prices and forcing locals to move out. Many complain about the replacement of family-run stores by global chains and the rowdy behavior of foreign youths lured by low-cost flights. “Barcelona has become a top destination for cheap, drunk partying. I’m all for partying, but I’m the first one to go out on my balcony and shout for people to be quiet,” said Mario, who did not share his last name because he works in the tourism sector. Mario was rollerblading along a beachfront free of rental bikes and Segways weaving around couples taking selfies. In place of sun-baked bodies luxuriating in the warm sun and gentle breeze, the sand was occupied by a handful of families who flouted a temporary prohibition on sunbathing and let their children frolic in the surf. “The beach has become wholesome and pure again,” Mario said. Rafaela Pérez and her husband considered the hiatus from the hubbub bittersweet as they lingered on the boardwalk. “It is glorious to have all this space for ourselves, but we know that it is not good for the economy,” the 63-year-old Pérez said. “We have neighbors who are having (financial) difficulties. And the worst is yet to come.”

STOCKHOLM – The Swedish government on Thursday urged its citizens to take their fight to the internet after thousands in the capital defied coronavirus restrictions to protest against racism and U.S. police violence. Demonstrators bearing signs like “Black Lives Matter” gathered for several hours at a square in the heart of Stockholm during Wednesday afternoon to show support for George Floyd, a black man in Minneapolis who was killed by police. Pandemic-hit Sweden has a ban on public gatherings of more than 50 people. While COVID-19 deaths have slowed since the peak in early April, healthcare resources are still strained. Home Affairs Minister Mikael Damberg said it was a democratic right to protest but that the rules from the Health Agency must be respected. “I would urge anyone who wants to protest against racism to use digital media instead. Otherwise, many people risk getting sick and dying,” he said in a written comment to Reuters. More than 4,500 people have died in the outbreak of the novel coronavirus in Sweden, many times more relative to the size of the population than in neighboring Nordic countries. Floyd, who was unarmed, died after a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes, and event that has set off the biggest anti-racism protests seen in the United States in decades.

I don’t care. What the owners make, what the players make. I hope for fairness. That no one is exploited. That transparency wins. I do think the players are the engine of the game, the product that fans spend money on. Thus whatever players receive you will never read in this space that they are greedy or undeserving. Still, when covering, say, Gerrit Cole’s negotiation if he received $10 million a year, fine; if he received $50 million a year, fine. Don’t care. In the current negotiations to restart the season, the advocates from both sides try to twist me to their view. And, in real time, both sound reasonable and right. If I must decide on a jump ball, I will do the best possible to figure out where I stand. But whether the advocates believe it or not — and most times I think they do not — I really don’t care how they split the money until it encroaches on what I do care about. The baseball. The history. The integrity. The continuity. MLB is talking about implementing a 50ish-game season that feels a slander to the league’s history, integrity and continuity. In a pandemic maybe you take what you get. But it is not the virus stopping owners and players from staging a more representative season. It is the money. When this is all forensically gone over in the future, I suspect we will discover that if the sides had been cooperative they already would have been in spring training for a few weeks now and been capable of playing a regular season that ends in September and was 100 or more games. MLB’s first offer of 82 games was going to invite asterisks. But at least it is half a season. Being in first place at roughly the traditional All-Star break feels relevant, if incomplete. Teams reach 50 games at about Memorial Day, normally the first pitstop to assess the season, not determine everything from ERA titles to championships. Maybe expanded playoffs would cover some shorter-season sins. But the 50ish game season with full prorated pay would be something forced upon the players. They would have to approve going from 10 to 14 postseason teams, and why would they do that moneymaking favor for the owners? MLB has had five teams (10 total) in each league make the playoffs each season since 2012. Seven times in those eight seasons a World Series participant was not in postseason position through Memorial Day, including the champion Nationals last year and both the AL-winning Tigers and champion Giants in 2012. Using June 30 for an approximation of when teams reach 82 games, five 2012-19 World Series participants still were not in one of the 10 playoff spots. But if the playoffs expanded to 14 clubs all World Series teams would make the playoffs except for last year’s Nationals, who would have had to compete in a play-in as they were tied for the final playoff spot, and the 2012 Tigers, who were just 38-40 though June 30. If the playoffs were kept to 10 teams, the numbers rise slightly with 57 of a possible 80 teams from 2012-2019 in postseason position through June 30, compared to 54 through Memorial Day. But there has to be more than just the data here. This sport just had to penalize the 2017 Astros and 2018 Red Sox for illegal sign stealing, throwing further doubt on the credibility of those champions. Again, 82-100 games would not be perfect. But a half season-plus of accomplishment is way meatier than one-third. Baseball is a game appreciated for its daily, serial journey. The endurance is part of the joy. And I believe, fans would have provided a lot of the needed credibility if MLB and its players were maneuvering together to play as many games as possible during a pandemic. Not playing when MLB could be a unifying force in time of racial strife, a monetary boon amid financial disaster (don’t forget how many subsidiary jobs in travel, hospitality, transportation, media, etc, benefit from the game) and a symbol that some form of normality will rise with all the sickness and death is so short-term, blinders-on stupid for both sides that they are not going to get any benefit of the doubt by playing less not more. Really, I don’t care how they split the money. But I do think more would be there than is projected. There are avenues in which some attendance returns and opportunities to do marketing deals with so little fresh entertainment content available from, say, Hollywood. There are expanded playoffs. The chance to get larger than prorated dollars from regional sports networks. But the sides are losing time to do that to the best use, which is starting by the Independence Day weekend and playing no fewer than 82 games. Already by fighting so publicly on this matter, MLB has hurt its reputation. Putting on a season shorter than it needs to be will do credibility damage that carries well beyond a schedule of any length.

Jesse McCartney paid tribute Wednesday to former Dream Street bandmate Chris Trousdale, who died Tuesday at the age of 34 after battling coronavirus. “It pains me to say that an old friend, Chris Trousdale, from my early days in the music industry has passed away due to complications from COVID-19,” McCartney, 33, penned on Instagram. “Chris had an explosively charming personality with boundless amounts of talent.” Trousdale joined Dream Street in 1999, teaming up with McCartney and fellow performers Greg Raposo, Matt Ballinger, and Frankie Galasso. Their self-titled album dropped in 2001 and featured the singles, “It Happens Every Time” and “I Say Yeah.” “We were young kids with budding talent who shared an overwhelming love for music and performing,” McCartney recalled. “Chris, in my opinion, was the most popular among us, who had a way of drawing every eye to what he was doing on stage. As an incredibly trained dancer, he would pick up an entire dance number in a matter of minutes; something that would take the rest of us days. I truly envied him as a performer.” McCartney also spoke about the bond he and Trousdale forged with their bandmates at the time. “We were a part of something people never get to experience in an entire lifetime at the tender ages of 12 and 14. Although we were a band for only 3 years, at that age, it felt like a lifetime and we built a real brotherhood,” he shared. Dream Street split up in 2002 amid legal troubles between the parents of the group’s members and the band’s creators. The singers went their separate ways, with McCartney finding success as a solo artist and an actor. He recently appeared on “The Masked Singer,” and is engaged to girlfriend Katie Peterson. “In later years, we would grow apart as our lives would take different turns, but I would often reflect on our early days together and think about how exciting it all was,” McCartney said. “My deepest sympathies go out to his mother whom I know cherished him dearly. RIP Chris. I’ll never forget your smile. #DreamStreet #ChrisTrousdale.” Trousdale went on to make guest appearances in the Disney Channel shows “Shake It Up” and “Austin & Ally.” In 2012, he appeared on NBC’s “The Voice,” but did not make it beyond the blind auditions. He previously collaborated with the girl group Play on the single, “I’m Gonna Make You Love Me,” and later worked with band member Anna Sundstrand on the 2009 duet “If Only.” She too posted a touching message about Trousdale on her Instagram story. “The first time I saw you on stage I was amazed and inspired by your talent,” Sundstrand, 31, wrote. “Together we danced, sang and became very good friends. R.I.P. my friend and thank you for all the good times.” Trousdale died Tuesday at a Burbank hospital due to coronavirus complications, TMZ reported Wednesday, citing a family member.

Keanu Reeves and Alex Winter joined San Dimas High School’s virtual graduation ceremony on Tuesday to deliver a totally bodacious message to the class of 2020. Reeves and Winter starred in the 1989 film “Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure,” which takes place in San Dimas, Calif., with Bill and Ted attending the high school. The cult classic centers on a history project Bill and Ted must complete for school, but their world is turned upside-down when they find a time machine and use it to interact firsthand with some of history’s biggest names. Before the graduating seniors’ names were read, Reeves and Winter appeared with a video message for the San Dimas students. Reeves sported a “Be Excellent to Each Other” t-shirt, referring to a quote from “Bill & Ted,” and the two introduced themselves as the “Wyld Stallyns,” the name of Bill and Ted’s band in the film. They then offered words of encouragement to the graduating class. “We know that it’s a tough time right now and you’re having to do this virtual graduation,” Winter said. “We want to wish you the best of luck moving forward.” “Congratulations to the graduating class of 2020. Well done,” Reeves added. Reeves and Winter couldn’t resist adding in a few more nods to “Bill & Ted.” “San Dimas High School football does rule,” Winter said, again referencing a famous line from the film. “But most importantly, we wanted to tell you to be excellent to each other.” Reeves then ended the video message with, “And party on!” Reeves and Winter both starred in the movie’s 1991 sequel, “Bill & Ted’s Bogus Journey” and started production for the third installment, “Bill & Ted Face the Music,” in June 2019.

Staten Island Amazon workers sued the company over its handling of the coronavirus crisis, saying lax workplace policies put them at risk of catching the deadly disease. The federal lawsuit aims to hold Amazon legally accountable for what workers say are insufficient efforts to protect them from the coronavirus, which has reportedly killed at least eight Amazon staffers and infected hundreds more. One of the plaintiffs, Barbara Chandler, contracted the virus in March at the JFK8 fulfillment center and brought it home to her family, the Wednesday complaint says. It eventually infected her cousin — whom Chandler found dead in the bathroom less than a month later — and her son, who’s also a plaintiff, according to the lawsuit. The complaint accuses Amazon of prioritizing productivity over safety at its JFK8 fulfillment center by failing to keep workstations clean, discouraging workers from washing their hands, and tacitly encouraging them to work while sick. Amazon has not disclosed how many warehouse workers have caught the coronavirus. But the complaint says the Staten Island facility has seen at least 44 confirmed cases and at least one death. Amazon also took weeks to pay Chandler only part of the “quarantine leave” that she was entitled to under New York law as a worker who contracted COVID-19, the suit says. “As New Yorkers consider a gradual return to normalcy, JFK8 workers and their families live with the very real threat of infection every day,” says the complaint, which seeks an order forcing Amazon to better protect workers from the virus. The other plaintiffs include two Amazon workers and their family members who worry they could catch the virus as a result of the warehouse’s working conditions, court papers say. Warehouse associate Derrick Palmer is suing along with his live-in girlfriend, Kendia Mesidor, who could only see her father once in the months leading up to his May death because she worried she could be carrying the coronavirus, the lawsuit says. “We want to protect our own health, but also peace of mind for our family members, and safety for the many communities in which JFK8 workers live,” Palmer said in a statement. In response to the suit, Amazon said it has followed guidance from state and local health authorities during the coronavirus pandemic and that it always complies with public health laws. The Seattle-based company has put $4 billion towards safety measures and other coronavirus-related initiatives from April to June, spokeswoman Rachael Lighty said. It also offered unlimited time away from work from early March to May 1 and leave for vulnerable staff since then, she said. “We are saddened by the tragic impact COVID-19 has had on communities across the globe, including on some Amazon team members and their family and friends,” Lighty said in a statement.

Doctors in Barcelona have reportedly been taking coronavirus patients the beach as part of their recovery process. Photos that were taken this week show doctors from Barcelona’s Hospital del Mar wheeling patients to the seaside, according to a report. The attempt to humanize its intensive care units comes as Spain has eased restrictions amid declining cases of the novel coronavirus. The lax approach is a stark contrast to just a few months ago when Spain ranked behind in Italy in Europe — and third overall in the world — for the highest number of coronavirus cases. At the peak of lockdown, people were prohibited from going outside to exercise, while children couldn’t leave their homes for any reason. Tuesday marked the second day in a row that Spain did not report a single coronavirus death in the previous 24 hours, the BBC reported. Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez on Wednesday requested from parliament another extension to the state of emergency through June 21. “We have overcome the worst of the pandemic,” Sanchez said. As of Wednesday, Spain has reported 240,326 cases of the coronavirus with more than 27,120 deaths, according to the latest figures from Johns Hopkins University, which tallies global cases.

COPENHAGEN, Denmark — Authorities in Norway have turned down applications to hold rallies in the country’s three largest cities in support of protesters in the US over the death of George Floyd, citing the coronavirus restrictions on gatherings. Rallies were planned in Oslo, Bergen and Trondheim but local authorities said that without a dispensation from the Norwegian Institute of Public Health, not more than 50 people can gather in one place, Mohamed Awil, president of the African Student Association UiO told The Associated Press. The association is co-organizing the rally in Oslo where more than 15,000 people had said they planned to take part in Thursday’s demonstration outside the US Embassy. Awil said they were considering an alternative demonstration but details were not immediately available. Similar events took place in the in the capitals of Sweden and Finland Wednesday. They attracted thousands of people even though the limit in Sweden is currently 50 and in Finland is 500.

That didn’t take long. Less than a week after resuming flights, Lion Air is suspending domestic and international flights until further notice. According to a statement from the airline, this decision was made after it was discovered that many passengers were either unable or unwilling to follow regulations to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. A statement on the airline’s website says that flights will be suspended starting June 5th. The statement also explains that travelers who already bought a ticket for after June 5th will be able to either receive a full refund or change the date without any additional charge. On its website, Lion Air posted a statement which explained, “Lion Air Group’s decision was based on considerations from an evaluation of previous flight operations, that many prospective passengers were unable to carry out air travel because they did not complete the required documents and conditions during the Corona Virus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic alert period.” Lion Air only recently resumed flying after halting operations due to the pandemic, the Jakarta Globe reports. According to the news outlet, a spokesperson for the airline, the largest in Indonesia, said, “many passengers had to cancel their trip because they could not show the required documents.” The Indonesian Transportation Ministry requires that travel is allowed under certain circumstances, but travelers must show documents stating that they are not infected with COVID-19. They must also show other documents proving that the reason for their travel fits one of the approved instances (business and family emergencies).

A Chinese doctor whose skin turned dark brown while he fought the coronavirus has died in a Wuhan hospital — more than four months after he was first infected, according to reports. Dr. Hu Weifeng, 42, went viral in April after photos were released showing his skin radically darkened as he was being treated for COVID-19, a condition put down to either liver damage or drugs he was prescribed. He died early Tuesday, according to Global Times — almost 20 weeks after he was diagnosed on Jan. 18. The urologist fell sick while treating coronavirus patients at Wuhan Central Hospital — the Chinese hospital where the pandemic was first identified. He appeared to be recovering, but suffered cerebral hemorrhages on April 22 and May 21, the report said. Hu is believed to be the sixth employee there to have died from COVID-19, Global Times said — including whistleblower Dr. Li Wenliang, who was allegedly silenced when he tried to alert the world to the new contagion. Other medical whistleblowers at Wuhan Central Hospital — including emergency unit director Ai Fen — have told Chinese media they were punished by authorities for speaking out, according to Agence France-Presse. Another colleague who also turned a dark color — Dr. Yi Fan, also 42 — was discharged from hospital on May 6, Global Times said.

An 8-year-old North Carolina girl has died after she got sick with coronavirus and suffered a seizure that left her in a coma, according to a report. Aurea Soto Morales, who was a second-grader at Creekside Elementary School, died Monday after she was hospitalized at UNC Hospital with severe complications from the virus, news station WNCN reported. The young girl, known as “Yoshi,” started feeling sick last week after both of her parents tested positive for the virus. “My sister and I started to get the COVID-19 symptoms,” her sister, Jennifer Morales, told the outlet. Morales said her sister suffered a seizure Friday and was rushed to the hospital, according to the report. “On Saturday, her brain started to swell up and she went into a coma,” Morales told the outlet. She ultimately succumbed to complications from the virus Monday — and now her family is urging parents to take the illness seriously. “Everyone associates it with old people, as they think they’re the only ones who are going to get it, but that’s not true. My sister got it,” Morales said. Jennifer Morales Jennifer Morales Jennifer Morales View Slideshow

The nation’s biggest mall operator is suing its largest tenant for not paying rent during the pandemic in what could be the beginning of a torrent of litigation over rent payments. Simon Property is suing the owner of Banana Republic, Old Navy and The Gap for $66 million in back rent and other charges related to its 412 stores in Simon malls, according to the complaint filed in Delaware State court on Tuesday. The Gap stopped paying rent on its stores in North America in April when it said in a public filing that its monthly lease obligations in the region represent $115 million per month. The apparel giant also acknowledged that it might not be able to negotiate rent deferrals or abatements and that “any dispute under these leases may result in litigation with the respective landlord,” according to Gap’s April 23 filing. Gap has already been sued in Manhattan for not paying rent for its store at 1212 Sixth Ave. and other locations in Orange County, Calif., according to The Real Deal, which first reported on the Simon complaint. “The bottom line is, we do have a contract and we do expect to get paid,” Simon CEO, David Simon said in a May earnings call in which he was referring to closed stores in the malls.

Nearly 1.9 million Americans applied for unemployment benefits last week as the coronavirus crisis put 42 million people out of work in less than three months, new data show. Thursday marked the first time since mid-March that US Department of Labor’s weekly figure fell below 2 million — a number that would have been unthinkable before the pandemic sparked an American employment crisis not seen since the Great Depression. “The states are opening up, but the job offers are turning down,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank. “We can’t keep getting weekly initial claims for unemployment benefits at this level and say the economy is A-OK.” The seasonally adjusted totals of initial jobless claims have steadily declined since peaking at 6.8 million in late March. But last week’s number was still nearly triple the 665,000 claims seen at the height of the Great Recession about a decade ago. Moreover, the number of people filing continued unemployment claims rose again after falling earlier in May, a troubling sign as states eased lockdown measures aimed at controlling the virus. There were 21.4 million continuing claims in the week ending May 23, up from 20.8 million the week prior, according to the seasonally adjusted data. “I think it generally signals that whatever reopening had occurred by right before Memorial Day had no meaningful impact on rehiring,” unemployment insurance expert Andrew Stettner told The Post. “People are still excited to get things going again but we’re not seeing it yet in these numbers.” States such as California, Texas and Oregon saw big upticks in continued claims that outweighed decreases in 37 states, noted Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation think tank. The number of people claiming Pandemic Unemployment Assistance — the federal benefit created for gig workers and others not usually eligible for regular benefits — also surged by nearly 3 million to about 10.7 million in the week ending May 16, the feds said, citing data from 35 states. New York saw the nation’s biggest decrease in initial claims last week as several regions began to emerge from coronavirus lockdowns, data show. The state recorded an unadjusted 82,981 filings, down from 189,087 the prior week, according to the feds. Economists were expecting the feds to report about 1.8 million new jobless filings ahead of Friday’s closely watched employment report for May. Experts predict it will show the unemployment rate at or near 20 percent given that job losses continued last month even as some parts of the country started reopening their economies. While the April report indicated most jobless Americans expected to be only temporarily out of work, the limits under which businesses will have to operate once they reopen may slow the pace of rehiring, according to Stettner. Friday’s report “will tell you the steep hole that we are facing,” Stettner told The Post. “If the virus stays contained this will be the bottom of the labor market, and it will show you the depth of getting up from it.” With Post wires

Luxury giant LVMH is examining the coronavirus pandemic’s impact on its $16.2 billion takeover of Tiffany amid reports that it wants to renegotiate the deal. The Paris-based conglomerate’s board of directors discussed this week how the virus crisis could affect Tiffany’s “results and perspectives” in relation to the companies’ November acquisition deal, LVMH said Thursday. The Louis Vuitton owner also sought to quash rumors that it’s considering buying Tiffany stock on the open market, where the storied New York jeweler’s share price plunged as the coronavirus hammered retailers worldwide. Tiffany shares closed Wednesday at $114.24, roughly 15 percent below the $135 per share that LVMH agreed to pay. “Considering the recent market rumors, LVMH confirms, on this occasion, that it is not considering buying Tiffany shares on the market,” the company said in a statement. LVMH agreed to buy Tiffany months before the coronavirus upended the retail industry by forcing stores to close around the world. Tiffany’s shareholders approved the deal in early February, just weeks before the virus tanked global stock markets. LVMH CEO Bernard Arnault has been looking for ways to pressure Tiffany into lowering the per-share price of the takeover amid the pandemic, Reuters reported Wednesday. But Tiffany reportedly isn’t convinced that there’s a legal basis for reopening the talks as it’s followed the financial covenants laid out in the deal. LVMH — whose portfolio includes other posh brands, such as Fendi, Givenchy and Dom Perignon — also said it would not buy Tiffany shares on the open market in March, when Bloomberg News reported that the company raised the idea with Tiffany’s board. Tiffany did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday morning.

George Floyd had tested positive for the coronavirus in April, though it was not a factor in his death, his full autopsy has revealed. Floyd was likely no longer symptomatic when four Minneapolis police officers killed him during an arrest on Monday, according to Dr. Andrew Baker, the chief medical examiner at Hennepin County. “Since … positivity for [COVID-19] can persist for weeks after the onset and resolution of clinical disease, the autopsy result most likely reflects asymptomatic but persistent … positivity from previous infection,” Baker wrote in the report, which was released Wednesday with the permission of Floyd family. The full 20-page report maintains that Floyd’s death was a homicide — that he died when his heart stopped while Officer Derek Chauvin compressed his neck in the widely viewed video of his arrest. Floyd’s family had conducted an independent autopsy that was released this week and ruled differently — that Floyd’s homicide was caused by asphyxia from both neck and back compression due to the weight of fellow Officer Thomas Lane pressing on his abdomen. Chauvin, Lane and the two other officers who assisted in the arrest, J. Alexander Kueng and Tou Thao, have all been fired and charged with felonies. The medical examiner’s office’s findings included “other significant conditions” of Floyd’s: heart disease, fentanyl intoxication and recent methamphetamine — details released in the initial report that angered Floyd’s family attorney, Benjamin Crump. Crump said Tuesday the inclusion of those conditions, which were not ruled to be a factor in his death in either autopsy, was an attempt to assassinate Floyd’s character ahead of the officers’ trials. Along with the positive COVID-19 test, the full autopsy detailed that Floyd had suffered blunt-force injuries to his face, shoulders, hands, arms and legs; bruises on his wrists from handcuffs; and a broken rib during cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

New York City businesses have likely suffered tens of millions of dollars in damages and theft as a result of the rampant open looting and vandalism that exploded in the Big Apple over the last few nights – and some may never recover, experts told The Post Wednesday. “I think it’s pretty safe to say it’s going to be in the tens of millions of dollars,” Nicole Gelinas, a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute, said of the financial and physical destruction to businesses citywide. That estimate includes the expense of repairs as well as other facets like increased security and insurance costs, Gelinas explained, adding that the pilfered merchandise likely accounts for “several million dollars.” Over the past three nights since Sunday, looters and vandals taking advantage of the mass protests in the Big Apple over the Minneapolis police killing of George Floyd have plunged swaths of the city into chaos, hitting hard Midtown Manhattan, SoHo and parts of The Bronx. Gelinas estimated there were likely “hundreds, if not thousands” of storefront windows smashed during the wild looting sprees around the five boroughs. “These are pretty custom-made, specialized glass,” said Gelinas, noting that merchants also have to buy lumber to board up the bashed-in windows in the meantime. “You put it all together, it’s certainly not incidental,” she said. “It’ll be a big cost to the retail industry’s recovery.” Mark Dicus, the executive director of the SoHo Broadway Initiative business improvement district, said that 37 retail stores along Broadway from Houston to Canal streets and some surrounding streets suffered damaged storefronts during the mayhem. Seth Gottfried Seth Gottfried William Farrington William Farrington William Farrington William Farrington William Farrington William Farrington William C. Lopez Richard Harbus Richard Harbus Richard Harbus View Slideshow There was “extensive damage” to shops on Prince, Spring, Grand, Mercer, Greene streets, said Dicus who added, at least 80 percent of retail businesses in the area are “now boarded up.” Nineteen area stores had goods stolen least once and some more than that including, The North Face, Shops of SoHo, Lulu Lemon, Bloomingdale’s, Foot Locker, Verizon, Broadway Market, Duane Reade, Zara, H&M, Prada, American Eagle, Timberland, and Balenciaga, according to Dicus. Brazen looters also raided stores in Midtown, including Macy’s flagship on Herald Square, a Sephora, a Nintendo store and a Microsoft. In The Bronx, crooks broke into pharmacies, banks and other small businesses along Fordham Road and Burnside Avenue. Jonathan Bowles, the executive director of the Manhattan-based public policy think tank Center for an Urban Future, predicted that some merchants already grappling with staggering financial losses from the city’s coronavirus-induced shutdown could close up shop for good given the costs of repairing the destruction caused by looters. “For some that are already struggling to reopen or considering whether it’s financially feasible, this could be a factor in their decision,” said Bowles. The risk of shutting down permanently is even higher for small businesses, he said. “The chances are they’ve got less of a cushion to fall back on, and many of them are already financially weak from the pandemic,” Bowles said. Gelinas expressed a counterpoint that chain stores “may have a harder time.” “A lot of chains were already struggling before this,” she said. “They had too much debt. They probably over-expanded compared to what happened with competition from online shopping, paying very high rent in major retail corridors.” Still, if the city can get the looting situation “under control in the next day or two, there may not be any problem at all,” according to Bowles. “We may entirely bounce back,” he said. “This doesn’t have to be a sign of what’s to come.

Urban beat: Pandemic and Pandemonium “The rage ignited by the death of George Floyd is symptomatic of a profound sense of alienation that has been building for years” and was “worsened” by the coronavirus crisis, Joel Kotkin argues at Quillette. COVID-19 and progressive city governments’ response to it have “devasted poorer communities,” creating “urban malaise.” Hence the return of a “riot ideology,” in which “radical activists” — and even some more mainstream left-wing politicians — applaud “random looting and even killings” as “part of a glorious ‘rebellion’ or uprising.” In response, our cities need a “laser-like focus on economic opportunity” to “repair the social safety net broken by COVID-19” and “promote self-sufficiency and not dependency.” The alternative is “watching them burn when minority and working-class resentment inevitably erupts.” Culture critic: The Unforgivable Sin Treating whiteness as an “original sin, an inherited moral defect one must atone for” has “gone uber-mainstream” since George Floyd’s “brutal execution,” Spiked’s Brendan O’Neill sighs. But such “collective guilt on the basis of racial origin” is “wicked” — and, ironically, racist. It also distracts us from “the real problems facing the US,” including the “police brutality” and “structural disarray” that resulted in Floyd’s death. That’s why “corporate America and the new political elites” have embraced “the woke ideology of pathologized whiteness”: It “takes the heat off the powers-that-be.” Science desk: Politicized Meds in the Trump Era With President Trump having taken hydroxychloroquine to guard against the coronavirus, his “critics in the press seem to be on a mission to discredit the therapy,” The Wall Street Journal’s Allysia Finley observes. And “a prestigious medical journal may be joining in.” A study by The Lancet found a 30 percent “increased risk of death for hospitalized COVID-19 patients” treated with that drug or a related one. But “some 120 doctors, statisticians and epidemiologists” write in an open letter that they have “both methodological and data integrity concerns.” For instance, “more deaths were reported from five Australian hospitals collectively than had occurred in the entire country during the study period,” and the average reported dose of the drug “was 100 milligrams higher than FDA guidelines.” With headlines such as “Study says drug hailed by Trump is harmful,” experts worry trials of what could be a life-saving treatment won’t go ahead as planned. From the right: How Urban ‘Forests’ Die Elites “excusing the destruction of our cities” have clearly “never built a business themselves,” bemoans National Review’s David Harsanyi, whose parents “would never see a penny for the years of preparation, exertion and sacrifice” after thieves looted their business. Alas, many American small-business owners may “end up in similar circumstances” because of our elected officials’ unwillingness to stop “criminals and cosplay revolutionaries.” The worst example: Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey, who said, “Yes, America is burning, but that’s how forests grow,” even as rioters and arsonists are “destroying poor and minority neighborhoods.” Small businesses in those neighborhoods may never recover, and even big stores may leave for good when they start “paying higher insurance rates.” The forest, in fact, “doesn’t always grow back.” Lockdown watch: Dems Push Cuomo To Reopen “Withering before our eyes is the pulse that once made New York great,” Democratic Assemblyman Simcha Eichenstein and City Councilman Kalman Yeger write in a letter urging Gov. Andrew Cuomo to reopen the state. “Three months of difficult lockdown” came “at immeasurable cost.” “Unemployment is at record highs,” “children’s skills and knowledge are regressing at unknowable rates” and “unrest is growing at exponential levels.” Business owners “are aware of the need to be safe, even while going about their business.” And let’s face it: “The calls for mass peaceful marching without any regard for social-distancing have rendered a continued lockdown at this point ludicrous.” It’s time to heal: “New Yorkers are unemployed, broke, anxious and emotionally drained. We need an infusion of hope, a burst of energy, a restoration of normalcy.” And the only thing that can bring it is an immediate, “unmitigated reopening.” — Compiled by Karl Salzmann & Kelly Jane Torrance 

Researchers out of Bar-Ilan University in Tel Aviv have discovered disinfectant technology that is now being used for a sanitation tunnel, which sprays visitors with disinfecting liquid before they enter large venues to prevent the spread of coronavirus. The industrial automation firm RD Pack in Karmiel, Israel, took the process that makes a disinfectant out of water and applied it to a tunnel structure, according to The Times of Isreal. The tunnel is reportedly made out of an aluminum and polycarbonate frame and is currently being tested at Bloomfield Stadium in Tel Aviv as soccer players prepare to return to stadium play, albeit without fans. “When people walk through the tunnel, their whole body gets sprayed with the disinfectant, which works fast and efficiently, and provides the complete sterilization of a person,” Eran Druker, business development manager at RD Pack, told The Times of Isreal during a demonstration on Tuesday. The method was developed by Dr. Eran Avraham, Dr. Izaak Cohen and professor Doron Aurbach, head of the electrochemistry group of the Department of Chemistry and Institute of Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials at Bar-Ilan. The main advantage of the disinfectant, hypochlorous acid, is that it is not harmful to human skin or food, Avraham told The Times of Israel. The tunnel would mostly be used for other public and private events such as stadiums games, concerts, airports, schools and businesses. Druker said the team is waiting for the conclusion of the pilot program so regulators can inspect the tunnel before the process moves ahead. As of Tuesday evening, the coronavirus pandemic has infected more than 6 million people worldwide and killed nearly 380,000 people, according to Johns Hopkins University.

The coronavirus isn’t mutating to become more dangerous, the World Health Organization said Wednesday. Scientists around the world studying the virus have not found it to be mutating in a way that could pose a new threat, as some health officials feared early on, WHO infectious disease epidemiologist Dr. Maria Van Kerkhove said at a briefing. “There are normal changes in this virus that one would expect over time,” she said, referring to the ways in which RNA viruses like the flu and the coronavirus mutate. “None of these changes so far indicate that the virus itself is changing in terms of its ability to transmit or to cause more severe disease.” But COVID-19 is continuing to devastate the world, with outbreaks now moving to poorer nations like Mexico and Brazil after ravaging wealthier countries like Italy and the United States. Van Kerkhove said lockdown fatigue and a relaxing of social hygiene could still pose a significant threat, warning that the pandemic is “far from over.” “People grow tired. It’s very difficult to keep up all of these measures and we must remain strong and vigilant — to have government fully engaged and people fully engaged as these lockdowns are listed,” she added. “That has to be done in a slow way.” Van Kerkove warned that outbreaks could force the return of unpleasant and economically damaging lockdowns. “In some situations, these measures, these public health and social measures, may need to be reintroduced again and that may frustrate people, which is completely understandable,” she went on. “And that in a sense could make the virus more dangerous because people become complacent.” In the US, the nationwide protests around the death of George Floyd have upended social distancing measures, with massive crowds gathering in cities. While the protests have brought fears of a spike in COVID-19 cases within the coming weeks, Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Wednesday delivered a sunny forecast for the virus in New York, saying outdoor dining could return to the city by late June during a Phase 2 of reopening.

The coronavirus pandemic has exponentially exacerbated screen addiction, easily preying on already tech-dependent populations suddenly out of work, locked in their homes and attempting to follow the breakneck news cycle. For many, just the idea of using smartphones less — let alone taking a break from all technology while still in quarantine — is distressing. But these folks took a tech-free meditation “retreat” right at home — and loved it. “I had not been away from my computer for over two years; to pull myself away from all that, it gave me tons of anxiety,” says retreat participant Franz Aliquo. But much to the experiential event director and artist’s surprise, he found that the three days he spent off the grid in his Queens apartment flew by. “By the end of it I was like, ‘Holy s - - t, that went so quickly,’ ” he says. The retreat was originally planned as an eight-day silent meditation at Joshua Tree National Park in California, a midway “immersion” in the 3½-month online Alchemical Leadership program. “We were going to go to the desert for this,” program leader Larissa Conte tells The Post of the April excursion. Unable to safely travel or meet in-person, she reworked that portion of the program to be an at-home “quest.” The eight participants range in age from their mid-30s to late-50s and live across America, with one Amsterdam-based individual. They planned solo retreats in a four-day window during which they intended to spend from 10 hours to the full period near home but without technology. Aliquo spent his retreat going on long, aimless walks with his Shiba Inu, taking bubble baths, reading and making dishes from old hand-written recipe books. The only human interaction he had was some four words he exchanged with his roommate, and he abandoned his bed to live out of a comforter “nest” he created in his apartment hallway. “It was like camping inside my house, 10 feet from where I usually sleep,” he says. While he admits the experience was “the weirdest s - - t and less comfortable,” the combination of removing tech and waking up in a space simultaneously familiar and unfamiliar was profoundly powerful, giving him the feeling of “openness and relaxation you get from traveling.” “I thought that three days in that little area, not doing anything, was going to take forever and I would be dead,” he says. “But I really don’t know what the f - - k happened to the time, and it’s not like I was sleeping 12 hours a day.” One Maine-based participant held an all-night fire in his yard while his wife and two daughters slept in the house. “For my quest, I spent two days alone in nature fasting on water from dawn until dusk,” says creative strategist Lily Betjeman, of San Francisco. After spending two days at home with her digital devices turned off, which she describes as “a feat in and of itself,” Jennifer Conti-Davies went on a 13-mile solo hike through a local preserve. “That was the first time I spent an entire day in nature alone,” she says. “It’s an incredible gift to slow down and listen.” For her own retreat, Conte sheltered in her San Francisco apartment, went on walks through her Eureka Valley neighborhood, gardened and rested. In reflecting on their experiences, she says, participants reported varying levels of difficulty with being tech-abstinent, but everyone said it ultimately gave them a feeling of massive relief. Aliquo says he’s also found himself using tech less since giving it up for a weekend. Conte is not surprised, and despite the immensity of foregoing technology in 2020, she did not worry she was putting the group in danger with the activity. “I’ve been guiding for over a decade. People can encounter wildlife, they can find scorpions, rattlesnakes — just having their phone in the off position? Not that big of a deal,” she says. Being forced to stay in place was, in this instance, a surprise blessing, she says. “So often people go on retreats far away from their home. There’s a magic in traveling because we assume beginners’ eyes when we travel,” she says. For her, the coronavirus has been a good excuse to try and find that magic at home. “Creating spaces to completely unplug and shift the way we view life —  especially at a time when the mystery is so loud and we don’t know what the future holds — lets us more consciously navigate our moment to moment.”

SYDNEY – Learning Australian bush survival skills is becoming popular as city folk turn to nature with the easing of the coronavirus lockdown, organizers of a course outside Sydney said. The Bushcraft course teaches basic survival skills like foraging for food and water, and also offers insight into traditional indigenous cultures. The course filled up soon after the lockdown began to be eased late last month, and there is a lot of demand, the organizers said. “A lot of people come to learn self discipline. How to organise themselves and organise themselves in a natural environment,” said instructor Gordon Dedman at Bushcraft Survival Australia, who is a former army commando. “The more knowledge you have… it actually gives you a sense of confidence and then you can make better informed decisions.” Course participants learn how to erect a shelter, build a fire, solar and celestial navigation, forage for edible plants, some within a timed environment designed to emulate the stress of a real survival situation. “They’ve got a timed period to make a fire using the procedure that we’ve given them because it makes it efficient. They may have to light a fire to signal for help, to boil water to give to a person that’s suffering from hypothermia,” Dedman said. “The other thing is that the timed deliverables gives an element of stress and in a survival situation you’re going to be very, very stressed.” The interest in the course comes as Australia loosens its lockdown laws after months of restrictions that saw runs on supermarket staples, and many Sydney dwellers cooped up at home. Now beaches are reopening and pubs in Sydney are allowed to accept ten patrons for meals. “I’ve been caught up with that supermarket mayhem. I didn’t realise how entrenched I was in that,” course participant George Hamza said. Hamza is one of 11 participants taking part in a three-day intermediate course near Ku-ring-gai National Park, Ingleside, north of Sydney. “Coming out here and spending a few days here and removing myself from that, I’m feeling like I’m detoxing a little from that sphere of the world,” he said.

“Saturday Night Live” cast member Chris Redd has launched a fundraiser to provide COVID-19 testing and treatment for those participating in protests over the death of George Floyd. Redd announced the GoFundMe campaign on Twitter. “COVID19 protest relief is live!! Give if you can, share if it’s in your heart!! #BlackLivesMatter and more to come!!,” Redd tweeted. “As thousands of people take to the streets to protest racial discrimination and the many Black Lives lost at the hands of injustice, we also have the unfortunate fact that this deadly pandemic is still upon us,” Redd wrote in the GoFundMe campaign description. “The lives at risk of the injustice being fought against are also the most vulnerable to COVID-19. Many will not be in position to pay the inevitable cost associated with their brave efforts,” he added. “This fund is to assist those that contract this disease while protesting and other protest-related injuries as many are being attacked while speaking out.” The fund also will provide support for treatment/hospital bills as related to COVID-19, injuries obtained while protesting, bail relief and court expenses for protesters. The fund so far has raised $125,240 of its $250,000 goal.

At the peak of the coronavirus pandemic, all four New York University hospitals in Manhattan, Brooklyn and Long Island were filled to the brim with infected patients. Over the course of the pandemic, the hospital system added 189 beds in their two Manhattan hospitals alone. Dr. Fritz Francois, chief medical officer at NYU Langone Health, spoke with Fox News about the plan their hospitals have in place in preparation for a second wave of coronavirus. He says they are following the seven T’s to keep their workers and patients safe: Tools, Testing, Teams, Triage, Treatments, Trials and Throughput. “I can’t emphasize enough how important it is for us to do research and publish what it is that we find, as opposed to just doing things anecdotally,” Francois told Fox News. “And we now know so much more about it [coronavirus] than we did before.” Stocking up on the tools they need, like personal protective equipment (PPE), is one of the many ways Francois is keeping his staff safe. He’s also relying on testing to ensure his patients stay safe too. Every incoming patient regardless of symptoms is getting tested for COVID-19. Knowledge is power and the more you know about a patient the better you can treat them, Francois said. “[We developed] specialty teams to deliver types of care that other institutions don’t have, such as an ECMO team or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, [which] was a dedicated team,” said Francois, who is also a patient safety officer at NYU Langone Health. From how many times a nurse can go into a room to how they clean equipment, triage processes got a total overhaul because of the virus. “We developed ways in which we can have some of the equipment outside of the room so that minimizes the need to go into a room multiple times,” Francois said. NYU is doing a number of trials to see what fights coronavirus best. The trials include treatments like convalescent plasma and stem cell therapy. “[Throughput] is in terms of how do we ensure that patients can safely transition [back home or to a rehab center] when they [beat the virus],” Francois said. With this in mind, Francois believes that if there is a second wave they will be more than prepared to battle it. “We’re not in the same position, we know so much more, we’re better prepared — and that really is going to make all the difference in the world.”

The World Health Organization and several world governments have changed their coronavirus policies and resumed trials of hydroxychloroquine because they got questionable data from a small US healthcare company — with a science fiction writer and an adult content model on staff. The company, Surgisphere, whose employees include an unidentified sci-fi author and adult model doubling as a sales director, has produced data on multiple studies on COVID-19 co-authored by its chief executive — but has refused to adequately explain its data or methodology, The Guardian reported Wednesday. Data the Chicago-based company claims to have obtained from more than a thousand hospitals worldwide formed the basis of scientific articles that led to changes in coronavirus treatment policies in several countries. The company, formed by Dr. Sapan Desai, a vascular surgeon in Springfield, Illinois, also influenced the decision by the WHO and other research facilities to halt trials of hydroxychloroquine, which President Trump has touted and took as a precaution against coronavirus. The WHO announced Wednesday that those trials of the anti-malarial drug would now resume. Two top medical journals – the Lancet and the New England Journal of Medicine – published studies based on Surgisphere data that raised concerns about potentially fatal side effects from hydroxychloroquine, reports that prompted researchers to abandon trials.  The Lancet on Tuesday released an “expression of concern” about its published study after inquiries from the UK news organization, and the New England Journal of Medicine offered a similar message. An independent audit of the data has been commissioned by the authors not affiliated with Surgisphere because of “concerns that have been raised about the reliability of the database,” The Journal said. The Guardian’s investigation revealed that a search of public records found that several of Surgisphere’s employees had little if any data or science background. The paper also found that one employee listed as a science editor was apparently a science fiction author and fantasy artist, while another listed as a marketing executive was an adult model and events hostess. The company’s LinkedIn page has fewer than 100 followers and last week listed just six employees — a number that was changed to three employees on Wednesday. While Surgisphere claimed to run one of the biggest and fastest hospital databases in the world, it has a lame online presence, with fewer than 400 followers on Twitter as of Wednesday afternoon. At a press conference Wednesday, the WHO announced it would now resume its global trial of hydroxychloroquine, after it determined there was no increased risk of death for Covid patients taking it. Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said that all parts of the so-called Solidarity trial, which is investigating potential drug treatments, will go ahead. “On the basis of the available mortality data, the members of the committee recommended that there are no reasons to modify the trial protocol,” said Tedros. “The executive group received this recommendation and endorsed continuation of all arms of the Solidarity Trial, including hydroxychloroquine.” Last month, the Lancet published a study that found that hydroxychloroquine was linked with a higher mortality rate in Covid-19 patients and increased heart problems. The study, which listed Desai as one of the co-authors, claimed to have analyzed Surgisphere data collected from nearly 15,000 patients with COVID-19, admitted to 1,200 hospitals around the world, who received hydroxychloroquine itself as well as in combination with antibiotics. The negative findings made global news and prompted the WHO to halt the hydroxychloroquine arm of its global trials. But many of the hospitals that supposedly took part in the study questioned the data, which was contradicted by reports from Johns Hopkins University, which tracks worldwide cases. The Guardian reached out to other hospitals who also contradicted the study’s data. Desai did not immediately return a request for comment from The Post.

A Pennsylvania man arrested during a violent protest over the death of George Floyd says he has the coronavirus — and officials now worry he may have sparked an outbreak of the disease. Julio V. Torres disclosed that he was COVID-positive during his arraignment Tuesday on charges of aggravated assault, rioting and resisting arrest, Lancaster Online reported. The 22-year-old had been told to self-quarantine, but still went to a 250-person demonstration in Lancaster on Monday evening — and didn’t wear a mask or social distance. “[He] has placed other people at risk — both the public who were peacefully participating in the protest and law enforcement,” said Lancaster County President Judge David Ashworth, while releasing the information to the press. “I know of no other way to get the word out,” the judge said. Police said they haven’t confirmed that Torres tested positive, but he told a district judge and prison staff of his diagnosis. “If it’s all made up on his part, then it is. All we can do is act on his word. He has told a number of officials now that he is positive,” Ashworth said. Charging documents allege that during the protest in front of a police station, Torres threw “objects which could cause bodily harm at police officers” and spoke to others in the crowd “appearing to be directing their action.” He’s also accused of hurling a barricade into the middle of the street. “These actions taken by Torres were done with the intent to prevent or coerce official action and then with the intent to cause public inconvenience, annoyance or alarm,” the documents state. He was being held in Lancaster County Prison after being unable to post 10 percent of his $25,000 bail, court records show. Lancaster Mayor Danene Sorace told the outlet on Tuesday that she was “very worried about an outbreak following days of demonstrations.” She said the state Department of Health has said contact tracing is ineffective if people were exposed at large gatherings. But she was monitoring any uptick in cases over the next two weeks. “While it has been shown that young people seem less susceptible to severe symptoms, I worry about others they come into close contact with, especially their families,” Sorace said. “Wear a mask. Self-isolate. Get tested if you have symptoms.”

A Mexican lawmaker accidentally showed up topless in a government Zoom meeting — but later insisted she was “not ashamed” of having shown her body. Senator Martha Lucía Mícher Camarena, 66, said she had no idea she was still on camera when she stripped off to get changed during last Thursday’s meeting about the economy — only realizing when colleagues alerted her. She later apologized to everyone watching — including members of the media — saying she realized that she accidentally broke the expected standards of conduct, and blaming her lack of understanding of new technology. The senator for Guanajuato refused, however, to be ashamed of having been so openly exposed. “I am Malu Mícher, and I am not ashamed to have shown by accident a part of my intimacy,” Camarena wrote on Twitter, declaring herself a proud feminist. “I am a woman of 66 years of age who has breastfed four children, three of whom are today professional and responsible men, and I feel proud of my body for having nourished them,” she continued. “I am a woman who is not ashamed of her body, which I love and care for.” CEN CEN CEN View Slideshow Many of her colleagues spoke in support of the politician, instead attacking those who spread the images. Fellow Senator Ricardo Monreal Avila called her an “exemplary woman,” saying, “Morals and integrity will always be stronger than infamies and attacks.” She was not the first to have fallen foul of the coronavirus-era reliance on video meetings. In Brazil, a leading judge was caught shirtless in a Zoom hearing. And even in New York, the city’s hospitals chief, Dr. Mitchell Katz, was caught changing his shirt as reporters waited for a virtual press conference to begin.

Halima Aden wants to help those who wear hijabs and turbans protect themselves during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Somali-American model, 22, has teamed up with mask-making startup Anywear and Allure magazine to create a capsule collection of simple hijabs and turbans that are compatible with face coverings to protect from coronavirus. Each hijab set costs $45, while a pack of three masks is $40 and a turban set retails for $52. All products are made from 100 percent organic cotton and come with built-in buttons and extenders to ensure that the masks stay attached to the hair coverings. For every purchase, Anywear will donate a medical hat with buttons to a healthcare professional. “As many hijab-wearing women are working at health care facilities, I wanted to make sure they have a comfortable option for wearing a mask while keeping their hair covered,” Aden, who was the first hijab-wearing woman to appear in the Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue, wrote on the company’s website. “It can also get hot running around at the pace health care employees are right now, so a breathable fabric was a must.” As for the pastel color palette, Halima added, “I really wanted the pieces to give a feeling of tranquility and calm, so I went with soft shades that bring a feeling of peace.”

Chris Trousdale, a former member of short-lived boy band Dream Street, has died following a battle with COVID-19. He was 34. TMZ, who is reporting the news, says Trousdale died Tuesday in a hospital in Burbank, Calif., of complications from the coronavirus, according to a family member. “Chris left this earth at 8:44 pm yesterday after a horrible battle with [an] acute strep infection that shut down his body,” says a comment on his Instagram left by a woman named Jane Gagle, who works at the Pacific Ballet Dance Theatre, which Trousdale worked with. “Chris was in a coma, on life support when he passed.” Trousdale joined Dream Street, which also counted Jesse McCartney among its members, in 1999. Formed by producers Louis Baldonieri and Brian Lukow with the intent of capitalizing on teenybopper pop’s grip on the mainstream, the group, despite all being underage, were already veterans of the NYC acting and Broadway scenes. Their songs “It Happens Every Time” and “I Say Yeah” were Radio Disney hits and their self-titled debut went gold. The group split in 2002 after a lawsuit from their parents alleged a wide variety of sordid behavior from Baldonieri and Lukow, such as encouraging them to sleep with teenaged fans and providing them with liquor and pornography. Despite starring in the Dream Street film “The Biggest Fan,” Trousdale had a harder time launching his solo career than McCartney. He continued to act in smaller roles and eventually auditioned for “The Voice” in 2012, but did not make it past the blind auditions. At the time, he was working as a waiter in a sushi restaurant. “It’s hard to be serving somebody and she’s like, ‘What are you doing here, you were my idol, I had you on my bedroom wall,'” he said on the show. “Chris was one of a kind and always the brightest light on any stage he stood on,” Gagle’s comment reads. “Thank you for the love you gave him. He felt it to the end and I’m sure still as he watches from heaven.”

Officials in the Chinese city of Wuhan claim they only detected a few hundred coronavirus cases out of the millions of people tested through an ambitious initiative to screen all residents. There were 300 asymptomatic carriers out of the 9.9 million residents who have been tested so far in Wuhan, the original epicenter of the virus, officials said. China does not count patients who don’t report any symptoms in its confirmed case tally, so officials told reporters there were no new cases of the virus. Officials said the asymptomatic carriers were determined to not be infectious — adding that masks, toothbrushes, phones, door handles and elevator buttons that they touched had no traces of virus. Wuhan announced last month that it planned to test all 11 million residents after a new cluster emerged  from the same residential compound. The city-wide testing effort ran a bill of about $126 million. Wuhan was the hardest-hit city in the nation during the crisis, accounting for the majority of the 4,634 deaths and 83,022 infections reported in mainland China. With Post wires

A top World Health Organization official had good news and bad news Wednesday — warning that there was a “definite threat” of another coronavirus outbreak but adding that the world would be better prepared this time around. “We still have neither a vaccine nor a cure for Covid-19,” Hans Kluge, the WHO’s European director, said during a news conference conducted in Russian to reach people in countries where many speak the language, from Russia to Armenia and Israel, Russia Today reported. “The second wave is not inevitable. But an increasing number of nations are lifting restrictions, and there is a definite threat of a repeat outbreak of the Covid-19 infection. If those outbreaks are not isolated, a second wave may come and it may be very destructive,” Kluge said. The good news, he added, was that the world was now in a better position to deal with coronavirus after the first outbreak. “We better understand the virus, which measures work, how we must prepare,” Kluge said. The initial pandemic, which broke out in China in late 2019, has to date killed more than 380,000 across the world, including more than 105,000 in the US. Experts, including Dr. Anthony Fauci of the White House Coronavirus Task Force, initially predicted it could take up to 18 months to develop an effective vaccine. But Swiss drugmaker Novartis will start producing a genetic coronavirus vaccine this month under a deal with Massachusetts researchers. AveXis, Novartis’ gene-therapy arm, agreed to manufacture the vaccine being developed by Massachusetts Eye and Ear and Massachusetts General Hospital. Production will start in time for clinical trials that are scheduled to begin in the second half of this year, according to a Thursday announcement. And President Trump has asserted that a vaccine would be developed and ready for use by the end of 2020 under an ambitious effort he dubbed “Operation Warp Speed.” “We’re getting ready so that when we get the good word that we have the vaccine, we have the formula, we have what we need, we’re ready to go, as opposed to taking years to gear up,” he said when announcing the effort last month. “We’re gearing up. It’s risky. It’s expensive, but we’ll be saving massive amounts of time, we’ll be saving years if we do this properly,” the president added. Trump has also bashed the WHO for its handling of the outbreak, particularly its purported kowtowing to China, and said the US was suspending relations with the organization.

They’ve lived through World Wars, the Great Depression and other pandemics, so they weren’t about to let a little COVID stop them. Meet some of the oldest coronavirus survivors — all 100 years old and above — whose optimism and fighting spirits inspire all who hear their stories. Read on for their longevity secrets — and the life lessons they say aided their recoveries, from good eating habits to keeping calm under pressure. World War II was no match for East Rockaway, LI, resident Walter Reed. And neither was COVID-19. The 100-year-old Reed, who drove race cars up until a year ago, says he has more days ahead of him thanks to a life full of good judgment. “I never smoked,” he says. “I watched my diet. I always try to do the right things: You never hear me cussing … I don’t get angry, I hold my temper down. I walk away and have a good relationship with everybody.” Even so, the coronavirus did a number on the Norwalk, Conn., native. “I don’t remember much of anything,” says the retired MTA train operator of his battle with the illness. “I’ve been on Earth a long time, I’ve never been like that. I didn’t know where I was — you lose track of everything. My memory isn’t as good as it was before.” His biggest hope? To get behind the wheel of a racing car again. “I still want to get back at it,” he says. Courtesy Courtesy View Slideshow “God takes good care of me,” says lifelong West Sayville, LI, resident Rose Leigh-Manuell, 101. The devout Protestant — who was born during the Spanish flu pandemic — is exceptionally optimistic due to her faith, says her 63-year-old son, Gary Leigh-Manuell. “She always has this upbeat attitude,” he says of his mother, who has three additional children, 17 grandchildren, 19 great-grandchildren and eight great-great-grandchildren. “One of her famous sayings is ‘this too shall pass.’ ” She’s also long prioritized being social and spending time with her son. “We were going out to dinner at least a couple times a week,” says Gary. “About 10 days before she tested positive [for the coronavirus], we went out to dinner three nights in a row.” In April, she fell ill with a fever and chills, and spent two weeks battling the virus at the Good Samaritan Nursing and Rehabilitation Care Center in Sayville, and was able to avoid a ventilator. Leigh-Manuell has always been tough: She lost her husband nearly 50 years ago and she had to start working to support her family. At one point she was employed as a fire department dispatcher, then at a fish market until 95. “The only reason she retired was because the fish market closed,” says Gary. “She says to me, ‘When this is all over, we have a dinner date, right?’ ” 104-year-old Lilian Menendez credits her longevity with good genes. “My mother was 98 and she didn’t have a gray hair in her head — she was jet black,” says Menendez, the eldest resident at Apex Rehab & Healthcare in South Huntington, LI. Menendez adds that her mother, who raised six children alone in Manhattan, taught her to be strong — and made sure they were fortified to do so. “My mother took very good care of us,” says Menendez. “We ate a lot of rice and beans, and chicken. Sunday we got chicken because we were poor then.” The Harlem native grew up to have two children, four grandchildren and several great-grandchildren. Since recovering from the virus in April, “I feel wonderful,” says Menendez, who once worked at Lord & Taylor on Fifth Avenue, where she made $10 a week. “I’m as strong as a bull.” What’s more: symptom-free, she says COVID-19 is now in the past. “I’m back 100 percent,” she says. Courtesy Courtesy View Slideshow In early May, Jennie Stejna was so ill that her grandson Dave Stejna said his goodbyes. But on May 4, the “feisty and tenacious” 103-year-old woke up and said, “I’m not sick!” Once she was cleared of the virus a couple of weeks later, she celebrated with a cold beer, something Dave says she’d often indulge in on a hot summer day. The family matriarch, who lives in a nursing home in Wilbraham, Mass., was the first person to contract the deadly virus in the facility and the first there to beat it. Dave tells The Post that it is her active nature that’s propelled her through her century of life. “She’s the most high-energy person I ever met,” says Dave, 49, who lives in Easton, Mass. “Into her 90s, I would go places with her and I could barely keep up.”  An avid Red Sox fan, Jennie spent most of her time in her garden, according to her grandson, where she grew tomatoes, cucumbers and mushrooms. She also consistently weeded and mowed her lawn, and went out regularly to play Bingo and go shopping. She also quit smoking cold-turkey when Dave was a newborn. “Did she lead a sedentary lifestyle?” says Dave. “Not in the slightest.” Even though she’s now legally blind and using a wheelchair, she still manages to keep moving. “She’s using her legs,” says Dave. “She pedals herself around [the nursing home] where she makes the rounds.”

Back in April, in the heart of the coronavirus pandemic, NASA stepped up to help by developing a ventilator specifically designed for COVID-19 patients. The device was nicknamed VITAL (short for Ventilator Intervention Technology Accessible Locally) and it was meant to be a low-cost, easy-to-build piece of life-saving medical hardware. Now, as the pandemic continues to rage on, the space agency has announced the companies that have been chosen to manufacture the VITAL ventilators. In a new blog post, NASA reveals that over 100 companies submitted applications to be chosen as manufacturers for VITAL. After narrowing down the dozens of options, the Office of Technology and Corporate Partnerships at Caltech, which manages NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory and holds the patents on VITAL, selected a total of eight companies as manufacturing partners. These are the companies that made the cut, per NASA: “The VITAL team is very excited to see their technology licensed,” Leon Alkalai of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and VITAL team member, said in a statement. “Our hope is to have this technology reach across the world and provide an additional source of solutions to deal with the on-going COVID-19 crisis.” The ventilator has proven itself capable of tackling the challenge that COVID-19 poses. It was tested by scientists at the Icahn School of Medicine and demonstrated its usefulness on a number of simulated patients. “We were very pleased with the results of the testing we performed in our high-fidelity human simulation lab,” Dr. Matthew Levin, Associate Professor of Anesthesiology, Preoperative and Pain Medicine and Genetics and Genomics Sciences at the Icahn School of Medicine previously said. “The NASA prototype performed as expected under a wide variety of simulated patient conditions. The team feels confident that the VITAL ventilator will be able to safely ventilate patients suffering from COVID-19 both here in the United States and throughout the world.” A slightly tweaked version of the VITAL ventilator uses compressed air and could be made more widely available on a shorter time frame. The design for that device is currently awaiting approval by the FDA under Emergency Use Authorization, according to NASA.

What if the answer to treating the coronavirus was in our medicine cabinets all along? Despite early speculation that ibuprofen was exacerbating coronavirus symptoms, a later study found that those negative side effects could not be attributed to the common anti-inflammatory drug. Now, some scientists think that ibuprofen may, in fact, be an effective defense against COVID-19, according to the US National Library of Medicine’s clinical trials database. Doctors from London’s Guy’s and St. Thomas’ hospital and King’s College are beginning clinical research on patients in a trial program dubbed “Liberate,” wherein half of the test subjects will be treated with ibuprofen while the other half will receive treatment without the added drug. Scientists note that they will be using a unique formulation that wouldn’t be found in drugstores; rather, it’s in lipid capsule form that’s prescribed for conditions such as arthritis. Findings in animal studies have suggested that ibuprofen could treat acute respiratory distress syndrome, which is known to develop in coronavirus patients. “We need to do a trial to show that the evidence actually matches what we expect to happen,” says professor Mitul Mehta of King’s College London. The idea that ibuprofen may lead to severe coronavirus complications was inspired by a report in March of a 4-year-old British child whose symptoms worsened after taking the fever-reducing drug. This prompted the UK’s health officials to rescind recommendations for taking ibuprofen to treat symptoms. Later the French health minister Olivier Véran bolstered the claim when he said the drug could “aggravate the infection.” This prompted King’s College London researchers to conduct a review of 13 previous studies about ibuprofen, but ultimately they found no evidence that it had the potential to weaken the immune system. They published their report in the journal Ecancermedicalscience on March 27. “Our search did not identify any strong evidence for or against the use of ibuprofen for treatment of COVID-19 specifically,” the study reads. “The current literature does not give conclusive evidence for or against the use of NSAIDs in the treatment of COVID-19 patients.”

MLB rejected the players association’s proposal for a 114-game season and is building internal consensus around implementing a season of roughly 50 games for full prorated pay for players, unless the union is willing to accept 82-ish games at less than proration, sources told The Post. MLB informed the players association there would not be a formal counter to the union plan, continuing a staredown that further threatens what kind of season, if any, can be played. The union on Sunday made a counterproposal to MLB that would call for a 114-game season and no cutbacks in prorated pay. MLB has objected to both of those concepts. The league’s initial offer was for an 82-game regular season that concluded in September with the playoffs in the traditional October, largely out of concerns that the coronavirus could rebound with a strong wave in cooler weather and lead to the cancellation of the postseason, which is the sport’s big national TV moneymaker. The union’s plan called for the regular season to end in October with the playoffs in November. And MLB also has been strident that it would not play that many games at full prorated salaries and incur what it said would be greater losses by playing. During what was at times a contentious negotiation Sunday between top officials from both sides, MLB floated the notion that if full prorated salaries were a must, then the March 26 agreement between the two entities gives commissioner Rob Manfred the right to implement a season of any length, as long as it was at full prorated salaries for the players. MLB’s current concept would call for a regular season of 40-60 games, but the expectation is the league would center it more at 48-54 games. MLB would essentially be giving the union a choice of two months of games at full prorated pay or three months worth of games at potentially more money overall, but not at a full proration. Scott Boras, who represents some of the biggest and most influential players in the game, told The Post, “In March players compromised and gave to MLB nearly $2 billion in salary concessions — over a 40 percent salary cut — as consideration to receive a defined pro rata salary per game. MLB does not dispute that.” MLB, though, has maintained it will not give that prorated total for its proposed 82-game season. But the commissioner is in control of the number of games and scheduling via the March 26 agreement between the sides. Thus, as long as it proves health/safety and economic feasibility requirements, MLB can impose a season of any length it desires. But the union could provide impediments. The players, theoretically, could disagree with health/safety protocols, which need both sides’ approval. Or they could refuse to accept MLB’s desire for expanded playoffs, which almost certainly would lead to a larger payday from TV partners. The players association had offered expanded playoffs for 2020-21 as part of its presentation Sunday. But it was part of a lager proposal and can always be pulled. But even if the players agreed to a shorter season and the full prorated pay, is that going to be self-defeating to the industry? There already are asterisk-level credibility questions that would arrive with an 82-game campaign. What if it were 48 games? Would fans think the ultimate World Series winner is truly a champ or that the stats are legitimate or that it is worth their time to care? Also, would more players stay away believing if there are questions of legitimacy why even show up and take on the risks created by the coronavirus? Would that lead to fights about service time? There is still so much to work out and time dwindling if the goal is to begin the regular season advantageously on Independence Day weekend.

Steven Avery, the subject of true-crime series “Making a Murderer,” has tested positive for coronavirus, his lawyer said Wednesday. “Steven Avery has tested positive for COVID-19, and is confined to his cell,” tweeted Jerome Buting, Avery’s former criminal defense attorney. Buting said his client’s ex-fiancee, Sandy Greenman, reports Avery’s symptoms were “short-lived” and that he’s in “good spirits.” Avery, 57, is serving a life sentence without parole for the 2005 murder of Teresa Halbach in Wisconsin. His case received worldwide attention with the 2015 hit Netflix documentary “Making a Murderer” that examined whether Avery and his nephew Brendan Dassey were wrongfully convicted. Buting and lawyer Dean Strang have both argued that Avery and Dassey are innocent. The two no longer represent Avery, TMZ reported, but his new lawyer, Kathleen Zellner, is working on an appeal. “It is true that Steven Avery has tested positive for the COVID-19 virus — he will fully recover,” Zellner tweeted. “The bigger threat to him is whether the COA [Court of Appeals] will cure the disease that caused him to be wrongfully convicted.”

In April, Carhartt, the workwear company out of Dearborn, Michigan, pivoted from announcing new types of brown pants and jackets to making medical masks and gowns, aiming to help the “men and women working on the front line,” with the gear they need to protect themselves. The company said, “As long as these critical items are in short supply, Carhartt will continue to assist in production.” Carhartt is producing 50,000 medical gowns and 2.5 million masks, since stockpiles of personal protective equipment will be needed to avoid any catastrophic shortages. The company has gained fashion cred with teens for its woolen beanies, and is known for making rugged, durable wear for men and women. “We had to transition everything from the design to material to machinery. There were a number of challenges along the way, including the sourcing of raw materials which are far different than our famous brown duck,” says William Hardy, Carhartt’s senior vice president of supply chain. The move has a precedent, however. “Serving and answering the call during times of need has always been an integral part of
Carhartt’s history,” he says of the firm founded by Hamilton Carhartt, who began producing bib overalls with two sewing machines and a half-horsepower electric motor in a small Detroit loft in 1889. “We retooled our facilities during World War I and II to support the country’s troops, and immediately knew that we wanted to get involved to support the hard-working first responders.” The firm used a staggered approach to bring supply chain associates back to the facilities. All associates receive a daily no-contact-thermometer temperature check and short questionnaire. ”We also provide masks, which associates are required to wear while in our facilities,” says Hardy. Workers in Carhartt’s US factories were on paid leave due to the pandemic, but some
volunteered to do the new work. The company worked with local health authorities to figure out the layout and handling protocols for production, which must be done in a sanitary environment. With more than 5,500 associates worldwide, Carhartt is family-owned and managed by the descendants of the company’s founder. They temporarily closed all company-owned stores and brought in temporary rotating paid-work schedules in manufacturing and distribution facilities. “Serving and answering the call during times of need has always been an integral part of
Carhartt’s history and it’s why consumers have trusted us to have their back for more than 130 years,” says Mark Valade, chief executive officer at Carhartt. “We are humbled and honored to help all the essential workers serving and protecting us right now.” Tony Ambroza, chief brand officer of Carhartt, will be a keynote speaker at Brands Across America on Friday, June 5.

President Trump on Wednesday called it a “strange deal” that the coronavirus was largely contained to the city of Wuhan within China, but at the same time spread all over the world. “I ask this, why is it Wuhan? It came out of Wuhan, why is it that it didn’t go to [all of] China but it went to the rest of the world. It went to Europe, it went to the world, it went to the United States, [but] it didn’t go to Beijing,” the president said during an interview on Fox Radio. “How come they let it go out into the world but they didn’t let it go into China. It went all over the world, that’s a little strange deal going on there.” Trump also alluded to a report Tuesday from the World Health Organization that said that China delayed releasing critical information about the coronavirus in the weeks after the outbreak was first reported. “The plague came in from China, they shouldn’t have let it happen. It’s not right. In fact I see today there’s a very big article that they weren’t very transparent or forthcoming, to put it mildly. The stall, they call it,” he said, referring to the WHO report, which also lauded the Communist country for its quick response to the pandemic, which has killed more than 380,000 worldwide, including more than 105,000 in the US. The president also touted his phase one trade deal with China, but seemed to cast doubt on its future because of the pandemic and escalating tensions between the world’s two largest economies. “The trade deal was done, but the ink wasn’t dry before the virus floated over from China and started killing everybody in the world. Not just here, in the whole world. Look at Brazil, look at what it went through, Spain, France, all of them, the whole world,” he said. “I did a great deal but you know what? I’m not excited about anything with respect to China right now because of what happened. They could have sealed it, they could have closed it off.” He also trashed his predecessors, asserting that past presidents had been snookered by the Chinese Communist Party government, which has pulled back from meeting some provisions of the deal. “China was having, before the plague, China was having the worst year they’ve had in 66 years because of me. I’m not proud of that. I’m just saying that these presidents let China pick our pockets,” he said.

Sweden’s top infectious disease expert admitted Wednesday that his controversial coronavirus strategy of avoiding a strict lockdown resulted in too many deaths, according to a report. As the country’s fatality rate soars, its chief epidemiologist Anders Tegnell — whose light-touch approach left many businesses and schools open as the pandemic raged — told Swedish Radio he should have implemented stricter policies. “If we were to encounter the same illness with the same knowledge that we have today, I think our response would land somewhere in between what Sweden did and what the rest of the world has done,” Tegnell told the station. “Clearly, there is potential for improvement in what we have done.” Earlier this week, Sweden’s death rate per capita emerged as the highest in the world, according to the Guardian. At 43 fatalities per 100,000, it has far surpassed neighboring countries such as Denmark and Norway, which have imposed tougher stay-at-home orders. During the pandemic, Swedes have been able to dine at restaurants, go shopping, attend gyms and send kids under age 16 to school. Tegnell — the brains behind those measures — has argued that a relaxed response to the virus would be more sustainable long-term than severe and sudden lockdowns. While his strategy was widely supported in Sweden,  it was both hotly criticized and praised in other countries. On Wednesday, some Swedish politicians were stunned by Tegnell’s admission that he may have screwed up. “Astonishing,” Jimmie Akesson of the Sweden Democrats tweeted. “For months, [his] critics have been consistently dismissed. Sweden has done everything right, the rest of the world has done it wrong. And now, suddenly, this.” There’s limited evidence showing Sweden’s decision to leave businesses open has boosted the country’s economy, according to Bloomberg News. Finance Minister Magdalena Andersson has warned that Sweden is facing its worst economic crisis since World War II, with gross domestic product set to slump 7 percent in 2020 — roughly as much as the rest of the European Union, the outlet reported. On Monday, Swedish Prime Minister Stefan Löfven vowed to investigate the handling of the crisis before the end of the month.

GENEVA – More than 600 nurses worldwide are known to have died from COVID-19, which has infected an estimated 450,000 healthcare workers, the International Council of Nurses said on Wednesday. The death toll among nurses more than doubled in the past month from 260 on May 6, according to its figures, which are based on data from more than 30 countries. “In the last two months, we have seen the number of deaths of nurses as a result of coronavirus around the world rise from 100 to now in excess of 600 and we think worldwide the number of healthcare workers who could be infected by the virus is around 450,000,” Howard Catton, chief executive officer of the Geneva-based ICN, told Reuters Television. “These are numbers that keep going up,” he said. The pandemic’s true cost among health professionals was not known, the association said, renewing its appeal for greater protection for them and systematic collection of reliable data. On average, 7 percent of all cases of COVID-19, the lung disease caused by the novel coronavirus, are among healthcare workers, which means that nurses and other staff are at great personal risk “and so are the patients they care for”, it said. Extrapolating from more than 6 million reported cases gave its estimate of some 450,000 infections among healthcare workers. Infection rates among healthcare workers vary greatly between countries, with fewer than one percent in Singapore and more than 30 percent in Ireland, it said. Spain and Germany have recorded low numbers of fatalities among healthcare workers despite large outbreaks, it added. “Why do the rates of deaths among nurses appear higher in some Latin American countries?” it asked, referring to the region that the World Health Organization (WHO) says has emerged as the new epicenter for the pandemic. “Why are some countries reporting disproportionate deaths among black, Asian and minority ethnic HCWs (healthcare workers)? This is an issue raised directly by the Philippine Nurses Association to ICN, concerning Filipino HCWs in the UK,” it said. The ICN represents 130 national associations and more than 20 million registered nurses.

Two large movie theater owners issued dire warnings on Wednesday about their ability to bounce back from the coronavirus. AMC, the nation’s biggest cinema chain, said in a regulatory filing that there’s a “substantial doubt” about its ability to “continue as a going concern for a reasonable period of time.” Companies issue “going concern” warnings when running low on cash and AMC has been dogged by persistent rumors of bankruptcy since it was forced to shutter 630 theaters across the nation in March. “We are generating effectively no revenue,” the filing said. AMC expects to take a first-quarter loss of up to $2.4 billion as revenue dropped 22 percent to $941.5 million, it added. The company says its cash balance of $718.3 million will be enough to sustain it through the end of the summer, but warned that its business woes could persist even after stay-at-home orders are lifted as Hollywood studios have also been forced to push back production and delay the release of films. Mark Zoradi, chief executive officer of rival movie theater chain Cinemark, expressed similar concerns — saying he doesn’t expect the industry to return to normal until 2022. “The reality is, I don’t think we’re going to be able to get into a full-on rhythm again of product cycles and all that we had prior to COVID-19 until 2022,” Zoradi said on a first-quarter earnings call with analysts. “That’s more production-related than our operation-related because as studios have had to adapt to not being able to do filming and do post-production, they’ve had to move their schedules. Therefore, we’re going to adapt as well.” In addition to a new program of deep cleaning, Cinemark plans to limit its seating capacity to 50 percent in each of its 525 theaters, with six feet between patrons for social distancing. The CEO, who said he expects the chain to begin reopening its doors on July 1, said Cinemark could still be profitable operating at that level. During the first quarter, however, Cinemark posted a loss of $59.6 million, or 51 cents a share, compared with a profit of $32.7 million, or 28 cents a share, a year earlier. Adjusted earnings totaled $66.2 million. Revenue slid 24 percent from $714.7 million to $543.6 million.

WALENSTADT, Switzerland  – Two Swiss conceptual artists are offering seven open air “hotel rooms” this summer across a “performance space” encompassing eastern Switzerland and Liechtenstein. The Bushcraft course teaches basic survival skills like foraging for food and water and also offers insight into traditional indigenous cultures. The course filled up soon after the lockdown began to be eased late last month and there is a lot of demand, the organizers said. “A lot of people come to learn self-discipline. How to organize themselves and organize themselves in a natural environment,” said instructor Gordon Dedman at Bushcraft Survival Australia, who is a former army commando. “The more knowledge you have… it actually gives you a sense of confidence and then you can make better-informed decisions.” Course participants learn how to erect a shelter, build a fire, solar and celestial navigation, forage for edible plants, some within a timed environment designed to emulate the stress of a real survival situation. “They’ve got a timed period to make a fire using the procedure that we’ve given them because it makes it efficient. They may have to light a fire to signal for help, to boil water to give to a person that’s suffering from hypothermia,” Dedman said. “The other thing is that the timed deliverables gives an element of stress and in a survival situation you’re going to be very, very stressed.” The interest in the course comes as Australia loosens its lockdown laws after months of restrictions that saw runs on supermarket staples and many Sydney dwellers cooped up at home. Now beaches are reopening and pubs in Sydney are allowed to accept ten patrons for meals. “I’ve been caught up with that supermarket mayhem. I didn’t realize how entrenched I was in that,” course participant George Hamza said. Hamza is one of 11 participants taking part in a three-day intermediate course near Ku-ring-gai National Park, Ingleside, north of Sydney. “Coming out here and spending a few days here and removing myself from that, I’m feeling like I’m detoxing a little from that sphere of the world,” he said.

CLUJ, Romania/BUCHAREST – Soon after a two-month lockdown to prevent the spread of the new coronavirus eased in Romania in mid-May, Grigore Lup, a Romanian shoemaker from the Transylvanian city of Cluj, noticed people were not respecting the rules of social distancing. So Lup came up with the idea of long-nosed leather shoes to help keep people apart. They come in a European size 75. “You can see it on the street, people are not respecting social distancing rules,” said Lup, who has been making leather shoes for 39 years. “I went to the market to buy seedlings for my garden. There weren’t many people there but they kept getting closer and closer. “If two people wearing these shoes were facing each other, there would be almost one-and-a-half meters between them.” While he also sells ready-made shoes, Lup’s shop, which he opened in 2001, relies heavily on custom orders from theatres and opera houses across the country, as well as traditional folk dance ensembles. His business ground to a virtual standstill as live events were canceled or postponed due to the coronavirus pandemic, but he was cautiously optimistic that sales would recover over time. The European Union state, which has reported 18,791 cases of the coronavirus and 1,240 deaths, began gradually easing its lockdown on May 15. Lup, who said he adapted the long footwear from a model he made for actors, said he had so far received five orders for social distancing shoes. It takes him two days to make a pair, which requires almost one square meter of leather. They cost 500 lei ($115) a pair. Now 55, Lup first started making shoes when he was 16, learning from a cobbler who at 93 today still makes traditional ethnic Hungarian footwear.

An Oklahoma State linebacker said he tested positive for the coronavirus after attending a protest, according to new reports. Amen Ogbongbemiga announced his diagnosis on Twitter Tuesday evening. “After attending a protest in Tulsa AND being well protective of myself, I have tested positive for COVID-19,” he wrote. “Please, if you are going to protest, take care of yourself and stay safe.” Ogbongbemiga was one of 30 players to return to Oklahoma State on Monday, the first phase of university athletes returning to campus during the coronavirus pandemic, ESPN reported. Each of those players, in addition to coaches and other staff members, were tested for the coronavirus, a source told the outlet. Ogbongbemiga will be quarantined in separate on-campus housing, as per university protocol, according to ESPN. He will be retested Friday, and then again at a later date. Protests over the police-involved death of George Floyd in Minneapolis have been held in Tulsa for four straight nights, Tulsa World reported.

Amanda Kloots says she’s been told to say goodbye to husband Nick Cordero amid his two-month battle with COVID-19 but has faith he’ll pull through. “I’ve been told a couple times that he won’t make it. I’ve been told to say goodbye. I’ve been told it would take a miracle. Well, I have faith,” Kloots, 38, posted to Instagram Wednesday. “Faith that is small as a mustard seed sometimes, but that is all you need sometimes.” In April, the 41-year-old Broadway star was hospitalized at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in LA with a suspected coronavirus infection. He had to have his right leg amputated due to complications from the virus and has been on a ventilator for weeks. Cordero recently suffered a setback with a lung infection. Kloots added, “He’s still here and despite his odds gets slightly, slightly better every day. Where there is faith, there is hope. Where there is hope, there can be a miracle! Like my dad has said since day one, every day he’s still with us is a miracle. I believe God is with us, with the doctors and with Nick.”

Meet the “24-hour meat machine.” The owner of a butcher shop and restaurant in Rochester, NY, told Fox News that his meaty new vending machine is a hit with customers, who can now purchase their steaks and chops with minimal person-to-person contact in a sectioned-off vestibule at the front of his shop. “The response has been unbelievable,” said Kevin McCann, the owner and head butcher at McCann’s Local Meats. “On Saturday, I was cutting and restocking the machine four or five times.” McCann can’t take all the credit for the idea. As he tells Fox News, his friend and mentor Josh Applestone, who operates Applestone Meats in the Hudson Valley, has been utilizing refrigerated meat vending machines for years. “He’s sort of been a bug in my ear, trying to get me to do this,” McCann said. “And with the coronavirus and [our efforts] to keep people safe, it just seemed like a no-brainer idea to implement at this time, as an added service to what we already do.” McCann’s new vending machine doesn’t merely help with social distancing protocol, either. The butcher tells Fox News that he hopes his machine — which carries fresh cuts of meat as well as prepared foods — will also provide a much-needed service for the local health care community in Rochester. “With regards to the coronavirus pandemic, a lot of our customers here work in the hospital system,” McCann said. “A lot have crazy schedules and not much time to do their grocery shopping. I’d like to give them the option to be able to come here, pick up a steak and a couple of different sides… to be able to sort of have a complete, healthy meal without having to resort to fast food.” McCann planned to debut the concept at McCann’s Local Meats on Monday, June 1. But after stocking the refrigerated vending machine on Friday, as part of a test run, McCann said it only took a few hours for folks to find out about it. “We didn’t announce to people that it was open. We figured we’d get to it on Monday,” he said. “[On Friday night], I wanted to show my wife, from the shop’s security camera. And I saw customers in there already, who were just sort of figuring it out on their own.” McCann then spent the rest of the weekend slicing meat and stocking the machine for the influx of customers, all the way through Tuesday, when McCann’s Local Meats officially reopened its meat counter and take-out sections for to-go orders. “It gave us a poetic opportunity to reemerge from this pandemic,” said McCann, who noted that June 1 was the company’s five-year anniversary. “It brought us back in a way customers would recognize and remember us.”

Prime Minister Boris Johnson said the United Kingdom will not abandon Hong Kong if China imposes a harsh national security law and would admit 3 million people from the former British colony. “Hong Kong succeeds because its people are free,” Johnson wrote in the Times of London newspaper. “If China proceeds, this would be in direct conflict with its obligations under the joint declaration, a legally binding treaty registered with the United Nations.” “Many people in Hong Kong fear that their way of life — which China pledged to uphold — is under threat,” he added. Johnson said he would allow British National Overseas passport holders in Hong Kong to settle in the United Kingdom and provide them a path to citizenship. He said there are about 350,000 holders of the passport in Hong Kong and 2.5 million are eligible to apply for one. Communist China’s parliament rubber-stamped a measure last week that would crack down on secession, sedition, terrorism and foreign meddling in Hong Kong. “If China proceeds to justify their fears, then Britain could not in good conscience shrug our shoulders and walk away; instead we will honor our obligations and provide an alternative,” Johnson said. Britain returned Hong Kong to China in 1997 and it was granted autonomy under a “one country, two systems” policy with Beijing. China told the United Kingdom to butt out of its affairs. “The UK’s irresponsible remarks and accusations … have grossly interfered in China’s internal affairs including Hong Kong affairs,” Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said, according to Reuters. “We advise the UK side to step back from the brink.” Unrest in Hong Kong has been ongoing since March 2019 when Beijing considered a now-abandoned measure that would allow criminal suspects in Hong Kong to be returned to mainland China for trial.

More than a dozen West Point cadets from the Class of 2020 who were brought back for graduation where President Trump is expected to give the commencement address have tested positive for the coronavirus, according to reports. Sources on Capitol Hill told USA Today that the number of infected cadets was 16. “About 1½ percent” of the Class of 2020 who were brought back have tested positive,” a US Army spokesperson told CNN. None of the infected cadets have displayed any symptoms, the spokesperson said, adding that “no cadet has contracted through person-to-person contact while under the Army’s care” and that those infected were isolated. The graduating class comprises about 1,000 cadets. Of them, 850 have returned to the campus since spring break in March, USA Today reported. “The Army and West Point have done meticulous planning to ensure the health and safety of the returning cadets of the U.S. Military Academy’s Class of 2020,” the rep said. In April, Trump announced he was going to address West Point’s graduating class on June 13 — a decision that was criticized for putting cadets’ health at risk. West Point said in a statement later that the graduation procession “will look different from recent graduation ceremonies due to current force health protection requirements” related to the pandemic. Army Lt. Gen. Darryl Williams, the West Point superintendent, declined to specify the number of cadets affected, but told USA Today that screening and safety procedures will permit the ceremony to be held safely. Sources on Capitol Hill told the paper that of the 16 affected cadets, 14 had tested positive for the antibodies that indicate they had contracted the bug and recovered. Also, 71 of the more than 5,000 faculty, staff and civilians at the military academy have tested positive for COVID-19 since March. All but four civilians have recovered, USA Today reported. Army brass have defended Trump’s decision to address the graduating class. “We can’t telecommute to combat,” Army Chief of Staff Gen. James McConville told Pentagon reporters when asked about the decision.

Mayor Bill de Blasio is now urging New Yorkers to stay home and continue to practice social distancing over coronavirus fears, despite days of thousands taking to city streets to protest the Minneapolis police killing of George Floyd. “I want people to stay home to the maximum extent possible,” de Blasio, who has previously welcomed the peaceful mass protests, said during his daily City Hall press briefing Wednesday. De Blasio said he wants Big Apple residents to “get back to” social distancing “because it has been working and we need it to beat back this disease.” The comments come after thousands have flooded city streets daily for nearly a week in protest over the death of Floyd — a black man who died May 25 when a white cop kneeled on his neck — and as the Big Apple readies to enter phase one of reopening from its coronavirus-induced shutdown. “We all now need to turn our attention to the hugely important moment coming this Monday, June 8, where we take phase one of the restart,” de Blasio said, adding that “the single most important thing happening in New York City is the battle against the coronavirus. “Right after that is restarting our city, helping people get their livelihoods back,” he said. “Their No. 1 concern, overwhelmingly, was their economic reality … Their No. 2 concern was the health and safety of their families.” De Blasio continued, “We need to get back to that focus.” Meanwhile, for the past three nights, looters and vandals turned parts of the city into chaos following the demonstrations, but de Blasio insisted Wednesday that what unfolded Tuesday night was nowhere near the unruly level of the previous night, when looters struck Midtown and parts of The Bronx, leaving slews of storefronts in ruins. “Overwhelmingly, it was a very different reality in New York City last night,” de Blasio said, explaining, “We took a step forward.” “We saw a very different picture around New York City last night,” the mayor said, noting, “We still have more work to do.” Hizzoner said the city saw “peaceful protests during the day — yeah some tense moments undoubtedly, but overwhelming some peaceful protests.” “We saw a few instances where some people decided to do something illegal or violent around the protests but that was rare,” said de Blasio. Areas in Midtown and The Bronx hit by looters Monday night “did not see that kind of activity in any meaningful number last night.” De Blasio, who implemented an 8 p.m.-to-5 a.m. citywide curfew for Tuesday through Sunday, chalked up the progress to a “series of strategies” and a “different adjustment” taken by the NYPD. “Those strategies, I think, by and large, were effective,” de Blasio said.

In an effort to encourage volunteers to donate blood, Vitalant — a non-profit organization that helps distributes blood to hospitals — said that it will start informing blood donors if they have coronavirus antibodies. The antibody test Vitalant is using has already been approved by the FDA and will help individuals determine if they were exposed to the coronavirus, regardless of whether or not they ever exhibited symptoms. The impetus for the program is that blood for various surgeries and medical treatment plans is in short supply because blood drives have effectively been on hiatus on account of COVID-19. “While a positive antibody test does not mean that someone is immune to COVID-19, it does mean that they may be eligible to donate convalescent plasma in the future and help people with the disease,” Vitalant marketing officer Cliff Numark explained. “Convalescent plasma can be given directly to patients currently battling COVID-19 to help boost their ability to fight their illness.” Indeed, Vitalant is interested in testing blood for coronavirus antibodies precisely because it can help scientists and researchers come up with an effective plan to combat the virus. You might recall that Microsoft a few weeks ago launched a program to help people determine if they’re eligible to donate plasma for coronavirus research. In a blog post highlighting the benefits of studying blood with coronavirus antibodies, Microsoft explained: Thankfully, as the human immune system learns to fight off the disease and people recover, we see some very promising ways that people’s naturally produced antibodies, which are present in convalescent plasma, can be used as treatment for others. The use of convalescent plasma is a technique dating back to the 1918 Spanish flu epidemic and was effective more recently during the SARS outbreak. Today, there is mounting clinical evidence that plasma collected from those who have recovered from COVID-19 can be used to treat ill COVID-19 patients. Vitalant has already been collecting convalescent plasma for a weeks but the new program will hopefully result in a surge of blood donors. Vitalant notes that the following individuals are not in a position to donate blood: You can read more about the eligibility requirements to donate over here.

The Trump administration said Wednesday it will ban Chinese passenger carriers from flying in and out of the US starting June 16, ramping up pressure on Beijing to allow American carriers to resume flights to the country. The US Department of Transportation announced the move, which penalizes China after the country’s Communist rulers failed to comply with an earlier agreement on flights between the world’s two largest economies, Reuters reported. Relations between the two countries have also soured in recent months amid escalating tensions surrounding the coronavirus pandemic, Taiwan and Hong Kong. The order applies to Air China, China Eastern Airlines Corp, China Southern Airlines and Hainan Airlines Holding. Delta Air Lines and United Airlines have asked to resume flights to China this month, even as Chinese carriers have continued US flights during the pandemic. Delta said in a statement on Wednesday that “we support and appreciate the US government’s actions to enforce our rights and ensure fairness.” China “remains unable” to say when it will revise its rules “to allow US carriers to reinstate scheduled passenger flights,” the Transportation Department said in a formal notice made public on Wednesday. The Chinese embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to a request for comment from the news service. The Trump administration on May 22 accused China of making it impossible for US airlines to resume service to China, and ordered four Chinese carriers to file flight schedules with the US. The Chinese carriers are flying no more than one scheduled flight a week to the States but also have flown a large number of additional charter flights, often to help Chinese students return home. The Trump administration is also cracking down on Chinese passenger airline charter flights and will warn carriers not to expect approvals. Administration officials have suggested charter flights have been used to circumvent Chinese government limits on flights. On Jan. 31, the Trump administration barred most non-US citizens who had been in China within the previous 14 days due to the coronavirus crisis but did not impose any restrictions on Chinese flights. Major US carriers voluntarily decided to halt all passenger flights to China in February. Delta and United are flying cargo flights to China, and Delta had requested approval for a daily flight to Shanghai from Detroit and Seattle, while United had asked to fly daily to Shanghai from San Francisco and Newark and between San Francisco and Beijing. China’s air authority in late March said Chinese airlines could maintain just one weekly passenger flight on one route to any given country and that carriers could fly no more than the number of flights they were flying on March 12, according to the US order. But because US passenger airlines had stopped all flights by March 12, China “effectively precludes US carriers from reinstating scheduled passenger flights to China,” the Transportation Department said. The move is just the latest in the escalation of tensions between the two countries. The US beefed up restrictions on Huawei, the Chinese telecom giant, and blocked a government pension fund from investing in China. President Trump announced Friday that he was starting to end the US special relationship with Hong Kong, and that he will place sanctions on officials responsible for Beijing’s rollback of civil liberties in the former British colony. With Reuters

For those of us working at home, I’m willing to bet that it has instilled tremendous gratitude for two things: pajamas and PDFs. Whether you’re a lawyer or accountant, marketing manager or sales exec, Adobe Acrobat, along with Adobe’s suite of other products, has proved indispensable — especially sans office printers. “We are fortunate to be in an industry that is not as heavily impacted as some [by coronavirus-related layoffs]. Indeed, our software has never been more critical than today,” says Ann Lewnes, Adobe’s executive vice president and chief marketing officer, who will be a keynote speaker at Brands Across America on June 5. “We are committed to keeping businesses up and running, students learning, creatives creating, and governments connected to their citizens. As challenging as these times are, we are blessed that our mission has never been more relevant and that our products make a meaningful impact in the lives of so many people.” From Photoshop to InDesign, Dreamweaver to Flash Builder, Adobe makes working from home easier. Now, the San Jose, California-based software company is also going above and beyond to make life a little bit easier for those in need across the country. “To date, Adobe has committed $6 million to support our local and global communities, including giving to organizations providing essential needs like the International Red Cross, Silicon Valley Community Foundation, American India Foundation and the Akshaya Patra Foundation,” says Lewnes. As part of this initiative, a $1 million fund has been created to go toward projects made by members of their creative community. All visual creators can apply to the fund. Since March, employees have raised over $1.6 million through Adobe’s two-to-one employee-matching grants program. In addition, staffers have virtually volunteered nearly 25,000 hours to nonprofits since the pandemic’s outbreak in March. And just because the world as we know it has come screeching to a halt, that doesn’t mean creativity should. To that end, the company has gifted 30 million students with free Creative Cloud subscriptions, offering more than 20 desktop and mobile apps and services for photography, design, video, web, UX and more. The company’s employees, too, have played a key role in fostering imagination and artistry to help self-expression thrive during quarantine life. Since March, many Adobe employees have stepped up to share their talents with their communities, as illustrated by the following examples. Take Kyle Webster, an illustrator at Adobe based in Winston-Salem, NC, who, with his team created Draw Along with Kyle Webster, providing drawing classes for children to enjoy virtually, helping to both spark ideas and teach new skill sets. “There are several reasons why creativity plays an important role in times like this” says Webster of his thrice weekly YouTube drawing classes. “First, the mental-health benefits of engaging in creative project work, which includes anything from a 10-minute origami folding session to a four-hour stretch of painting on canvas, have been proven time and again. Making things is meditative and healthy — creative thinking often leads to innovation and solutions to problems.”  Based in Salt Lake City, Brandon Pack, director of software engineering, and his wife, Mindy, a vocal coach and singing specialist, partnered with their good friend Dr. Reena Gupta, an ENT physician working on the front line of the COVID-19 pandemic in Los Angeles. As they witnessed how musicians were being impacted by the coronavirus crisis, they self-funded a virtual choir project to bring attention to the MusiCares COVID-19 artist relief fund, providing singers with a paid gig. Within days of making their announcement, they received over 200 virtual auditions. Reflecting on the experience, Pack says, “For the team, these submissions highlighted how strained musicians are right now. This project helped artists cover bills or pay for meals. But crucially, it also allowed these creative individuals to connect with their art, share their talent with the world, and prove that this pandemic would not silence their voices.” Indeed, their voices resonated as powerfully as ever, with the virtual choir performing a beautiful cover of composer Scott Alan’s “The Distance You Have Come,” edited and produced by Australian actor and singer, Ky Baldwin, using software donated by Adobe. Then there’s Jonathan Lancar, engineering manager, who has worked tirelessly with his wife, Genevieve, to 3D print and assemble face shields for medical workers across the Bay Area. Since they started in March, they have printed, assembled and delivered over 600 shields to front-line personnel, with some going to other parts of California, Arizona and New York. “We have learned a lot along the way and I can only be grateful for how Adobe has handled this situation,” Lancar says. “It has truly inspired us to follow our leadership and take action.” We’re also moved by the example of Kavita Mittal, who’s a group product manager in the Bay Area. Along with her two sons, Kavita made homemade masks to donate to the Good Samaritan Hospital. Determined to do more, she decided to share her skills online and made an instructional video (using Adobe products, of course) to show others how they can easily make their own creative masks at home. “It’s a drop in an ocean, but hopefully the cheery prints will make someone less stressed and keep our folks at the front line a tiny bit more protected,” says Mittal. “I am so happy to be part of Adobe, that makes software to allow people to take their inspiration to fruition, sharing and hopefully, proliferation.” For people at home who want to get involved with Adobe’s community support projects, they have also launched an #HonorHeroes campaign, helping to bring a bit of joy into the lives of men and women who do so much for us, by celebrating their achievements. “Creativity has the power to bring us all together even in the most challenging times,” says Lewnes. “Everyday people are doing extraordinary things. Health-care workers, first responders, delivery drivers, sanitation workers, mail carriers, supermarket staff, school teachers and thousands of other essential workers have been working tirelessly to keep us all safe. We’ve partnered with iconic artists from around the world to honor these workers and volunteers, telling their stories through personal creative tributes. We have been so moved by the work we have seen from our community. We just released a film that highlights some of the work from this campaign.” To submit your own creative message of gratitude, use the hashtag #HonorHeroes when posting on social media. Our war against this virus makes this much clear: Creativity endures during adversity, and perhaps the most valuable of Adobe’s multipronged relief efforts is nurturing that light inside of all of us. For now, for tomorrow, and for the young Picassos they’re igniting, one digital sketching lesson at a time.

The coronavirus turned out to be chicken soup for Campbell’s profits — but did little to boost the stock. The canned-soup giant reported a 15 percent surge in quarterly net sales Wednesday thanks to consumers stockpiling shelf-stable foods amid the pandemic. Customers snapped up Campbell’s items so fast last quarter that the company struggled to keep up with demand, according to Chief Executive Mark Clouse. The initial stockpiling “exceeded shipment capacity,” and the company is working to add capacity amid continued supply challenges, he said. The company’s capacity concerns, along with expectations that demand could waver post-coronavirus, helped send Campbell’s shares down as much as 6.4 percent to $48.65 by early Wednesday afternoon. “I think especially some of the shorter-term investors were maybe expecting a little bit more of an upside relative to what we saw,” Bank of America analyst Bryan D. Spillane told The Post. “They basically under-shipped consumption as retailers were selling product out of inventory and Campbell’s had a little trouble keeping up with demand.” Investors are also shifting toward stocks that will benefit from the economy reopening after coronavirus-related lockdowns, Spillane said. The New Jersey-based company’s signature soups saw a 35 percent spike in US net sales for the three months ending April 26, a period marked by coronavirus-fueled panic shopping. Net sales jumped 20 percent in Campbell’s broader meals and beverages segment, which includes brands such as SpaghettiOs and Prego pasta sauce. The sales boom came as millions of new consumers bought Campbell’s products, with millennials making up the largest cohort, Clouse said. The company said its “household penetration” rose nearly 10 percentage points compared to the same quarter last year. “Consumers also have gravitated to these brands because of the comfort they bring,” Clouse said in prepared comments. “All of them have seen significant consumption gains during the crisis.” Campbell also increased marketing expenses by 26 percent to keep its brands relevant with a focus on snack ideas and recipes, the company said. Campbell reported adjusted earnings of 83 cents a share for its third fiscal quarter, beating Wall Street’s expectations for about 75 cents a share, according to Bloomberg data. The company now expects net sales to jump 5.5 to 6.5 percent for 2020, up from previous guidance for a 1 percent increase at most.

Calvin Klein’s usual Pride month promotions throughout June have this year morphed into its COVID-19 response. In recognition of the pandemic, Calvin Klein has partnered with OutRight Action International on their COVID-19 LGBTIQ Global Emergency Fund, offering financial resources to LGBTQ organizations around the world who are serving people impacted by COVID-19. The underwear-and-more firm also recently launched #ProudInMyCalvins, a celebration of self-expression among the full spectrum of LGBTQ identities. It features photos and videos of nine talents, chosen for their unique stories, all shot by Ryan McGinley, the outsider photographer whom, in 2014, GQ called, “the most important photographer in America.” “The theme of the campaign is taking pride in everything that makes you unique,” says McGinley. “My goal is always to create honest photos that connect to the viewer on a human level and show the subject’s power and vulnerability as human beings.” The actor, writer and activist Chella Man is featured, as is his partner, photographer MaryV. As a deaf, genderqueer, Chinese-Jewish youth, Man found that he didn’t see himself represented in mainstream media or have role models to look up to. Together with MaryV, whose first solo exhibition will document Man’s gender transition, they have brought widespread awareness and attention to not only the trans and queer experiences, but also the experience of being disabled in the queer community. Others include Brazilian singer and drag queen Pabllo Vittar, who says, “I never imagined myself making money with a wig on my head, but bitch, I’m here,” and trans queer model, activist and actor, Jari Jones, who says of growing up with no family support, “With no blueprint set out for us, we had to make it our own.” Ryan McGinley Ryan McGinley View Slideshow The campaign also stars Mina Gerges, the Egyptian model and actor who uses his platform to advocate for LGBTQ visibility and acceptance in Middle Eastern culture, and Gia Woods, the Persian artist whose songs first served as a personal journal, and later, an outlet for coming out. It features actor Tommy Dorfman, whose work reflects their journey as a gender-nonconforming person and focuses on telling stories that shine a light on the queer experience and finding comfort in their identity, and model and poet Reece King, who hopes to inspire others through his self-published book of poems and messages of self-care and self-love. Finally, actor, model and activist Ama Elsesser, who uses their platform to inspire others, will also star. “First, you have to come out to yourself. That’s the biggest thing.” Additionally, to show financial support to all impacted by the pandemic, PVH Corp., the parent company of Calvin Klein, committed $2 million toward COVID-19 relief efforts. The money will support front-line medical workers, the fight against food insecurity, supply chain and industry relief and community resiliency. Ryan McGinley Ryan McGinley View Slideshow Nonprofit grantees include several hospitals and health-care organizations, including Mount Sinai Health System, Montefiore Health System and Northwell Health in New York, plus RWJBarnabas Health and Hackensack Meridian Health in New Jersey. They’ve also sent funds to Feeding America, Coalition for the Homeless in New York City, the Food Bank of Somerset County in New Jersey and the NYC Small Business Continuity Loan Fund. Calvin Klein and Tommy Hilfiger also donated product in the US and around the world to support front-line health-care workers.

At the heart of a community, pharmacies play an integral role in the daily lives of their base, providing essential goods and supportive advice on products and services that affect our well-being. Since the onset of COVID-19, Walgreens has risen to the task as both a community and consumer ally, and an essential service provider at its 9,200 physical locations nationwide. “It’s been an amazing experience for us to be a part of the whole country coming together in support of trying to keep everyone as safe and secure as possible,” says Patrick McLean, senior vice president, chief marketing officer for Walgreens. “I’m really proud of all of our team members — they really are the heroes.” At Walgreens, additional customer service features include free shipping, accelerated drive-thru purchasing and a curbside pickup option, says McLean. Through an expanded partnership with Postmates, which offers local delivery of goods, “We’ve learned more about the demand for our retail products,” says McLean. “All these safety and prevention techniques and investments we’ve made aren’t going away anytime soon. They will stay in place indefinitely.” Walgreens’ commitment to the community is further demonstrated through its philanthropic endeavors. On Red Nose Day on May 21, (the sixth annual fund-raising campaign run by the Comic Relief US public charity to end child poverty) Walgreens continued its support while having to quickly adapt the way in which it participated. Unlike in previous years, the iconic and symbolic red noses weren’t for sale. Instead, those interested in supporting and raising awareness of the cause could unlock their own digital red nose by donating online. Thousands of employees posted digital nose filters on social-media networks, sharing internally with team members and challenging them to show their best red nose shots, says McLean. “Red Nose Day has always supported the most vulnerable children in America and around the world, and this year, the health crisis made it clear there was a greater urgency to help than ever before,” McLean said in a recent press release. “Walgreens was honored to work with Comic Relief US on the first digital red nose, which allowed us all to continue to come together, even while we remained apart, in support of such an important cause.” Over the last six years, the Red Nose Day campaign has raised more than $230 million, including nearly $32 million so far in the 2020 campaign. Walgreens debuted Frontline Hero Discount Day on April 25, offering a special 30 percent discount to celebrate front-line workers. “It was a really successful day for us,” says McLean. Additionally, they have collaborated with AT&T and Sesame Workshop, the nonprofit educational organization behind Sesame Street, to co-create an initiative in response to the uncertainty facing kids and families as the virus situation evolves. At SesameStreet.org, resources are provided to help parents comfort kids and manage anxiety, as well as stay mentally and physically healthy. A campaign was released including a Muppet video thanking “Super Families” of essential workers, many of whom have young kids. “In communities across the country, our customers often look to their local Walgreens team members as a sign of comfort, whether that’s for filling a prescription or finding the perfect gift,” said Richard Ashworth, president of Walgreens, in a recent press release. “Now, it is more important than ever in these unprecedented times, that we explain to children about essential workers and their roles while also celebrating their extraordinary care.” Teachers are also working to address social issues in their classrooms amid this global health crisis, and Walgreens’ WE Teachers program, a no-cost curriculum for educators across the country, offers teachers across the country free resources with training, modules and the WE Teachers Award. This celebrates teachers who have an impact on their communities. With a gravely rising need for mental-health resources since the COVID-19 outbreak, Walgreens has also completed its first phase of pharmacist training in mental-health first aid, which is administered by the National Council for Behavioral Health and accredited by the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education. Pharmacists are being taught to understand the risk factors and warning signs for mental-health and addiction concerns and strategies for how to help in both crisis and noncrisis situations. Service to community has always been at the heart of the Walgreens brand’s values. Kevin Hook, a store manager at Walgreens in Chicago who’s been with the company for more than 20 years, oversees 100 employees. His location is one of the busiest stores within the company.  Once the coronavirus hit, Hook says his store had to swiftly switch gears. “We had fewer tourists and more people who lived in the neighborhood,” he says of a quick switch to carrying more cleaning products, paper goods and grocery items. Hook is constantly checking in with his team members to ensure they are feeling alright. “As a dad, it’s especially upsetting to know that children are often left most vulnerable when something like this happens,” he says. “We rallied around the Red Nose Day cause, knowing funds raised help children in our local communities to have meals, have a safe place to sleep, receive health-care services and access to educational programs. It really does foster a stronger sense of community, and bring us closer together as a Walgreens team,” says Hook. “People often refer to their local store as ‘my Walgreens,’ because they feel a sense of kindness and community there. Kindness has been at the route of our culture well before the pandemic and as an essential business.”

You may not know Fernando Machado, but you are probably familiar with some of the marketing and branding campaigns he has run for Burger King. A few years ago, at Pride week in San Francisco, the fast-food chain sold a limited edition of the Whopper burger, wrapped in rainbow-colored paper. When opened, customers found the same familiar Whopper they’d known for years. The campaign’s message? “We’re all the same inside.” More recently there was a time-lapse BK ad that shows a Whopper accumulating green mold over 34 days. Its tagline: “The beauty of no preservatives.” “The idea was to illustrate that we use only fresh, preservative-free ingredients,” says Machado, global vice president and chief marketing officer of Restaurant Brands International which includes Burger King, Popeye’s and Tim Hortons. The commercial was so cutting-edge that Ad Age wrote, “There are only two eras in advertising: ads that came out before Burger King’s Moldy Whopper, and ads that came out after.” But, during the COVID-19 epidemic, outrageous ads are tasteless, says Machado, who has won numerous awards from Ad Week, Andy Awards, Cannes Lyons, and others, and will be a keynote speaker at the June 5 Brands Across America webinar. “They don’t reflect how society feels. The first thing we thought about (when COVID-19 arrived) was how we could step in and help people. That’s more important than advertising and social media at this moment.” Restaurant Brands International (RBI) concentrated on setting up new practices for store employees, like wearing masks and gloves and taking employees’ temperatures, contact-free. They redoubled sanitizing and cleaning standards, updated the drive-through experience and added contactless home delivery. However, with schools closed, RBI recognized that some children who depend on academic institutions for their meals, might go hungry, so they set up a program that provides two kids meals free of charge whenever an adult makes a purchase via the Burger King app. More than one million kids’ meals were given away nationwide. In New Orleans, Popeyes pledged to give away one million meals to those affected by COVID-19 through a partnership with customers who stepped up to help. They sold a “NOLA Strong” package for $28 that consisted of 12 pieces of Popeye’s fried chicken, two sides, six biscuits, a Popeye’s brand “NOLA Strong” t-shirt and a hat, with 100 percent of the proceeds going to the Second Harvest Food Bank, the largest anti-hunger network in Louisiana. “You cannot go wrong when you help people,” says Machado. Tim Horton’s, whose locations are primarily in Canada, used coffee trucks to give away free java and baked goods to doctors, nurses, paramedics, ambulance drivers and others who serve the communities they are in. Machado has since added a little fun and service into his promotions which are meant to bring a little laughter into your life during quarantine, and to remind you to stay safe at home and to feel good about your purchases. One ad suggests that you are a patriot for lazing around at home, using the slogan: “Your country needs you to stay on your couch and order in. Do your part and we’ll do ours. Order through the Burger King app and the delivery fees are on us. So, staying home doesn’t just make us all safer — it makes you a couch potatriot.” The ad also promises to donate Whoppers to nurses and to support the American Nurses Foundation. More recently BK put out ads with the intention of making quarantine fun. One of them features a QR code dancing around on a TV commercial. “If you can catch it and scan it with your phone, Burger King might have something for you the next time you order on the app,” says Machado. “It doesn’t feel like advertising, it feels like fun.” Now that things are beginning to open up and people are slowly venturing out, what can we expect from Burger King? “There are a lot of unemployed people, so we’ll have to deliver good value,” he says, without providing more of a hint. Of course, advertising, branding and marketing aren’t worth as much if the employees on the front and back lines don’t feel cared for, safe and well-treated. At BK, and others, employees who work during COVID-19 earn a bonus, Machado didn’t reveal the amount. And if they get sick with COVID-19, two weeks paid time-off is provided. When it comes to what working from home looks like for Machado, he says that in one way work is becoming more structured because you have to set up a call to talk to a colleague instead of walking by and popping into their office. But that’s just one side of the story. “Before, if you were working from home and your child made noise, it would feel awkward. Now, I was in a video call with global executives when my young son came to me asking for more yogurt, it seemed normal. New normal,” he says. “I think we’re all becoming more flexible, more empathetic.”

Paul Van Doren, the founder of skateboarding shoes and apparel company Vans, once said that Vans isn’t so much a shoe and apparel company as it is a people company that makes shoes and apparel. Although the brand originated in 1966, that statement has perhaps never resonated more than during the turbulent times of the coronavirus outbreak. Without a doubt, this is one of the toughest times that fashion and apparel companies have faced. But this historic chapter in history is also a meaningful opportunity for businesses to show their true colors — loudly, proudly and in the case of Vans, one signature skateboard swivel logo at a time. “Looking after our people has always been and will remain top priority,” says Nick Street, vice president of global integrated marketing at Vans, and one of the keynote speakers at the Brands Across America event on June 5. To that end, the Costa Mesa, Calif. headquartered company has been working nonstop on a variety of charitable initiatives and donations, planning for the brighter days ahead while showing their employees and communities across North America that they are ready to lend their support and solidarity amid uncertainty. First, back in late March, Vans began coordinating a well-deserved shoe delivery program as a gesture of gratitude for the multitude of volunteers who are working around the clock on their feet all day at food banks across the US and Canada. So far, they’ve donated more than 24,000 pairs of Vans “Slip-On” and “Authentic” shoes, and they’re working hard to make sure they get more sneakers in the hands (and on the feet) of tireless workers. “We are grateful to Vans for donating such comfortable footwear for our volunteers,” says Ana Martinez, director of volunteer services at the Los Angeles Regional Food Bank, one such recipient of this offering. “The volunteers have been so appreciative, and even more motivated to help us fight hunger in LA County.” The sneaker and apparel leaders have also quickly pivoted to help give back to the medical heroes who do so much for us all. In early April, Vans teamed up with designer Michael Schmidt and donated upward of 40,000 Vans shoelaces to enable Schmidt and his team’s efforts to create and donate medical face shields to front-line hospital workers. Since each face shield needs two 18-inch shoelaces to secure the piece to the worker’s face, Vans’ donation serves as a key element for some 20,000 units to be donated to health-care workers around the country. As face masks have also become this season’s hottest accessory (and necessity) Vans has shifted part of their supply chain operations to collaborate with Hedley & Bennett, current Vans partner and kitchen and workwear brand, to donate more than 250,000 reusable, nonmedical-grade face masks, which are crafted from the canvas typically used in the making of Vans shoes. In a small gesture of appreciation for first responders and health-care workers, Vans also offered a discount of 30 percent off any one-time purchase made by these individuals on their Web site from May 18 to May 25. Vans has also stepped up to help small businesses during these difficult months with their Foot The Bill campaign, which targets community-driven restaurants, music venues, skate shops, surf shops and art galleries. “We launched the Vans initiative [to focus on] supporting 160 small businesses who are feeling the incredible strain COVID-19 has put on their livelihoods,” says Street of this collection of Vans “Customs Slip-Ons.” “Fans can support their local business by selecting its pattern for purchase and further customizing it through the Vans ‘Customs’ offerings.” So far, they’ve seen so much success with the program — which has sneaker designs paying homage to institutions and businesses as diverse as Amityville Music Hall on Long Island, the Meatball Shop in New York City and Homegrown Skateshop in Ithaca, NY — that they also added custom-designed T-shirts. The Vans “Customs Slip-On” sneakers cost $90 and the T-shirts $30, with the net proceeds from both going directly to the indie business partners. Beyond all of these worthy endeavors, Vans has also taken great strides to ensure they look after their own employees. In March, as they moved from their corporate offices to remote setups, they also temporarily closed all of their stores in the US and Canada to protect the health and safety of their store associates and consumers. Despite the closures, Vans continued to support retail associates in the US, Canada and Mexico. “In April, our parent company VF Corp. made the announcement that we would continue supporting our North American retail employees as their stores remain temporarily closed, by further extending full pay and benefits to all retail associates through May 30 and increasing pay through July for our US and Canada distribution center associates,” says Street. For us folks at home, Vans is doing its part against the Battle of Stir-Crazy. “We’ve been focused on not only helping our local communities through giveback initiatives and donations, but also engaging our Vans Fans through content shared across Vans.com and our social-media channels,” says Street. Most notably, they launched the Make Something campaign to spark creativity, and have shared new content on social media with the #OffTheWallsChallenge hashtag, featuring musical and artistic demos and livestream sessions with their Vans athletes. As for what’s next for the iconic skateboarding shoes and apparel company, like businesses around the globe, adaptability is the name of the game. “We all know how fluid the situation is and as a global brand, we are in tune with the needs and circumstances of our consumers around the world,” says Street. “Given the changing nature of the pandemic, we continue to lean into our purpose of enabling creative self-expression. We also continue to review and evolve our plans to remain reactive and agile as we navigate through these uncertain times. We remain committed to supporting our communities, fans and loyal consumers — just like we have always done.” Makes sense — after all, that’s what a people company always does.

The coronavirus has numbed us in many ways, but to one thing it has not: the unflappable generosity of the human spirit. And our everlasting need for caffeine. That’s where the booming grassroots philanthropic campaign NYLovesCoffee comes in, slinging java to those on the front line of the coronavirus crisis while helping small businesses at the same time. The concept behind NYLovesCoffee is simple: Individuals and corporations can remotely buy anywhere from four to 150-plus cups to be enjoyed by hospital staffers battling the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as to help with their mind-boggling fatigue. To sweeten the deal, doughnuts can also be tacked onto orders. Four cups of coffee costs $10; 100-plus is $230 and a custom delivery of 150-plus cups of coffee to an area hospital of your choice is $300. As of press time, the organization has even had one generous soul buy 300 cups for three different hospital locations. To prepare for deliveries, all coffee contributions are tallied up until there is enough for a hospital department delivery. Typically, this amounts to around 50 cups of hot and iced coffee, with iced tea sometimes thrown into the mix for the java teetotalers among our health care heroes. The logistics are ironed out from there. At this point, a New York City specialty coffee shop is selected to fill the order and a hospital location is confirmed for the drop-off. “These coffee purchases keep these small businesses brewing throughout this crisis at a time when they have lost almost all their foot traffic business and many have closed completely,” says Paul Kontonis chief marketing officer at WHOSAY, who spearheads NYLovesCoffee’s marketing efforts. Kontonis was brought on after being approached by his longtime friend Dane Atkinson. As the CEO of Odeko, a startup artificial intelligence tech company based in New York City for — you guessed it — coffee shops, Atkinson founded NYLovesCoffee as a way to help health-care workers and small businesses simultaneously. Now, Kontonis is proud to share that they’ve delivered over 35,000 cups of coffee since deliveries began in mid-March. Still, there’s much work to be done: “Even though we have gone to the hospitals many times, there are still departments we have not reached yet. Let’s not forget all the night-shift workers!” Currently, participating coffee shops include local favorites like Bean & Bean Coffee, Bird & Branch Coffee, Birch Coffee, Buunni Coffee, Dough Doughnuts and Everyman Espresso. “I feel like it is incumbent upon us [to make] that 12-hour shift for them as palatable as we can. We can’t really thank them enough,” says Jeremy Lyman, co-founder of Birch Coffee on why he participates in this worthwhile operation. In addition to participating in coffee drop-offs, Birch Coffee has also done several pop-up barista stations at hospitals during which they set up a barista bar in their van where employees can get their free coffee. Brian Zak Brian Zak Brian Zak View Slideshow Jiyoon Han, head of innovation at Bean & Bean Coffee (she’s also the daughter of the company’s founders), echoes that sentiment, noting, “Of course, a cup of coffee can only do so much for all the stress our frontline workers are going through. It’s a token of appreciation.” But sometimes, such an offering of gratitude can be the difference between another grueling day on the battlefield of the coronavirus pandemic, and a moment of happiness. Most of the hospital coffee deliveries that NYLovesCoffee facilitates are conducted outside of the building, during which you’ll see the doctors and nurses themselves pushing any handcart they can find to load up and carry all the coffee and doughnuts back inside to share with their colleagues. “These are not glamorous, organized events, but all-hands-on-deck activities,” says Kontonis. “The power of smiles behind their masks is something to behold. Every person that we have delivered coffee to is beaming with happiness that people are thinking of them and giving them something as simple as a cup of coffee. Even though their faces are covered, you can see them smiling and saying thank you.” For Atkinson, an Elmhurst Hospital drop-off will forever stick out in his mind as a powerful reminder of his team’s work. “The doctors and nurses were lined up and waiting for us to bring the coffee and doughnuts,” Atkinson says. “They were so happy everything was organized for them and they made a line that wrapped the many hallways of the hospital. When we arrived everyone was clapping and literally dancing in the hallways.” On the receiving end, NYLovesCoffee’s efforts are far from unrecognized by the grateful hospital employees. “On behalf of Elmhurst Hospital and all the staff here, I want to thank you guys, it really made our day,” says Wayne Zimmerman, chief operating officer of the Elmhurst Hospital, of their recent brew bounty which was delivered courtesy of a $1,000 donation from the Cosmopolitan Junior Soccer League. “It’s certainly going to brighten up a lot of the spirits here.” Nicole Porto, associate director of patient experience at Mount Sinai also expresses her tremendous thanks for NYLovesCoffee’s regular drop-offs, which arrive every Friday for both day and night-shift workers. (While many organizations regularly deliver food and beverages to hospitals during regular business hours, night-shift workers are often overlooked even though they’re putting in the same Herculean efforts as their daytime counterparts.) “We have so many incredible front-line employees, not only doctors and nurses, but also [those in] food services, engineering, environmental services and more. NYLovesCoffee has really been a lifeline in supporting our communities and something we look forward to week after week,” says Porto. “Every cup of coffee we pour ourselves is an opportunity for us to feel cared for and a reminder of what we’re fighting for during a time when our staff is working tirelessly to save people’s lives.” On a parting note, Atkinson urges us to remember how big an impact these seemingly small gestures have. “Hospital workers always remain positive and when they get their coffee deliveries, they never let us leave without sending back messages of love. Challenges reveal the greatness in people,” he says. “We are currently doing 200 to 500 cups of coffee a day for tens of thousands of cups total. They are swept up the moment we arrive. This helps the small shops and the responders alike, so please keep it coming, New York!” Ready to put some pep in the step of New York City heroes? Visit NYLovesCoffee.com and send a cup of joe on its way to a hospital worker in need of a caffeine lift.

When COVID-19 first struck Boston a few months ago, one of the first calls Boston Medical Center (BMC) CEO Kate Walsh received was from John Hancock’s CEO Marianne Harrison. “She wanted to know how they could help,” says Walsh. BMC serves a proportionately higher number of uninsured and otherwise vulnerable individuals. As a result, BMC depends heavily on the goodwill of others and the generosity of donors. Like many hospitals all over the country, BMC’s COVID-19 efforts are centered around saving the lives of coronavirus patients who need to be hospitalized, and sending those who test positive but are well enough to recover at home to get better and self-isolate. But “that’s a problem when you have no home to go to,” says Walsh. Keeping those individuals in the hospital was not a choice — they needed the beds for patients who were extremely ill. But sending those that are housing insecure and suffering from COVID-19 out into the streets seemed cruel, irresponsible and could lead to bigger problems. Thanks to funding from John Hancock and others working with the Boston Resiliency Fund, BMC was able to open a COVID Recuperation Unit, which has discharged 253 patients to date. But that’s not all. Boston-based John Hancock is the primary sponsor of the Boston Marathon which was due to be held on April 20. The event not only shuts down the city for that day (most workers get the day off) but it also celebrates athletes and raises money for organizations in need, many of which are Boston hospitals. The marathon had to be cancelled, but, the Boston Athletic Association (BAA) and John Hancock found a way to make something good of it by donating 124 Boston Marathon invitational entry bibs to organizations helping COVID-19 patients. These bibs, mind you, are great fundraising vehicles; consider that Massachusetts General Hospital used them to create an Emergency Response Marathon Team after the 2013 Boston Marathon Bombing. The hospital has raised $2.3 million as a result. Dr. David Brown, head of Emergency Medicine at Mass General says that the hospital will receive 15 additional bibs for the September Marathon. Money raised will be used to fund training, conduct drills and to scale up treatment when surges occur. But it’s not only hospital executives who are excited by John Hancock’s generosity. Many of the city’s residents can recite the slogan the company crafted to show its gratitude to COVID-19 frontline workers. “You are essential. We are grateful.” Those words can be seen on doors and windows all over Boston; John Hancock made templates of the sign that kids could print and color available on their Web site. A highly visible expression of gratitude currently lights the skies of Boston. On April 6 John Hancock ignited its historic weather beacon blue — the color of healthcare — and committed to leaving it that way until the Stay at Home order was lifted. “Not long after we lit it, others followed,” says Barbara Goose, John Hancock’s chief marketing officer. “We’re expressing our gratitude and encouraging each other,” says Goose. Still, there was something more that John Hancock felt it could do. They purchased 8,500 meals which were distributed over a period of six days to feed employees at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston Medical Center, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital and Tufts Medical Center. These were not just any meals, according to Goose they were procured and delivered through Off Their Plate which partners with some of the city’s finest restaurants to get meals. “We were grateful to get such fine food,” says Walsh. Not only healthcare workers benefited from this donation — restaurant workers who might have otherwise been laid off became able to earn a paycheck at a time when dining establishments are takeout only or closed. Altruistic giving is not the only thing John Hancock cares about. Its customers and employees rate just as highly. These individuals are sheltering in place, trying to learn how to be productive at home, communicating in new ways, getting their questions answered and more. “We went digital almost overnight,” says Goose, which in some case, required quickly training workers so that customers could be serviced in the usual way, with the addition of one thing: “We trained our call center employees to be even more empathetic,” she says. Caring for employees at John Hancock isn’t an afterthought. At a time like this they have questions, cares, and worries. The company has redoubled its commitment to be fully transparent by offering three communications from executives each week, including a live “Ask me anything” with the CEOs of John Hancock and Manulife, its parent firm. John Hancock has created and provided its employees with access to 60 second videos covering topics such as using your (former) commuting time well, juggling work and caregiving, focusing, coping and more. “It’s been really good to hear from our leaders this often,” says Matt Gibson, head of vitality sales and distribution. Support for employee groups is high. The Global Women’s Alliance offers lunch time meditations during quarantine. Another group looks for alternative ways to celebrate PRIDE in light of its cancellation in nearly every city in the US. “One of John Hancock’s values is to ‘share your humanity,’” says Gibson, explaining that during COVID-19, “we’ve really done that.” He points out that he and his co-workers have literally been invited into each other’s homes via Skype and through conversations that illustrate what their childcare and elder care commitments look like. “We’ve learned that we all need to be flexible,” he says. “In a way, we’ve all become closer.”

Sometimes, it takes a crisis to bring out the best in ourselves, as well as in big business. Since the COVID-19 pandemic hit, essential business services large and small have had to adapt on the fly to customer demand, and all within a whole new set of preventative and safety parameters. Many have risen to the test in order to survive, and even thrive. Some have managed to do so while demonstrating gratitude and empathy through considerable philanthropic endeavors.
 Panera Bread has been able to continue to serve loyal customers throughout the coronavirus ordeal, since most of their 2,174 bakery-cafes across the nation and Canada remained open, says Scott Nelson, vice president of marketing for the company. “Nearly 90 percent of Panera cafes were able to stay open during the crisis with at least curbside, drive-thru or contactless delivery,” he says.
The good news is that it meant the continuation of Panera’s “Day-End Dough-Nation.” “Every night in every cafe, we donate our unsold breads and baked goods to local nonprofits in each of our communities,” says Nelson. “Last year, we donated over $100 million [worth] of baked goods to over 4,000 local nonprofits.” Thankfully for its 140,000 employees, the restaurant chain recognized the valiant efforts of their associates early on in the pandemic, as they quickly adapted to the brand’s off-premise model. The efforts of their delivery workers, in particular, were highlighted through a “From One Neighbor to Another” video commercial campaign. “This effort began early on during the pandemic when our delivery business was crucial to the environment we were living in, and our desire to make sure good, fresh food is accessible to all during this unprecedented time,” says Nelson.  The company reached out to cafe and franchise partners to seek out those drivers they thought the company should shine a light on. Such heartfelt, unscripted editorials were shot on driver smartphones. “We wanted to tell their amazing stories of being on the empty streets, the front lines, safely delivering food across America.” The belief that good food should be accessible to all is a tenet Panera operates by, and has diligently found ways to provide meals to those facing food scarcity during the global health crisis. Through a partnership with the Children’s Hunger Alliance (CHA) and the US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Panera is providing freshly prepared, wholesome meals to kids in need in Ohio, says Nelson, and, via local franchise partners, “is leveraging its supply chain and bakery-cafes to provide ready-to-eat, freshly prepared meals to CHA for children vulnerable to hunger across the state.” In conjunction with other nonprofits and local school districts across the country, the company has scaled this model, providing more than 65,000 school meals. “We’re continuing to look for partners who need meals delivered, even during the summer months when school is out,” says Nelson. Building upon their long-standing partnership with domestic hunger-relief organization, Feeding America, Panera mobilized quickly with them to provide freshly prepped meals to people in need through the charity’s network of food banks. The joint altruistic effort is a much-needed boost, since the charity estimates that 17.1 million people could face hunger in the next six months as a result of the pandemic, according to a recent press release. To expand the reach of this collaboration, Panera turned to their online platforms. “Panera has a large social voice [nearly 500,000 Instagram followers] and we wanted to try to use it to do some good during this crisis and help to raise awareness of the need that’s out there right now,” says Nelson. “We launched the #SeeAPlateFillAPlate challenge on Instagram on April 24, inspiring Americans to donate and fill a plate for someone in need,” says Nelson. “To date we’ve been able to provide more than 340,000 meals nationally.” Generosity has also come in musical form. The new single, “Say the Word,” written and performed by Elektra recording artist, Livingston, is providing a portion of the proceeds to Feeding America in partnership with Panera’s Together Without Hunger campaign. 		  Tipping their hats to front-line workers, Panera also launched a Meals for Heroes initiative during National Hospital Week (May 10 to 16). “The project provides a way for local communities to further thank their health-care workers by providing them with a fresh Panera meal and reminder that we appreciate all they are doing for our communities,” says Nelson. It is also designed “to better assist hospitals with the influx of meal orders for front-line workers,” he says. “We have many relationships with hospitals and have been working to support them as they use their own resources and private donations to feed their front-line employees. We quickly realized that some of the friction in providing meals to employees could be solved through our online ordering technology and knowledge of these locations. We’re currently working with 600 participating hospitals nationwide.” Those looking to contribute to Meals for Heroes to give back to health-care workers can visit PaneraBread.com/MealsForHeroes.

When the going gets tough, the tough spring into action. With the coronavirus pandemic affecting every corner of the corporate world, top companies across the country have not only pivoted to protect their employees and their businesses, but have also extended their philanthropic outreach to those impacted by the crisis. In light of their important outreach, on Friday June 5, keynote speakers from Fortune 500 firms will be gathering for Brands Across America, a live, online event to talk about the public-spirited efforts their companies are embarking on, and how they are learning and growing from the unique challenges of the COVID-19 era. Hosted by Brand Innovators, the online event will be livestreamed by the New York Post at NYPost.com/Brands-Across-America, beginning at 10 a.m. “After hearing so many wonderful stories from our friends in the brand marketing community about how they are giving back to their consumers, we decided to document these acts of kindness in a full-blown virtual event,” says Marc Sternberg, co-founder and co-CEO of Brand Innovators. Sternberg’s aim is to galvanize support among other companies, both big and small. “We hope that the brand marketers and other people who tune in to Brands Across America will be inspired by our event and the stories that their fellow brand marketers share on our virtual stage,” he says.
There will certainly be top talent on board for the fireside chats, namely: After each fireside chat, there will be an opportunity for the audience to ask questions. Brand Innovators was established in 2011 by Sternberg and co-founder and co-CEO Brandon Gutman to “provide senior brand marketers from Fortune 500 and other leading brands with continuing digital education, to help them stay on top of all of the new and emerging technologies, platforms, channels and devices that were changing how brands engage with and build long-term relationships with their consumers,” says Gutman. It’s now the largest community (25,000 members) of senior brand marketers from leading brands in America.
In more usual times, ‍Brand Innovators produces live events all over the country, with typical gatherings featuring 20 to 25 senior brand marketers. These professionals share best practices and success stories, and explain how they use new and emerging digital technologies to form customer loyalty and long-term relationships. “We also produce over 100 virtual events throughout the year,” says Gutman. These feature livecasts, roundtables and happy hours.

The Jets will be wrapping up their virtual offseason program next week and will not conduct an in-person minicamp this month, according to sources. The NFL has yet to clear teams to hold minicamps, but there has been speculation teams might try to gather later this month to hold some practices. The Jets are going to finish up with their virtual sessions next week and then reconvene for training camp, which is scheduled to begin at the end of July. This offseason has been unlike any other for NFL teams, as COVID-19 restrictions have kept teams out of their training centers. Typically, teams have offseason practices beginning in April and continuing through June, ending with a three-day mandatory minicamp. This year, teams have had to conduct meetings through video conferences. Submit your Jets questions here to be answered in an upcoming Post mailbag The Jets began their program on April 27 and will wrap it up next week. The Jets reopened their training center in Florham Park on Wednesday on a limited basis. Only a limited number of people from their football operations, IT department, medical staff and personnel staff were working on site. No coaches have been permitted to return yet. The NFL said last week that head coaches may be permitted to return by the end of this week. Even if some coaches and staff return to the facility soon, it seems like players will not be back until late July.

The other day, speaking to a veteran player representative, I emphasized that I try not to be naive, try not to be corny, but that I thought baseball needed a hero right now. Someone who both players and owners trusted to broker a resolution. Someone who could make them see a bigger picture of what was good for the game. And I told the representative, sadly, that I did not see that person within the game, in politics, in business. But watching the unrest in the country brought a recognition that I was shooting too low with my bigger picture — what was good for the game. This is no time to be myopic. Not when coronavirus has killed more than 100,000, disproportionately raining death on African-Americans. Not when a police officer in 2020 can still drop his knee into another man’s neck draining George Floyd’s life while three other officers look on and we have to wonder if justice will prevail. The hero we need is Jackie Robinson, and baseball — owners, players, representatives, executives — must embrace the most important person in its history not just to solve its squabble, but to again be an agent of change for the nation. There is so much wrong with our game — our national pastime — but breaking the color line in 1947 is a triumph. There were people on the wrong side of that issue then and history exposed their irrational hatred and fear and stupidity. History will do the same to anyone now trying to find some other-siderism to how brutally we police, incarcerate and treat people of color in this country. Consider that if we watched a police officer in France or Russia or Brazil put his knee into an American citizen’s neck on their soil and kill him while three of his comrades looked on, we collectively as a nation would be ready to go to war with that country. Especially if such abuses had taken place over and over for centuries. Especially if we appreciated that if this one was caught on camera, how many of these atrocities are not? So how is there not 100-percent cohesion in the United States that this MUST STOP? It is not going to end without people of influence making relentless demands until real change happens. It is not going to stop without real money backing the best of our angels against devils who would mislead, misdirect and find justification in brutalizing our own citizens. So this is where MLB comes in. This is where Jackie Robinson’s legacy should matter. How about the owners and players — in Robinson’s name — agree to something along the lines of the following: That the players will play for 50 percent of their prorated salaries this year and that the other 50 percent will be donated jointly from the two sides to mutually agreed upon organizations that fight for equality, that support the most vulnerable in our society, that need dollars earmarked specifically for them in the areas of health and science. This is hundreds of millions of dollars. Do it over 10 years so if owners are really having short-term cash flow issues it does not get in the way of the long-term good. Do it in the name and lingering importance and values of Jackie Robinson. Who says no to this? Maybe MLB can’t play anyway in 2020 because the coronavirus ultimately will not allow it — everyone should be concerned that the sardine-jammed protests will foster new waves and that two Japanese baseball players tested positive already and that there has been a new Ebola outbreak in the Congo. But MLB is not at an impasse because of the virus. The two sides can find common ground on safety measures to at least try to play. This is about money. So put the disputed money to better use and rise to a better place together. There is much imperfect with baseball, including poor representation of people of color in roles from manager to owner. But what Robinson withstood in threat and hatred has produced on the field as close to meritocracy as we get in society. I would never say bias is 100-percent dead, but largely skin color, nation or origin; none of that matters much. If you can play, you can play and you do play. MLB can showcase that. The sport could have its most prominent voices not only thanking our first responders and medical personnel that are risking so much during this pandemic, but we can see Jose Altuve and Aaron Judge and Hyun-jin Ryu and Masahiro Tanaka and Mike Trout kneeling in solidarity, offering words of unity and mostly showing how seamlessly people from so many different backgrounds can work together for a common good. You know, showing not only the best of our national pastime, but of our nation. We need a hero to get there. I offer the best hero not just in our game, but one of the most important in American history. Jackie Robinson.

Hospitals have always been filled with heroes, even before the COVID-19 pandemic set in. A new docu-series on Netflix, “Lenox Hill,” serves as a timely reminder with its compelling look at the pre-coronavirus work done behind the walls of that titular New York hospital system. The show, which premieres June 10, was filmed over about 18 months between spring 2018 and fall 2019 — before the global pandemic took hold — at the hospital’s facility on the Upper East Side and its emergency room in Greenwich Village. That seemingly long-ago world, as documented on film, was quite different from the overrun hospitals that have struggled to contain the novel virus. “What I would tell myself, if I had a crystal ball before COVID, is, ‘Get ready,’ ” says documentary subject Dr. John Boockvar, the hospital’s vice-chair of neurosurgery, in an exclusive interview with The Post. “The current day, during the pandemic, was unlike anything we’ve ever seen,” he says. “Not just [us] in the documentary but any health-care professional. We never had a day like we had during the pandemic.” The eight-part series follows two brain surgeons (including Boockvar), an emergency room physician and a chief obstetrics-gynecology resident as they and their colleagues relay good news and bad to patients and navigate the emotional highs and lows of hospital life. The other documentary subjects include: In the show, the highs and lows encompass a broad spectrum. On one end, Langer is greeted by a smiling, 28-year-old Brooklyn patient who tells him following successful brain surgery, “I think you just saved my life.” And a visibly touched Macri is surprised with a baby shower before she takes maternity leave for several months. “This is honestly the best place to work,” she says before heading back to her department to see what emergencies have arisen. On the other end, Langer must grapple with another patient whose health takes a “very, very unfortunate” turn. “Complications are not things that I take lightly, and certainly in the vascular world it happens,” a pensive Langer says while biting his lip and trying to keep his emotions in check. “But this was, um, just hard to take.” The emotional drama and behind-the-scenes moments may be of particular interest to viewers today, says Boockvar, because of the spotlight that COVID-19 has shined on front-line workers since the crisis began. “I think that viewers are more curious — now, more than ever — about what happens in hospitals, particularly here in New York City, because of COVID,” Boockvar says. “I think, frankly, the docu-series is coming at a very opportune time because there’s a thirst, a real appetite for what health-care heroes do on a day-to-day basis.” And he makes certain to point out that the series isn’t the stuff of a fictional medical TV drama. “We didn’t fake it,” he says. “This is a documentary that its intent was to tell the truth and to show and expose the beauty of what goes on inside these great walls of hospitals across the nation and really to tell the stories of the patients and their suffering, and their success, and their crying, and the laughing, and the joys and the tears that go with it.” Of course, what the audience sees in the pre-pandemic series — routine childbirth, brain surgeries and lesions in need of lancing — is drastically different from what medical professionals are doing these days. Boockvar says the pandemic surge between approximately mid-March and mid-April saw the health-care system put to the test. With elective surgeries on hold, many specialized physicians found themselves assisting in other areas. For instance, Boockvar and his team were “redeployed” to run the hospital’s COVID-19 clinical trial program that offered “novel drugs and therapeutics,” which he calls “extremely interesting and fruitful.” And even with resources pushed to capacity, Boockvar is awed by what was accomplished. “We all worked 24/7 to make sure that we held the line,” he says. “We did not let the front fall here in New York. I’m quite proud of how well everybody did.” Boockvar admits that “before the coronavirus, life was different,” but he also sees a silver lining to the enduring pandemic. “I mean, we have changed as a health-care industry, as physicians, as nurses, as respiratory therapists — we’re all different,” he says. “We’ve improved in a lot of ways what we know were inefficiencies in the health-care system prior to the coronavirus. So, frankly, we’re more efficient now than we were before COVID. We have safety measures in place that we didn’t have before COVID.” Boockvar — whose father, grandfather, great-grandfather, uncle and brother have all been doctors — hopes that means an eventual return to so-called normalcy. Or better. “I think that the hospitals will actually get back to a superior sense of normalcy, meaning that we were normal before COVID, we had COVID and now we’re actually going to be even better than we were for having gone through COVID,” he says.

In his first seven months back coaching Rutgers football, Greg Schiano built a heralded recruiting class. He hired a staff quick to adapt to teaching through Webex meetings to players dispersed around the world. He listened to leading experts on the dangers of the coronavirus — some of whom come from Rutgers Medical School — and to emotional reactions to social injustice. What’s missing? “We have not lined up 11 guys on offense, defense or kick team and run through a play,” Schiano told The Post. “But we are not complaining. What we would install in one day if we were practicing, we have taken a week to install. Hopefully, from a mental standpoint, players will have a more thorough understanding.” Coronavirus restrictions canceled most college football spring camps — a challenge for all but especially first-year staffs with new playbooks. Rutgers University’s dormitories are closed and classes moved online through Aug. 14. In conjunction with direction from New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy, the basketball teams could return to campus June 22. Football could be sooner.  “We are going to do everything we can to do it as soon as we can, but certainly not at the cost of being any way unsafe,” Schiano said. “You can’t swing and miss on this one. There is no margin for error.” The NCAA and Big Ten permitted athletes to resume voluntary individual on-campus workouts earlier this week. Some schools are delayed. So, coaches must accept they can’t control what will not be a completely level playing field of season preparation. “I spend very little time thinking of that,” Schiano said. “How can we remedy our own situation and make the best gains?” With no on-field drills to lead, Schiano’s focus is on recruiting and big-picture program development. He will drop in on an occasional position meeting, but much of the day-to-day instruction is left to assistants. Players can receive up to eight hours per week of coaching, per NCAA rules. Strength and conditioning coaches can watch voluntary at-home training, but most players don’t have home gyms like the pros. They eventually will return to new regulations. “Certainly it’s going to be smaller gatherings because you decrease the risk,” Schiano said. “We are in the middle of working out those details. Nothing is off the table, but nothing has been decided either.” Where Schiano has an advantage over other first-year coaches is in recruiting. Trust established during Schiano’s first 11-year stint with Rutgers — resulting in six bowl berths — and maintained after leaving in 2012 is seen in a 2021 class of 20 verbal commitments ranked No. 19 nationally by 247Sports.com. About 10 former Rutgers coaches and players and two ex-New Jersey high school coaches returned to this staff. There is a popular theory the pandemic, quarantine and travel restrictions will lead to more college recruits staying close to home and more teams eliminating risks by prioritizing in-state. That remains to be seen, Schiano said, but the elimination of summer camps helpful in identifying future recruits certainly emphasizes strong backyard relationships.  “These kids were 4 or 5 years old when we were winning big-time games around here,” Schiano said, “so it’s not in their wheelhouse. Really, what we are doing is being real: This is who we are. Then you get players who really want to be part of it.” The NCAA is considering an expanded six-week training camp. Rutgers is scheduled to open Sept. 5 against Monmouth and planning for an uninterrupted season.  “It gives your whole organization a goal you are working toward,” Schiano said. “If the date moves, then we’ll adjust. Until someone tells us we are not opening that weekend, we are opening that weekend.”

On the bright side, no one calls baseball “boring” at the moment. These heated negotiations to restart the 2020 season continue to entertain, even as they present absolutely terrible optics to a country coping simultaneously with a social crisis and a pandemic. Here are three thoughts on the latest developments: 1. If you’re wondering whether or how this collective bargaining differs from other turbulent talks that landed smoothly, look no further than the quote that Major League Baseball deputy commissioner Dan Halem gave in a text to The Post’s Joel Sherman on Monday night: “The one piece of good news out of [Sunday’s] meeting is that Tony Clark acknowledged that the March Agreement contemplated another negotiation over player salaries if the 2020 season could not be played in front of fans. We were concerned, based on media reports, if players knew that. Tony told us the players were aware that the March Agreement did not resolve the issue of player salaries in a season without fans. And he said the players’ decision to accept nothing less than 100 percent of their prorated salaries was due to the risks of playing the season, not because they were promised it in the March 26 agreement.” Halem is not accusing Clark of being unreasonable, or intransigent, or just plain wrong. He is questioning Clark’s competence, his process of disseminating information to his constituents. You don’t see much of that in these sagas. Halem could have been referring to reports like The Post’s last week, when Noah Syndergaard, amid a Twitter battle on another subject, accused MLB of going back on its word from the aforementioned March 26 deal. Extensive evidence exists that many players did not understand that, even after agreeing to prorate their salaries for this coronavirus-shortened campaign, MLB owned the right to at least try to take another bite of the apple. Tensions between the owners and players ran crazy high from the 1970s through the 1990s, leading to more work stoppages than “Fast and Furious” movies. They hated each other’s guts, and the players proved thrice, through an independent arbitrator, that owners colluded to suppress the free-agent market from 1985 through 1987. Yet would you rather believe that your partners/foes are malicious, as the players felt then, or inept, as the owners believe now? We’ll see which poison proves worse. 2. The 30-60-game season very likely won’t happen. It sounds like MLB didn’t offer this during Sunday’s virtual meeting as much as wryly mention it as a possibility that would give the players their prorated pay while not financially overextending the owners. Everyone knows how silly such a short schedule would look, especially with the decks clearing to hold a three-month regular season plus expanded playoffs in October. Even floating the notion does accomplish something, however: It yanks the moral high ground from under the players’ collective feet. Who can’t sympathize with the players’ desires to receive their full prorated income for putting themselves in harm’s way? Shoot, you can contend quite easily they deserve more than their prorated percentage. No owner will be sharing close quarters or risking collisions with other people while the coronavirus lingers, after all. But the only argument for more games, as opposed to higher pay per game, covers finance and statistical/historic merit, not what’s ethically right. Proposing the “fewer games/higher pay” concept would be like taking away Jacob deGrom’s slider. Though he can still prevail without it … he’d rather have it. 3. For all the understandable talk of Clark’s effectiveness and questions about his job security, it’s Rob Manfred and the owners who can lose the most. Folks rightly fault Bud Selig, not Donald Fehr, for canceling the 1994 World Series. Owners count on their franchises to increase in value, yet can that occur when those franchises don’t take the field? You’d think the owners would keep this in mind as they proceed here. Wouldn’t it make more sense for them to take a short-term hit — massive deferred player compensation still appears so darn logical — and live to fight another day than take a hard line now and severely damage those franchise values?

The company that administers the SAT college entrance exam is scrapping plans to provide a home version of the test this year, saying it can’t guarantee all students would have access to the needed technology. The College Board announced Tuesday that it’s pausing plans for the remote exam but still hopes to make it possible in the future. Offering the test at home would have required three hours of uninterrupted internet access, the company said. Officials in April said they were creating a home exam in case schools remained closed into the fall because of the coronavirus pandemic. Instead of offering the test on paper under a proctor’s supervision, the company said it would rely on “remote proctoring” using the computer’s camera and microphone. Instead, the College Board said that it’s working to expand the availability of the SAT at in-person test centers this fall, and it’s asking colleges to be more flexible with testing requirements. “There are more important things than tests right now,” said David Coleman, CEO of the College Board. “In making these difficult decisions we focused on reducing the anxiety that students and families are experiencing this year.” The company that owns the rival ACT exam said Tuesday that it’s continuing with previously announced plans for a home exam to be offered in late fall. A spokeswoman for the company said more details will be released in coming weeks. The College Board announced its change weeks after thousands of students ran into technical glitches while trying to submit online versions of the company’s Advanced Placement exams. Nearly 20,000 of the more than 4.6 million timed tests taken at home resulted in errors, according to data from the College Board. Students who were unable to submit their tests will likely have to retake them, officials said. For the SAT, the company is asking colleges to accept test scores as late as possible, to give equal consideration to students who were unable to take the test because of the coronavirus, and to recognize that students may have been unable to retake the test. The three-hour, multiple choice test measures math and English language arts proficiency. Most colleges require SAT or ACT exam scores as part of the application process, though an increasing number of institutions have made them optional in recent years, often to be more inclusive of students without access to private test preparation. The University of California system decided in May it would phase out consideration of the SAT and ACT. Critics of the tests have long argued that they put students of color and low-income students at a disadvantage, saying the test questions are slanted in a way that makes privileged children better equipped to answer and that those with privilege also have access to better preparation. The College Board has denied that the test is discriminatory. In-person SAT testing is scheduled to resume in August after spring exams were canceled. But many testing centers will have fewer seats amid social distancing measures, the company said, and some dates may be unexpectedly canceled. Although only a quarter of seats have been filled for August testing nationally, some states hit hard by the virus are already nearing capacity, the company said. Massachusetts is already at 75% capacity for August, while Rhode Island, New Jersey and Washington state are about 60% full. The company said it will add a January 2021 test date if there’s demand.

Meet some happy campers. Sales professional Bennett Prescott, 36, and his family usually spend summers adventuring far from their home in Wallingford, Conn. His job keeps him traveling more than half the year anyway, while his 38-year-old science-teacher wife,  Selena Gell, gets time off. Last year, the couple, with toddler Jacob, made stops in Fire Island, NY; Oregon; Italy and Norway. But as coronavirus risks loom for the third month and protests crop up across the country, a mobile retreat in rural America seems like the ideal escape. So in May, Prescott and Gell booked a 32-foot-long RV through rent-from-owner listings site RVShare. On Saturday, they packed camping gear, cooking supplies, their bikes and pup Edison into their new house-on-wheels — a Class A 2015 Thor Motor Coach Ace 30.2 — and headed west. “I’m a lot happier on this trip, where we have a lot of distractions and goals to look forward to and beautiful places to stay,” says Prescott, who is avoiding stops in major cities as riots ripple through them in response to George Floyd’s death last week at the hands of a Minneapolis police officer. The family, wearing masks and staying far from others to prevent virus transmission, has a flexible itinerary. “We’re going to plan as we go. It’s thrilling.” Akin to protected bubbles, RVs allow for easy movement while maintaining social-distancing and quarantine-like conditions. Their allure during the pandemic and civil unrest is undeniable: RV rentals have increased 1,000 percent since April, while RV sales jumped 600 percent in the same time period, according to the RV Industry Association and Kampgrounds of America (KOA). More than 25 million Americans will go RVing this summer, estimates the association, which also found that 80 percent of recent buyers are first-time owners. Indeed, Prescott and Gell’s six-week-long trip — on a route that will take them to Gell’s family in Rockaway Beach, Ore., and back via California, Colorado, New Mexico, Texas, Louisiana and Georgia with stops at the Grand Canyon and Utah’s Arches National Park — marks their first foray into this type of travel. One of their first overnight stays, at Greene Eagle Winery in Cortland, Ohio, was blissfully quiet. “There’s nobody here across 60 acres,” Prescott says. While Prescott and Gell have experience backpacking and car camping, they were still getting accustomed to handling their somewhat “ungainly” RV rental, which has proved “bouncy and loud” during five-hour stretches on the highway. “It’s much better when it’s parked,” Prescott jokes. “The mornings are great. You wake up in your little house on a winery, let the dog out, make coffee. It’s really lovely.” “We expect RVs to continue to gain traction as a preferred method of travel while consumers are seeking flexible options and a unique way to experience the outdoors,” says Jon Gray, CEO of RVShare. Its rental prices — comparable to other popular companies like Cruise America and Outdoorsy — generally range from $50 to $100 per night for a pop-up trailer to $175 to $275 per night for a Class A vehicle like Prescott’s. Meanwhile, Janine Pettit, 60, grew up camping with her family and had high hopes of instilling a similar passion in her husband Rick, 66. “That’s not what happened,” jokes the Princeton, NJ-based empty nester, although Rick occasionally meets her on her travels. So, in 2007, Pettit began organizing trips for solo women, founding the Web site GirlCamper.com and blogging for advice-oriented Go RVing. Pettit tows a 2019 19-foot Off Road Max teardrop trailer by Xtreme Outdoors for weekend trips to the Poconos, the Jersey Shore or Camp Taylor in Columbia, NJ. And she’s looking forward to driving to Kennebunkport, Maine, in August — all while wearing her mask in public and cleaning her hands often. Campground spots are spaced at a safe distance apart, Pettit notes, and her “little house on wheels” is completely self-contained with a bed, kitchen, toilet and shower. It was in Yellowstone, standing before a waterfall, that she had an epiphany about national parks: “They’re for everyone, whether you’re in a Class A or a van.” The equalizing power of the great outdoors could offer solace during turbulent times, she adds. “RVing and camping is going to be a route that’s so important to people until our country finds its way. People are stressed and need to get out in nature. It’s healing,” says Pettit, adding that the RV community is known for welcoming all comers, including her interracial family. “When you’re outside, you can decompress and restore. Nature takes you out of a state of trauma.” Aspiring road-trippers, be warned: With many campgrounds closed or operating at a limited capacity in response to the coronavirus, reservations are filling fast. An increased demand for RVs is also making them harder to secure. Pettit advises either advance planning or remaining ready to pounce if last-minute cancellations arise. You don’t need to worry about renting, though, if you buy your own house on wheels. Entrepreneur Jesse Itzler, 51, and his wife Sara Blakely, 49, founder and CEO of Spanx, caught the RV bug last year. Along with their four children, who are all under age 10, they camped across Idaho, Wyoming and Montana, visiting state parks along the way. “I love being outside,” Itzler says. “You can pull over and jump into a watering hole anytime. It’s a great way to keep the family contained and see the country with the freedom to create your own timeline.” So in April, Itzler took the plunge and purchased a 35-foot 2020 Thor Magnitude Super C Class for summer travel from their Atlanta home. That month, they drove to Florida with stops in Clearwater Beach, St. Augustine and Savannah, Ga. With their kids still in school remotely, Itzler describes their sojourn as “one-part home school, one-part ‘Bill & Ted’s Excellent Adventure’ and one-part summer camp.” Later this summer, the family plans to drive up the East Coast to Connecticut and then out west to Michigan and Montana. Itzler, who grew up in New York without much driving experience, has also had to confront the less glamorous underbelly of the vehicle: the power, septic system and water tanks. “I’m not super handy,” he admits, “but the learning curve is part of the fun.” “We’ve contacted friends and encouraged them to rent RVs and meet up with us this summer,” says Itzler. “There are benefits to flying. I love that privilege. But RVing is literally like having a vacation home on wheels. Home is wherever you park. The party is wherever you park.”

With trips to the ocean and lakes canceled because of the coronavirus and a long hot summer looming ahead, the idea of installing a backyard swimming pool couldn’t be more tempting. That is until the pain of sticker shock sets in since the average cost of building an in-ground pool is a whopping $35,000. Not wanting to risk ridicule about the aesthetic — or definite lack thereof — of a much cheaper plastic above-ground pool, hipsters have come up with the perfect solution: lounging around in stock tank pools, essentially a giant cattle trough filled with water. In other words, so-called “hillbilly hot tubs” are having a renaissance. Instagram is chock-full of supercool images of galvanized steel stock tanks — purchased from farm stores such as Tractor Supply Co. for between $300 and $600 — which creative fans of farmhouse design are customizing as pools. They include influencers Savannah McNeill and Casey Freeman, of the Instagram page Hey Wanderer, who have an 8-foot-diameter stock tank pool in their yard in Nashville, Tennessee. “We love it,” McNeill, 32, tells The Post of the tank, which holds 700 gallons of water. “It’s the ideal place to cool off in the heat. “It was tight, but we’ve even gotten eight adults in there at once.” She says while it might cost a little more than an above-ground pool, it will last longer, look better and require less maintenance. Such is the demand for stock tank pools, that McNeill and Freeman have launched a website called StockTankPoolAuthority showing people how to assemble them and buy accessories such as filters and pumps. “The page had 6,000 followers when we started it last year, but since the pandemic, it’s gone up to more than 18,000,” adds McNeill. “This spring and early summer, things have gone crazy.”

NYPD cops have been ignoring an official directive and abandoning their coronavirus face masks amid the violent protests over George Floyd’s killing — even though a top official took on the city’s health commissioner to get the protective gear. Dramatic images from recent street clashes show cops with surgical masks pulled beneath their chins or not wearing any at all while up close and personal with demonstrators whose mouths and noses are likewise fully exposed. Mayor Bill de Blasio has warned that the ongoing rallies — which entered their sixth day on Tuesday — could lead to a spike in cases of COVID-19, and he’s urged demonstrators to “stay home,” saying, “You’ve made your point.” Chief of Department Terence Monahan has also been repeatedly photographed without a mask in public, including when he held hands and kneeled in solidarity with unmasked protesters in Washington Square Park on Monday. Last month, The Post exclusively revealed that Monahan had to appeal directly to City Hall when Health Commissioner Oxiris Barbot ignored his desperate plea for 500,000 masks to protect NYPD cops and civilian employees from the deadly respiratory ailment. Christopher Sadowski Taidgh Barron/NY Post Stephen Yang Stephen Yang Stephen Yang POLARIS View Slideshow “I don’t give two rats’ asses about your cops,” Barbot told Monahan at the time. Barbot publicly apologized for the remark following The Post’s expose. During a May 22 meeting of the City Council’s Public Safety Committee, NYPD Assistant Deputy Commissioner of Legal Matters Oleg Chernyavsky said cops were under orders to wear masks as per “the protocol that we’ve instituted” to respond to the pandemic. “If they’re interacting with the public, they’re obligated to wear masks,” Chernyavsky testified. A high-ranking NYPD source said the situation surrounding the protests made it impractical for cops to wear face masks. “They’re not wearing them because they can’t breathe. It’s hot. You’re standing there for a long time,” the police official said. “Those masks aren’t for running. They’re heavy. The more you walk and move it’s harder to breathe.” Another NYPD source said, “Cops aren’t wearing masks with their helmets because it fogs up visors and it’s hard to breathe when you’re fighting.” Neither City Hall nor the NYPD immediately returned requests for comment.

RIO RANCHO, N.M. — Childhood disparities around malnutrition, graduation rates, and early deaths are worst among rural, black-majority counties in the American South and isolated counties with Native American populations, according to a new report. Those inequities put these populations more at risk for the novel coronavirus, the report by Save the Children concludes. “The Land of Inopportunity: Closing the Childhood Equity Gap for America’s Kids” report released Tuesday found that children in the most disadvantaged counties die at rates up to five times of children in the same state. Children in those counties also are 14 times as likely to drop out of school and are three times as likely to lack healthy food and consistent meals, the report said. Using federal data from 2018 and examining more 2,600 counties and their equivalents, the report found that about a third of the 50 worst counties are majority African American and a quarter are majority Native American. The counties and census areas of Kusilvak (Alaska), Todd (South Dakota), Madison (Louisana), Carson (South Dakota), and Bethel (Alaska) were the five worst-ranked, the report found. Todd County lies entirely within the Rosebud Indian Reservation and Madison Parish is 61% black. “These are just stunning statistics,” said Mark K. Shriver, senior vice president of U.S. programs & advocacy at Save the Children. “Children growing up rural areas, for instance, are more likely to die before their first birthday at a rate to 20% than in large urban areas.” The inequality comes from the lack of early childhood education, health care, and job training options in those areas, the report said. So far, children in some of the poor counties cited in the report live among the areas hardest hit by COVID-19. New Mexico’s McKinley County, which sits on the Navajo Nation — a tribe suffering amid the pandemic — is ranked near the bottom in child hunger and graduation rates. According to the report, Louisiana, Mississippi, and New Mexico are the lowest-ranked states for these childhood disparities. New Jersey, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire earned the highest marks. Save the Children recommends states and local governments invest more in early childhood education programs. The report comes more than a half-century after the late U.S. Sen. Robert Kennedy — Shriver’s uncle — embarked on a tour across the country to highlight the nation’s most impoverished regions. Kennedy visited Mississippi and South Dakota’s Pine Ridge Indian Reservation and was transformed by the hunger and inequality he saw. It also comes more than a half-century after President Lyndon Johnson’s Kerner Commission report, which sought to examine urban poverty and riots across the nation. Former U.S. Sen. Fred Harris of Oklahoma, the last surviving member of the Kerner Commission, said he’s not surprised by the report since the number of U.S. residents in poverty has grown in 50 years. “And most of that growth in poverty has been among children,” Harris said from his home in Corrales, New Mexico. “This is a great unfairness in our system.”

ATHENS, Greece — Greece is preparing to admit tourists from all over the world this summer but will be adhering to the advice of health experts to ensure it remains a safe destination in terms of coronavirus exposure, the country’s tourism minister said Tuesday. “Every tourist is welcome. … This has been a very stressful year for everyone, and the refilling of the batteries is the call of the day,” Tourism Minister Harry Theoharis said.. “But of course, we will have to wait for the experts, for the international bodies, to say when this is safe to do so,” “We don’t want to put at risk the people that visit us. And, of course, our population,” Theoharis told The Associated Press in an interview. The government imposed a lockdown early in Greece’s coronavirus outbreak, a move credited with holding infections to a level considerably lower than many other parts of Europe. Greece had a total of just over 2,900 confirmed cases and 179 deaths as of Tuesday, with no new virus-related deaths recorded in the previous 24 hours. Eleven people remained intubated in intensive care units. Lockdown restrictions have been gradually eased to the point where life is almost back to normal. But the country is heavily dependent on tourism, and the government has been eager to attract foreign visitors and help shore up the economy, which is only just emerging from a brutal decade-long financial crisis that wiped out a quarter of the GDP Authorities are now faced with the delicate balancing act of promoting Greece as a safe, attractive destination while ensuring that visitors don’t trigger a new outbreak. One illustration of the gamble involved came Tuesday, when authorities announced that 12 passengers on a Monday flight from Doha, Qatar, had tested positive. Greece’s Civil Protection Agency said it was suspending flights from Qatar until June 15. Currently, all arriving passengers to Greece are required to undergo tests and to pend the night in a designated hotel until the results come through. “The point is not to stop every economic activity in order to help the health situation, but it’s actually to find this balance, and for that, you need your health experts to guide you,” Theoharis said. One of those health experts, epidemiologist Gkikas Magiorkinis, told the AP that given current trends, the coronavirus outbreak in Greece was “in a trajectory of elimination. If we did not have other imported cases, it would be a matter of a month at most” for the virus to be stamped out in the country. But new cases will almost certainly arrive when Greece opens to tourists, he said. “Yes, we are worried because we know that globally the epidemic is a result of people moving around the world,” Magiorkinis said. “The question is how fast we will be able to contain the incoming cases. Because it will happen. There is no question that we will have incoming cases.” The government has outlined a two-part schedule for jump-starting tourism. As of June 15, visitors will be able to fly into Athens or the northern city of Thessaloniki. Direct international flights to regional airports, including on islands, will be allowed from July 1. Greece last week announced that visitors from 29 countries would be subject to random coronavirus testing and no quarantine, rather than the compulsory tests for every passenger and quarantines that currently apply. The announcement angered some nations, including neighboring Italy, that were not included. However, the government later clarified the measures referred to flights originating from specific airports rather than countries. Greece, it said, is basing its decisions on a European Aviation Safety Agency list of airports with high risk of coronavirus transmission. Visitors can still fly to Greece from those airports, but will be subject to compulsory testing, and either a seven-day self-quarantine period if they test negative for coronavirus, or a 14-day supervised quarantine if they are found positive. “Perhaps it was a misunderstanding that we’re blocking entire countries or anything of the sort. This is not what we intended to convey,” Theoharis said. He said the European agency’s list of high-risk airports was subject to change and airports could be removed as their regional public health situations improve. For example, Rome’s international airport is not on the EASA list, he noted. “We’re not actually blocking countries, but airports. And, you know, that shows that this is not about specific passports or nations,” Theoharis said.

Alcoholism. Drug overdoses. Suicide. These “deaths of despair” could reach 150,000 in the U.S. if more isn’t done to provide access to mental health care, increase emotional well-being, mitigate social isolation and blunt the impact of an economic downturn that has wiped away at least 40 million jobs, researchers warn. “More Americans could lose their lives to deaths of despair, deaths due to drug, alcohol, and suicide, if we do not do something immediately,” the executive summary of the study released in May by Well Being Trust states. “Deaths of despair have been on the rise for the last decade, and in the context of COVID-19, deaths of despair should be seen as the epidemic within the pandemic.” According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services’ National Survey on Drug Use and Health, there were 57.8 million Americans living with mental and/or substance use disorder in 2018, a number that doesn’t reflect the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. “Currently, suicide is the 10th-leading cause of death in our nation,” said Elinore F. McCance-Katz, the HHS assistant secretary for Mental Health and Substance Use, in a statement. “We know the stressors that are accompanying this pandemic – job loss and financial instability, anxiety, grief, depression and other factors – can lead to suicide and suicide attempts.” The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration announced on May 13 a $40 million grant program for suicide prevention efforts as part of the government’s response to the pandemic. The Well Being Trust study estimates anywhere from 27,644 to 154,037 additional deaths of despair in the U.S., depending on how quickly the economy recovers. However, the study’s authors note that their projections are based on data from the 2008 Great Recession – many economists believe this downturn is much worse – and don’t take into account developments in telemedicine and other forms of digital social connection. Therefore, the study’s numbers should be seen as estimates and not foregone conclusions. Due to social distancing measures that have slowed the spread of the virus, many health care programs and well-being services aren’t as accessible. “Many of the hospitals with dedicated beds for client detox had to reassign them to treat the influx of COVID-19 or critical patients, which limits the available treatment for those clients in acute withdrawal,” said Ellery Tarife, a certified nurse practitioner who oversees the outpatient withdrawal management program at CarePlus NJ. “Many private substance use disorder treatment facilities have limited their capacity and decreased their admissions, while some have even closed their doors for the time being.” CarePlus NJ, a nonprofit organization that offers a range of mental health care, substance abuse prevention and recovery-focused primary care services, is still providing therapeutic services – either virtually or in-person – during the pandemic. For people who are struggling in more extreme ways, Tarife may see them in weekly sessions, and clients can still come into the office for face-to-face visits if they need them. “In addition to the social isolation, skyrocketing unemployment rates and the fear and uncertainty surrounding the virus can serve as triggers to continued or increased substance use,” explained Tarife. “Clients can relapse, or increase their current usage while isolated, and without the appropriate checks and balances associated with treatment and support groups, things can escalate.” CarePlus’ Addiction Recovery Services program takes what it calls a “holistic approach” to addiction treatment by offering a wide range of outpatient services, as well as psychiatric evaluations, support groups and therapy, based on the needs of each person. As of Monday afternoon, there were almost 1.8 million infections and at least 104,584 deaths in the U.S. from COVID-19.

Mayor Bill de Blasio struggled to explain Tuesday why large religious gatherings remain banned and businesses deemed nonessential are still closed under coronavirus-related orders as thousands pack city streets to protest the death of George Floyd. “When you see a nation — an entire nation — grappling with an extraordinary crisis that’s deep-seated in 400 years of American racism,” a peevish de Blasio told a reporter during an hour-long press conference. “Sorry, that is not the same question as the understandably aggrieved store owner or the devout religious person who wants to go back to religious services.” “It’s about the deep, deep American crisis,” Hizzoner added. “I have eyes to see. We’re not going to treat it like it’s any other day, we’re not going to treat it like ‘why are people outside the bar.’ It was one in a slew of contentious exchanges between a visibly exhausted de Blasio and the City Hall press corps, following the Big Apple’s fifth night unrest in the aftermath of Floyd’s death. Hizzoner also attempted to explain the differing treatment by pointing to scientific research that shows there is less risk to contracting the disease from activities outside than inside. “It’s only been a few days,” of protests, De Blasio said. “It’s also been people outdoors, which, thank god, means less spread than when people are indoors.” Businesses, he added, will be able to begin to get back to work when New York City begins “Phase 1” of its pandemic reopening plan, which is still scheduled for Monday. Large religious services are approved to begin again under “Phase 2.” Floyd, who lived in Minneapolis, died on May 25 as he was arrested and violently detained by local cops over allegations he used a fake $20 bill to buy cigarettes. One of the police officers, Derek Chauvin, was captured on tape kneeling on Floyd’s neck for more than eight minutes as the African-American said he couldn’t breathe. Chauvin was charged later charged in connection with his murder after protests — some of which turned violent — broke out across the country, including in New York City.

Safe sex during the coronavirus pandemic might soon require protection beyond just the nether regions. A new study from researchers at Harvard University says that hooking up carries some risk for transmitting COVID-19 from one partner to the other and recommends — among other practices — wearing a face mask while doin’ it. The research, published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, ranked frisky situations based on how likely it is to catch coronavirus while in the act. Researchers recommend wearing a mask for the riskiest sexual scenario: sex with people other than those with whom one is quarantined. If you have an out-of-house coronavirus crush, the study says, besides keeping your mask on, you should avoid kissing, any oral-to-anal act and anything else that involves semen or urine. Shower before and after, and clean the space with alcohol wipes or soap. The study also mentions that having sex with people who are together in quarantine is safer, but there is still a risk. For instance, if one partner goes outside to run an errand and is exposed to the virus, they can transmit it to the other. Even if that person is ultimately an asymptomatic carrier, they can still infect the other. The safest approach to sexual activity, according to the researchers, is not having any. Abstinence, they say, is “low risk for infection, though not feasible for many.” Another option, they add, is masturbation. Other recommendations have come out since the coronavirus outbreak in the US, with some of them providing graphics to enhance the lessons. In April, the Oregon Health Authority released a sex guide that went viral, just weeks after the same happened to one released by the NYC Department of Health. The Oregon example stood out for its illustrations of condoms, a fleshlight and a peach, and NYC’s with its vivid warning about anal rimming.

Voters go to the polls in eight states and the District of Columbia on Tuesday amid the deadly coronavirus pandemic and the continuing protests taking place nationwide over the death of George Floyd while in police custody in Minneapolis. Four of the states – Indiana, Maryland, Pennsylvania and Rhode Island – are holding their presidential primaries on Tuesday after they were postponed in April or early May because of health concerns related to the coronavirus outbreak. Like many of the states, Pennsylvania saw a surge of people wanting to receive mail-in ballots, and on Monday Gov. Tom Wolf extended the deadline for receiving them in Pittsburgh, Philadelphia and a number of counties. “We think we’re prepared,” Pennsylvania Democratic Party Chairwoman Nancy Patton Mills told the Associated Press. “Thank goodness we have the opportunity of working this out in the primary because we don’t know where we’ll be with the pandemic in November.” Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, can formally clinch the nomination if he wins 89 percent of the delegates at stake Tuesday. The former vice president, who shot to the front of the Democratic pack following a strong showing in March’s Super Tuesday contests, needs 1,991 delegates to secure the nomination. Biden has 1,550 delegates and there are 479 up for grabs. But Biden is the only Democrat running in the primary after Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont dropped out of the race in April. Sanders, who endorsed Biden’s candidacy and urged his supporters to turn out for the former veep, is not actively campaigning. But he’s still hoping to amass delegates so he can use them as a bargaining chip to push for his progressive policies at August’s Democratic National Convention in Milwaukee. “People who support Bernie Sanders and his agenda, who want to maximize the influence of progressives at the convention, should cast their vote for Bernie Sanders,” senior adviser Jeff Weaver told the AP. President Trump has no primary Republican challenger since former Massachusetts Gov. Bill Weld dropped out in March. With the presidential outcome settled, the down-ballot race and those for House and Senate will be prominent. Along with weighing which candidate to cast a ballot for, voters will have to consider the health risks of voting in person during the pandemic and navigate the curfews that have been enacted following the protests that have turned violent in many cities. In Washington, DC, Mayor Muriel Bowser will allow voters to remain out after the 7 p.m. curfew so they can get to polling places that will be open until 8 p.m. The same applies to Philadelphia, where voters can still go to the polls after the 6 p.m. curfew. Other states holding primaries on Tuesday include Iowa, Montana, New Mexico and South Dakota. With Post Wires

NAIROBI, Kenya — Residents of a slum in Kenya’s capital have protested the death of a homeless man who they said was killed by police for violating a dusk-to-dawn curfew for the coronavirus. Hundreds of people in Mathare left their homes and burnt tires on the streets Monday night in the latest outrage over alleged police brutality. Dominic Njagi said he couldn’t understand why police shot his brother, 51-year-old James Mureithi. “The pathologist I talked to said my brother was shot twice; one on the legs and the other on the chest,” Njagi told The Associated Press. “The pathologist said the chest wound was at close range.” He said Mureithi was a university-educated automotive engineer who suffered a mental breakdown after divorcing his wife 10 years ago. Police did not respond to a request for comment. Local elder Stephen Wesonga said Mureithi was well-known in the slum as he used to walk around collecting recyclables to sell. Rights activist Boniface Mwangi asserted that 19 Kenyans have died from police actions in enforcing the COVID-19 curfew, all from low-income neighborhoods. He said the Kenyan deaths and the global protests over the killing of George Floyd in the US show that “struggles against police brutality are the same everywhere.” People are more afraid of the police than COVID-19, Mwangi said. He said activists are planning demonstrations and had hesitated before because they feared arrest that could lead to six months in jail for illegal assembly — or 14 days in a quarantine facility. A statement Tuesday by the Independent Policing Oversight Authority, established by Parliament, said 15 deaths and 31 incidents where people sustained injuries have been directly linked to actions of police officers during curfew enforcement. The authority said it has dispatched teams to investigate another six deaths allegedly linked to the police since May 29, including that of Mureithi. Also Tuesday, Kenya’s director of public prosecution ordered the arrest and prosecution of a police officer in the death of 13-year-old Yasin Hussein Moyo, who was shot dead while standing on his family’s balcony in March as police moved through his crowded neighborhood enforcing the curfew. Police at first said he was hit by a stray bullet.

North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper on Tuesday said he was still waiting for Republican officials to share a plan for the party’s national convention — and accused them of reneging on a deal to scale down the event due to the coronavirus pandemic. In a letter addressed to RNC chairwoman Ronna McDaniel and Marcia Lee Kelly, CEO of the party’s convention, which is to be held in Charlotte in August, Cooper said the pair in a May 30 letter and Trump in a Friday night phone call had demanded a “full convention,” which Cooper dismissed as “unlikely.” The event the GOP wants “19,000 delegates, alternative delegates, staff, volunteers, elected officials and guests inside the Spectrum Center.” The pair, according to the Democratic governor’s letter, also wanted “full hotels and restaurants and bars at capacity” despite their alleged earlier assurances that they would accept a smaller version “to protect the health of participants and North Carolinians.” Cooper added that he still wanted a “safe convention” in Charlotte that followed the Centers for Disease Control and Protections’ guidelines for safe mass gatherings — but that in the Friday night phone call with Trump, the president insisted on a full-blown convention. “The people of North Carolina don’t know what the status of Covid-19 will be in August, so planning for a scaled-down convention with fewer people, social distancing and face coverings is a necessity,” he wrote. The governor also said he was still waiting for a response from the party to questions about safety raised by the Tar Heel State’s health officials. “As much as we want the conditions surrounding Covid-19 to be favorable enough to hold the Convention you describe in late August, it is very unlikely,” he continued. “Neither public health officials nor I will risk the health and safety of North Carolinians by providing the guarantee you seek.” McDaniel replied by accusing Cooper of “foot dragging” — and blamed him for not informing the party of “guidance as to how to move forward with plans to safely conduct our convention,” despite Cooper’s reference to the CDC guidelines. McDaniel said moving the convention would cost North Carolina millions of dollars of revenue. At least 30,022 people in North Carolina have tested positive for the coronavirus and 961 have died, according to the state and county health departments, the Raleigh News & Observer reported Tuesday. Trump has insisted on having a full convention and ripped Cooper, threatening to move the event, scheduled for Aug. 24-27, to Florida or Georgia or another state with a Republican governor.

The coronavirus will slash box office revenues in half this year, and the pandemic is now poised to weaken the longtime status of movie theaters as destinations for first-run movies, according to an influential media analyst. Revenue from ticket sales will plunge to $5.5 billion this year, down more than 50 percent from $11.4 billion in 2019, MoffettNathanson analyst Michael Nathanson predicted on Tuesday. The drop could get steeper if theaters don’t reopen in July and if summer blockbusters like Warner Bros.’ “Tenet,” set to debut July 17,  or Disney’s “Mulan,” scheduled for July 24, get pushed back to later in the year. The analyst predicted “a significant bounceback” in 2021 to $9.7 billion in ticket sales, partly because a better-looking crop of movies is slated for release next year. But he also noted that movie theaters can’t count on their exclusive 90-day window for new releases to remain intact. The pandemic has not only kept movie theaters closed since March, but also pushed studios to bypass the theatrical window, which gave movie theaters a 90-day period to exclusively show new releases. In recent weeks, Universal Pictures released “Trolls World Tour” directly to video-streaming services instead of delaying it for when cinemas reopen. The kids’ flick sequel reportedly generated more than $100 million in home rentals during its first three weeks — more than the original “Trolls” movie reaped in a five-month theatrical release. “This unprecedented time, as movie theaters around the world have been closed, has led to headline-making experiments in studio windowing,” Nathanson said. “Before the shutdowns, these tests would have been met with strenuous push backs and likely blackouts by exhibitors.” Post-pandemic, Nathanson expects studios to narrow the window, and in some cases, bypass them altogether as streaming services like Netflix, HBO Max, Disney+ and Amazon Prime Video, have gained in importance.  “As long as multiple studios push forward with premium video on demand or some other form of window changes, the balance of power in favor of studios shifts even more in their favor and reduces the leverage the exhibitors have as they would be unlikely to boycott multiple studios’ upcoming releases,” he wrote. In the meantime, Nathanson said it will be difficult for the Hollywood studios behind big-budget flicks to move forward with summer release dates if major markets like New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles, which have yet to set a reopening date, aren’t ready to open. “Given the uncertainty around the key questions we mention above, including sticking to July release dates, when key markets reopen and willingness of movie-goers to return before a vaccine, our estimates today are very much a work in process with lots of volatility in the months ahead,” the analyst said.

She’s keeping up with the Kardashians in an extreme way. A plastic surgery-addicted Playboy Bunny is not letting the coronavirus pandemic keep her from undergoing operations until she resembles her favorite reality TV star: Kourtney Kardashian. The bunny’s bold proclamation comes a week after Brazil’s daily COVID-19 death toll surpassed that of the US. “I am not afraid of the coronavirus crisis, if I have to do the surgeries, I will do it,” model Nathy Kihara tells Jam Press of her obsession with emulating her idol. So far, the Brazilian bombshell has spent more than $200,000 on operations to help her achieve the unusual goal, which has made her a sensation online. Kihara’s Kourtney-parroting procedures have included lip fillers, nose remodeling, a bichectomy and eyebrow lifts, along with various other nonsurgical measures, she claims. Naturally, striving to mimic Kourtney instead of Kardashian family face Kim — who has her own lookalike following — might seem akin to modeling a basketball career after Larry Jordan (MJ’s brother). However, the self-proclaimed “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” fan since Season 1 says she identified with the mega influencer’s “personality, her lifestyle, the way she relates to people, and of course, her beauty.” Not only that, but Kourtney appears to be a helluva wingwoman. “In a way, the flirtation increased, because I was improving my body more and more,” says the saucy facsimile of her new and improved love life. The bodacious bunny reportedly always took care of herself via exercise and diet, “but after I saw the series ‘Keeping Up With the Kardashians’ and started to look like [her], yes, I had a very positive return,” she says. She even shouted out Kardashian in an April Instagram post, writing, “always making all my dreams come true. It is an honor to look like you.” The smoldering doppelgänger’s appeal extends to Instagram, where she has racked up 372,000 followers, and oodles of compliments from adoring supporters. “You are friendly, wonderful inspiration,” fawned one fan on the ‘gram. “This jacket fits you well,” said another under a photo of an almost indistinguishable side-by-side photo of Kihara and Kardashian. Kihara’s plastic surgery pilgrimage isn’t over yet. The celeb lookalike plans to undergo more operations this year, “even with a virus outbreak or not,” she says.

Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Kaleth Wright on Monday announced an independent review of the service’s justice system after a series of scathing reports that showed it disproportionately punishes young black airmen. And in a lengthy, passionate Twitter thread posted as the nation continued to be roiled by protests and fury over racism, police brutality and the deaths of George Floyd and other black men at the hands of police, Chief Wright — who is the second black man in history to be the Air Force’s top enlisted leader — invoked several of their names and expressed solidarity with them. “Who am I?” Wright began. “I am a Black man who happens to be Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force. I am George Floyd…I am Philando Castile, I am Michael Brown, I am Alton Sterling, I am Tamir Rice.” Wright described his outrage at “watching another Black man die on television before our very eyes” — and said that his rank and position would not necessarily be enough to spare him, either. Wright said that, “like most other Black men in America,” his heart starts racing when he sees blue police lights behind him. “What happens all too often in this country to Black men who are subjected to police brutality that ends in death…could happen to me,” Wright wrote. “As shocking as that may sound to some of you, I hope you realize that racism/discrimination/exclusion does not care much about position, titles or stature…. so yes, it could happen to you, or one of your friends, or your Airmen, or your [non-commissioned officer in charge], your Flight Chief, your Squadron Commander or even your Wing Commander.” But Wright said his greatest fear is that he will one day wake up to a report that a black airman has been killed by a white police officer. However, the Air Force itself continues to struggle with the issue of racially fair and impartial justice. Last week, the advocacy group Protect Our Defenders released a report — the third in the last few years — that found black airmen at the E-2 grade were twice as likely to be punished as their white counterparts, and that the disparities have persisted. And Protect Our Defenders said the Air Force did little to fix the problem, set up a toothless working group to address the issue, and covered up data showing racial disparities. In his tweets, Wright acknowledged “the Air Force’s own demons … include the racial disparities in military justice and discipline among our youngest Black male Airmen and the clear lack of diversity in our senior officer ranks.” And Wright admitted he has been doing “Not enough.” “I can only look in the mirror for the solution,” Wright said. “I, the CMSAF, must do better in ensuring every Airmen in our ranks has a fair chance at becoming the best version of themselves. … I, along with every other leader across the force, am responsible for making sure it becomes a reality.” Wright said that he and 25 other people from a variety of racial backgrounds, and representing enlisted airmen, officers and civilians, have been meeting on this subject to brainstorm solutions on things like how to bridge the communications and understanding gap between law enforcement and young black men. As he closed his message, Wright urged people to — like he is — acknowledge how upset they are at the state of the nation. “But you must then find a way to move beyond the rage and do what you think is right for the country, for your community, for your sons, daughters, friends and colleagues…for every Black man in this country who could end up like George Floyd,” Wright said. And Wright urged people who are not black to listen to their black friends and colleagues, and learn what their experience is like. “You might think you know what it’s like to grow up, exist, survive & even thrive in this country as a Black person,” Wright said. “But let me tell you, regardless of how many Black friends you have, how Black your neighborhood was, or if your spouse or in-laws are Black… You don’t know. You don’t know the anxiety, the despair, the heartache, the fear, the rage and the disappointment that comes with living in this country, OUR country every single day.” And, he said, people must vote, protest peacefully, and be active in their communities to change things. “We didn’t get here overnight so don’t expect things to change tomorrow,” Wright said. “We are in this for the long haul. … We need all hands on deck.”

As US businesses reopen after weeks of pandemic lockdowns, many have been posting coronavirus disclaimers or requiring employees and patrons to sign waivers before entering. From hair salons and recreation centers to stock exchanges and wedding photographers, the notices have sprung up across the country, asking guests to acknowledge they might contract a disease that has so far killed over 100,000 Americans. Companies are using signs, forms and website postings as a shield against lawsuits, but the measures do not prevent people from seeking damages due to negligence, the same way someone might sue after falling on a slippery floor or getting sick from walls covered in lead paint, experts said. Lawyers said it would be tough to prove a business caused a customer’s illness, but concerns are so intense that a waiver may soon become the new normal. Entities including the YMCA of Greater Oklahoma City, a real estate agency in Arizona, a racecar speedway in Seinsgrove, Pennsylvania and the New York Stock Exchange have introduced waivers disavowing responsibility for anyone who might contract the disease onsite, Reuters has learned. Missoula, Montana-based lawyer Paige Marie Griffith created a waiver for COVID-19, the respiratory illness related to the novel coronavirus, that business owners can buy and customize online. Events industry workers, including makeup artists and wedding photographers, are using them, she said. “As essential as we feel, everyone getting their hair done is choosing to do so,” said Cody Brooke, who owns 10th Avenue Hair Designs in Pensacola, Florida. “We don’t want the salon or stylist to be held liable knowing that they chose to come in.” Since reopening on May 11, the salon requires clients to sign a form stating they have no COVID-19 symptoms and have not visited a “hot spot” with high infection rates in the last 30 days. It releases the salon from liability for “unintentional exposure” to the virus. Ryan Reiffert did not mind signing a waiver recently for the gym where he practices martial arts near San Antonio, Texas. He had symptoms in March and later learned from antibody testing that had likely contracted the virus. “But even if I hadn’t had it,” he said, “I’d happily sign the waiver.” A gym attendant sprayed disinfectant on Reiffer’s hands and feet before he could enter, he said. Bigger companies are taking similar steps. Walt Disney Co’s website cites “severe illness and death” risks for customers at its Orlando, Florida, amusement parks due to reopen on July 11th. That warning did not deter the throngs who waited for hours to buy Mickey Mouse swag or apparel from familiar brands outside the Disney Springs shopping center that reopened on May 20. A Disney spokeswoman did not respond to a request for comment. New York Stock Exchange-owner Intercontinental Exchange Inc and commodities exchange CME Group Inc also require entrants to sign waivers. Floor traders at the exchanges have historically shouted in close proximity to one another, sans masks, but that has changed. “I cannot stress enough that we will not be able to guarantee the safety of traders, clerks or other trading personnel that choose to access the trading floor,” said CME Chief Executive Terry Duffy. “It will have risk and will continue to have risk until there is a vaccine or some other cure for this disease.”

Gilead Sciences is developing easier-to-administer versions of its antiviral treatment remdesivir for COVID-19 that could be used outside of hospitals, including ones that can be inhaled, after trials showed moderate effectiveness for the drug given by infusion. Remdesivir is the only drug so far that has been shown to help patients with COVID-19, but Gilead and other companies are looking for ways to make it work better. For critically ill patients, Roche and Eli Lilly are testing drugs in combination with remdesivir. Gilead is also seeking to treat the virus earlier. Other antivirals, like influenza pill Tamiflu, work best when given as early as possible after someone becomes infected. Gilead in a statement on Monday said it is looking at ways to use remdesivir earlier in the course of disease, including via alternate formulations. The company confirmed in an e-mail that it is researching an inhaled version, but declined further comment. Company executives such as Chief Medical Officer Merdad Parsey and Chief Financial Officer Andrew Dickinson have been doing interviews with Wall Street analysts in recent weeks to discuss the plans, which are in early stages. They have said that in the longer term, the company is exploring a subcutaneous injection formulation of remdesivir, as well as dry powder versions to be inhaled. Remdesivir cannot be given as a pill because it has a chemical makeup that would degrade in the liver, and the intravenous formulation is only used by hospitals. In the short term, Gilead is studying how its existing IV formulation of remdesivir can be diluted for use with a nebulizer — a drug delivery device used to administer medication in the form of a mist inhaled into the lungs. The idea is that a nebulizer would make remdesivir more directly available to upper airway and lung tissue as the coronavirus is known to attack the lungs. It would also allow for early treatment of coronavirus patients who are not hospitalized. “People look forward to an inhaled formulation in time,” but development is in the very early stages, said Jefferies analyst Michael Yee, adding that demand may be limited as many people infected with the virus require minimal treatment. He said Gilead is building up its capacity to supply remdesivir and has begun talking to governments around the world about commercial pricing. Gilead on Monday reported trial results showing that IV remdesivir provided a modest benefit for hospitalized patients with moderate COVID-19 compared to standard care.

A technical snafu in a US government system caused many small businesses to receive loans twice or more under a federal aid program to help businesses hurt by the COVID-19 pandemic, nearly a dozen people with knowledge of the matter said. The money mistakenly handed out could amount to hundreds of millions of dollars that the government and lenders — which made the loans — have been trying to identify and recover in recent weeks, one of the people briefed on the matter said. The technical issue and scale of the resulting duplicate deposits made under the Small Business Administration’s $660 billion Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) have not been previously reported. They are the latest issue to emerge with the massive program, which was designed to keep businesses hurt by the novel coronavirus afloat and their workers employed. The error was caused by a blind spot in the SBA’s loan-processing system that failed to see when some borrowers submitted applications multiple times typically with several different lenders, three of the sources said. Information provided by the sources, which include industry executives and borrowers, as well as Reddit posts, suggest at least 1,020 duplicate deposits were issued. While that is a tiny fraction of funds disbursed under the huge program, it could amount to roughly $116 million dollars based on average loan sizes. A spokesman for the SBA declined to comment, while a spokesman for the Treasury, which jointly administers the program, did not respond to a request for comment. Launched in April, the PPP allows small businesses hurt by the pandemic to apply with a bank for a forgivable government-backed loan. The SBA has approved roughly 4.48 million loans averaging $114,000 in size for a total of $510 billion as of May 30. Under the program, lenders issue the loan and are later reimbursed by the SBA. The government has said it will only guarantee one loan per borrower, which means lenders, rather than the taxpayer, are likely to be on the hook for the error. Wells Fargo, JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America, PayPal, Kabbage Inc., Square Inc. and BlueVine are among companies that have deposited duplicate loans, according to the sources and Reddit posts. “The SBA inadvertently issued duplicate loan approvals to some small businesses. It is our impression that the majority of these borrowers are…honest small business owners who had applied for a PPP loan through multiple lenders,” a spokeswoman for BlueVine said in an e-mail, adding “multiple” lenders were affected. A spokeswoman for JPMorgan Chase said the bank was aware of a “handful” of duplicate deposits and had referred those customers to the SBA. A spokeswoman for Square confirmed it was working with the SBA and borrowers to resolve the issue. Spokesmen for Wells Fargo and Bank of America declined to comment. A spokesman for Kabbage did respond to requests for comment. “We have seen a small number of duplicate applications funded through the SBA Paycheck Protection Program, despite the administration’s guidance that applicants not apply more than once for a loan,” said a spokesman for PayPal, which partnered with a bank to fund the loans. He added PayPal was working with the SBA and borrowers to resolve the issue. The PPP was launched hurriedly on April 3 as the government rushed to get cash to millions of desperate borrowers. From the outset, the unprecedented first-come-first-served program struggled with technology and paperwork problems that led some businesses to miss out while some affluent firms got funds. In the scramble for cash, many businesses applied with multiple lenders. Industry sources estimated that roughly 15 percent to 20 percent of the applications received by the biggest banks were duplicates. Most of those were spotted and withdrawn, but a fraction appeared to slip through if a borrower’s Social Security Number and tax identification code were mixed up in the system, one of the people said. Another source briefed on the issue said the SBA estimated that the universe of duplicate approvals amounted to hundreds of millions of dollars if not more. “The SBA has asked lenders to review duplicate loans based on a list they provided and work with any other lenders that may have extended funds to get one of the parties to cancel,” the BlueVine spokeswoman said. The SBA has said in the past that it doesn’t collect disbursal data from lenders, so the agency may not know the total amount of duplicate deposits. And lenders may not know if they have issued a duplicate deposit unless the borrower tells them, three of the people said. “How is it that I was successful at getting money from two different banks?” asked one California-based business owner who said she received two deposits, one of which was processed by Wells Fargo. She told Reuters that she returned the other loan. Businesses that refuse to return loans could be referred to the Department of Justice, which is probing suspected PPP fraud. Some borrowers said they weren’t clear on how to fix the issue. One Reddit user who last month reported receiving duplicate deposits from JPMorgan Chase and PayPal acknowledged having a “deep fear” that reporting the problem may mean being left “with no PPP at all.”

Pedro Martinez isn’t siding with the owners. He isn’t siding with the players. Instead, the Hall of Fame hurler is on the side of who he believes matters the most – the fans – in the midst of the dispute into starting the season amidst the novel coronavirus pandemic. “I hope that they take in consideration who pays our salaries and the people for us and how important the people are and at least bend your arm a little bit to try to find a middle ground for the negotiations,” Martinez said during NBCSN’s “Lunch Time Live” with Mike Tirico. Owners and players have struggled to come to an agreement over economics as they try to play a shortened season in front of no fans. Owners have proposed an 82-game season that would pay players only a fraction of their pro-rated salaries. The players response was a 114-game season that included deferrals if the postseason was unable to be played due to a second wave of the coronavirus, as is feared. They still remain far apart. “The economics is the dark part of baseball,” Martinez, the former Expos, Red Sox and Mets ace, said. “The business part of baseball is dirty. It’s dark.” 2020 has been dark, not only due to the pandemic, but also nationwide protests and riots in response to the death of George Floyd at the hands of a Minneapolis police officer. Baseball can help the healing process, but only if the owners and players can reach an agreement. “I’m hoping that both sides stop thinking about their own good and start thinking about the fans,” Martinez said. “I think people deserve to have their baseball teams out there to try to have people forget a little bit about what’s going on. It’s not only the pandemic. It’s everything that’s going on. People need something to actually do and find a way to relax. “I hope that the Players Association and MLB realize how important it is to bring some relief to the people.”

Coronavirus no longer “clinically” exists in Italy, which has seen the deadly disease lose potency, according to a doctor. New infections and fatalities from COVID-19, the disease caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, fell steadily in the country in May. “In reality, the virus clinically no longer exists in Italy,” Alberto Zangrillo, head of the San Raffaele Hospital in Milan, told RAI television. “The swabs that were performed over the last 10 days showed a viral load in quantitative terms that was absolutely infinitesimal compared to the ones carried out a month or two months ago.” Italy has the third-highest death toll in the world from COVID-19, with 33,475 deaths and 233,197 confirmed cases as of Tuesday, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Italy — the first country in the world to surpass China’s coronavirus death toll — was the first European country to lock down in early March. It began a slow reopening of some cities last month in hopes of kickstarting its dwindled economy. A second doctor, Matteo Bassetti, agreed that the coronavirus has weakened. “The strength the virus had two months ago is not the same strength it has today,” Bassetti, head of the infectious diseases clinic at the San Martino hospital in the city of Genoa, told the national ANSA news agency. “It is clear that today the COVID-19 disease is different.” Still, the Italian government urged residents to continue practicing social distancing and other safety measures. “Pending scientific evidence to support the thesis that the virus has disappeared … I would invite those who say they are sure of it not to confuse Italians,” Sandra Zampa, an undersecretary at the health ministry, said in a statement. “We should instead invite Italians to maintain the maximum caution, maintain physical distancing, avoid large groups, to frequently wash their hands and to wear masks.” With Post wires

The feds expect the coronavirus crisis to drain trillions of dollars from the US economy over the next decade, in the latest sign of the pandemic’s economic devastation. The crisis will lead to a $15.7 trillion reduction in the nation’s gross domestic product — the value of all goods and services produced here — from this year to 2030 without adjusting for inflation, the Congressional Budget Office said Monday. The nonpartisan agency expects a plunge of $7.9 trillion when adjusting for inflation, or 3 percent of the cumulative real GDP the office projected for that 10-year period in January. The CBO said social-distancing measures aimed at controlling the deadly virus and the resulting business closures will likely reduce consumer spending, while a drop in energy prices is expected to curtail US investment in the industry. Legislation aimed at blunting the economic impact of the virus will “partially mitigate the deterioration in economic conditions,” CBO director Phillip L. Swagel said. He added that the projections are uncertain because it’s unclear how the pandemic will develop going into next year and how it will affect the economy. “Additionally, if future federal policies differ from those underlying CBO’s economic projections — for example, if lawmakers enact additional pandemic-related legislation — then economic outcomes will necessarily differ from those presented here,” Swagel wrote in a letter to Senate Minority Leader Charles Schumer (D-NY), who requested the analysis. The nation’s GDP already suffered its worst contraction since the Great Recession in the first quarter of 2020 as the pandemic roiled the global economy. The CBO’s analysis also came ahead of the feds’ monthly employment report on Friday, which is expected to show unemployment at or near 20 percent in May. Schumer and Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.) said the gloomy numbers underscore the need for Congress to pass another coronavirus stimulus bill. Lawmakers have already approved nearly $3 trillion in stimulus spending since late March, and they’ll be talking about another package “in the next month or so,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) said last week. “In order to avoid the risk of another Great Depression, the Senate must act with a fierce sense of urgency to make sure that everyone in America has the income they need to feed their families and put a roof over their heads,” Schumer and Sanders said in a joint statement. “The American people cannot afford to wait another month for the Senate to pass legislation.”

MOSCOW — When nurse Maria Alexeyeva caught coronavirus at work, she isolated herself at home and followed the rules set down by Moscow authorities: She checked in with doctors regularly, didn’t leave her apartment and downloaded a smartphone app required by the city to keep tabs on quarantined patients. The Social Monitoring app tracks users via GPS and sends them random notifications demanding a selfie to prove they’re still at home. If it detects they’ve left home or they fail to provide a photo, they face a fine of about $56 each time. But soon the app became a nightmare for Alexeyeva. It crashed when she tried to take a photo. Weak with illness, she struggled with the software for days, sometimes on hold for hours with technical support. And when her quarantine ended, she discovered she had accumulated 11 fines totaling $620. “That’s more than my monthly wage,” Alexeyeva told The Associated Press. “This quarantine has been hard on me. And now I have to deal with this on top of it.” Thousands of Muscovites also complain they have been wrongfully fined by the quarantine app. In slightly over a month, authorities issued some 54,000 fines, totaling $3 million among its nearly 70,000 registered users. Authorities insist the fines were justified, issued to those who repeatedly violated quarantine. But the app’s users say it has glitches and flaws, sometimes demanding selfies in the middle of the night, adding that the fines were dished out arbitrarily. Moscow has been Russia’s biggest hot spot during the pandemic, recording nearly half of the country’s more than 414,000 cases. As the city of 12 million struggled to contain the outbreak, it used technology that later drew widespread criticism. After two virus cases were reported in February, Mayor Sergei Sobyanin authorized facial recognition software to track Chinese citizens in the capital, drawing complaints from rights groups. When the city introduced digital passes for commuters in April, tightly packed crowds formed at Metro stations as police checked smartphones individually. But the biggest complaints focus on the Social Monitoring app, which was rolled out in early April and was mandatory for those infected with the virus or suspected of having it. Patients had to sign a form requiring them to install the app as part of their quarantine notifications, although they said they were not told how to use the app or what actions would lead to fines. Grigory Sakharov, who self-isolated after a week in the hospital with coronavirus-induced pneumonia, was given six fines, totaling about $336. Two dated back to when he was still hospitalized, even though he didn’t install the app until after his discharge. “I don’t mind paying a fine for something I did wrong, but I don’t understand what I’m paying for here,” Sakharov told the AP. Svetlana Bystrova, quarantined at home with flu-like symptoms, didn’t install the app. She said her doctors didn’t tell her she had to and she didn’t notice a clause obligating her to use the app in the quarantine order she signed. After two weeks of strict self-isolation, Bystrova found she had been fined four times, totaling $224. One was for not installing the app, two said it detected her outside her apartment and one was for not giving details of her wrongdoing. “The one for not installing the app I get, fair enough,” Bystrova said. “But how can the app I never installed track my movements?” Vladimir Perevalov, who installed the app and diligently took selfies, was fined three times for $168. The app never sent him any notifications, he said. The outrage has mounted as tales of arbitrary fines mushroomed on social media. By the end of May, authorities got over 2,500 complaints contesting the fines and more than 200 lawsuits were filed. Three online petitions demanding to abolish the app got over 94,000 signatures. Tanya Lokshina, associate director for Human Rights Watch’s Europe and Central Asia division, said while many countries use mobile tracking apps, she hasn’t seen one getting so many complaints. “The situation is absurd. It’s insane,” Lokshina said. “Instead of serving to contain the epidemic, it in fact serves … to punish law-abiding citizens who actually attempt to play by the rules.” On May 21, Human Rights Watch urged Moscow authorities to drop the app, noting that on top of the arbitrary fines, Social Monitoring violated users’ privacy by accessing their location, calls, camera, network information and other data. Russia’s Presidential Human Rights Council echoed HRW’s stance, urging officials to cancel all fines. But Alexei Nemeryuk, the mayor’s deputy chief of staff, said there will be no amnesty, noting: “There’s a system for contesting the fines.” That has proved unsuccessful, said Leonid Solovyov of the Apologia Protesta legal aid group, which is working with over 100 people were fined. He said those who are fined must provide proof they did nothing wrong, which is difficult, while authorities are basing the punishment on data from the app. “Some fines are indeed being overruled,” Solovyov told AP, but only the “most egregious cases.” City Hall has said it was canceling 468 fines for failing to take a selfie because the app made those requests in the middle of the night. Another high-profile case involved Irina Karabulatova, a bed-ridden professor who hasn’t left her apartment in a year and got two fines for not installing the app. After her story made national headlines, the fines were canceled and officials apologized. “They canceled my (fines) because journalists stood up for me,” Karabulatova told AP. “But what is going to happen to the others is a big question.” On Thursday, Sakharov started receiving messages saying his fines were canceled. Alexeyeva, the nurse, also was contacted by officials who promised to lift all her fines. Then, Alexeyeva’s mother was notified she was being fined: Social Monitoring detected her leaving the apartment. “My mother was quarantined with me. She didn’t sign (a document) that had a clause on using Social Monitoring and she doesn’t have the app,” Alexeyeva said. “Looks like we got excited too soon.”

KAMPALA – Uganda will lose $1.6 billion a year in earnings from tourism as visitors stay away due to the impact of the coronavirus, President Yoweri Museveni said. Tourism is one of Uganda’s economic mainstays as the east African country attracts visitors to see a range of game including lions, giraffes, buffalos and others that roam its savannahs. Others are drawn by the mountain gorillas in forest in the southwest of the country on the border with Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda. “Already Ugandan will lose 1.6 billion dollars per annum from the loss of tourism,” Museveni said in a speech late on Monday referring to the impact of COVID-19 on the economy. The president did not say what time frame he was referring to. Latest available data from the country’s statistics office shows Uganda earned $2 billion from tourism activities in 2017, up from $1.7 billion the previous year. The International Monetary Fund said last month that Uganda’s tourism earnings were expected to fall 54 percent in the 2019/20 (July-June) fiscal year and decline 52 percent in the next year. Museveni said the economy would also lose a substantial chunk of the $1.3 billion sent home each year by Ugandans working abroad as many would be out of work due to the global economic downturn following the pandemic. Uganda has so far recorded 458 cases of COVID-19, with no deaths reported. Stringent measures implemented to curb the virus’s spread including bans on both public and private transport, temporarily shutting nearly all businesses and closure of borders has wiped out much of economic activity. The IMF last month nearly halved its forecast for economic growth in Uganda for the financial year ending in June to 3.3 percent and projects 3.7 percent growth in the following fiscal year. In the year ended June 2019, the economy grew 6.5 percent.

This pilot wants airline tickets to be the new toilet paper… kind of. When news of the coronavirus pandemic first hit North America, reports of panic-buying started to spread, with toilet paper apparently being one of the most sought-after items. This led to a temporary shortage of the normally easy-to-find household necessity. Unfortunately, not all businesses saw an increase in sales. The airline industry, for example, has been hit hard by the pandemic. Now, as businesses are starting to reopen, some airline workers clearly are hoping that things get busy again. Chris Pohl, a captain with Virgin Atlantic, shared an image on his Instagram page that showed him holding up a sign that read, “Buy airline tickets like you bought toilet paper.” In the photo’s caption, he explained, “I have been following Dude with a Sign since I started on Instagram and I saw Pilot Charlotte posted a similar message. I put them together to make my own version.” He then asked his followers to “re-post and pass this message to everyone you know, because it’s real. We need the world to start booking tickets, which will allow airlines to fill aircraft and get us all flying again. The only thing holding us back, is you; our loyal customers/passengers, without you, we’re grounded. Let’s get the world flying again.” So far, the post has received over 4,300 likes on Instagram. The post also received several comments from people telling Pohl the reasons why they were buying plane tickets, which included major events such as weddings but also included general vacations. One user joked, “If you give me nine tickets for $4.38 then yes. But seriously I hope virgin Atlantic stays afloat, I’ve got a holiday paid for and waiting.”

Could she be wearing any less clothing? Jennifer Aniston is putting her 1995 nude portrait by Mark Seliger on the auction block to raise money for coronavirus relief. The actor shared the announcement on Instagram with footage of the celebrity photographer working in his darkroom on that very photo. The iconic black-and-white image depicts Aniston seated cross-legged, strategically covering much of her body. The pair worked together when Seliger was assigned to shoot the entire “Friends” cast, which had premiered the previous year. “My dear friend @markseliger teamed up with @radvocacy and @christiesinc to auction 25 of his portraits — including mine :) — for COVID-19 relief,” Aniston, 51, wrote on Saturday. The post has now been liked by 1.2 million people. The current bid on the portrait is up to $6,500 (£5,200). All proceeds from the sale will go to the National Association of Free and Charitable Clinics, which “provides free coronavirus testing and care nationwide to the medically underserved,” according to Aniston. The Instagram account for NAFC Clinics responded to Aniston’s announcement on their page. “Thankful to @jenniferaniston for selecting the NAFC as her charity of choice in the @radvocacy @markseliger auction!” they wrote. Pal Rita Wilson commented on Aniston’s now-viral post, “Beautiful photo! Beautiful babe.” Said Robin Wright, “A true beauty . . . inside and out!” “Look at sweet baby you!” added Olivia Wilde. A post shared by Jennifer Aniston (@jenniferaniston) on May 30, 2020 at 8:19am PDT

A second-term Mississippi county prosecutor posted — and then deleted — a Facebook comment in which she apparently expressed optimism that “the deadly strain” of coronavirus would spread among rioters protesting the death of George Floyd in police custody, according to a new report. Pamela Hancock, who was first elected Madison County prosecutor in 2015 and was re-elected in 2015, was responding to someone else’s post, which read, “Does Covid spread during massive street riots or just in bars and restaurants? Asking for a friend,” Mississippi Today reported. In a since-deleted comment, Hancock replied, “We can only hope the deadly [coronavirus] strain spreads in riots!,” according to the report. Hancock, whose duties include bringing misdemeanor charges against individuals in justice court and county court — including disorderly conduct, trespassing and driving under the influence — told the outlet she would prosecute those involved in the rioting. “My job is to prosecute all crimes, including civil disobedience,” she said. “I’m against any breach of peace or criminal activity, and I would prosecute it. I have nothing against people peacefully protesting, but breaking into businesses and stealing things is a crime.” But when asked about her “hope” that the virus would kill rioters, she stepped back. “I was really just making light of it,” Hancock told the outlet. “I was not serious about wanting anyone to die. That’s not who I am. The post was kind of a joke, and I was attempting to joke back. Obviously, I did it very poorly. If you ask anybody that knows me, I don’t hold any ill will towards anyone or any group. I only try to be fair.” Brandon Jones, policy director at the Southern Poverty Law Center in Jackson, told the outlet that prosecutors should “be reflective about how we talk about these issues,” and Hancock’s post “sends all the wrong messages.” “We worry when people like Ms. Hancock say these things because of what message it might send to people who might have to face her in court,” he said. “It erodes the public’s trust that they’re going to be treated fairly with comments like this, even if they were in jest.” But Hancock said she “never meant to offend anybody” and the comment “was not directed toward anyone except for people that were rioting.” “What I saw on TV seemed to be people of all races,” she told the outlet. “If you ask anybody that knows me, I don’t hold any ill will towards anyone or any group.” “When I prosecute, I don’t look at someone’s color,” Hancock added. “I look at the crime they committed, the facts of the case … I only try to be fair.”

Unilever might seem like just a giant packaged goods conglomerate to some people, but it has worked hard at its mission to give back, rather than just sell more of its Dove, Ben & Jerry’s and Seventh Generation brands. When the coronavirus walloped New York, the company had to do a double-pivot. First, like many companies, it sent staff home to keep the business running from their couches and kitchen tables. But secondly, it ramped up its donations of time and money. Esi Eggleston Bracey, the head of beauty and personal care, has spent a lifetime in the beauty products industry and is responsible for many brands, including Shea Moisture, Dove and Vaseline. “The purpose of Unilever’s business is to do good in the world,” says Bracey, who will be a keynote speaker at the Brands Across America webinar on June 5. “With the crisis, it’s such an important time and there are many ways we believe our brands can help.” The company put together a day of service which could be participated in either in person or remotely. “It’s really inspiring watching how I was able to mobilize my team,” she says. During the May 21 event, Unilever donated the equivalent of one day’s worth of products produced at their US factories to Feeding America and Direct Relief. Unilever corporate employees and over 90 partners spent time virtually volunteering with national and local organizations. The company also mobilized employees, partners and consumers to send more than 4,100 letters of gratitude to essential food bank employees. Unilever US also announced a donation of more than $20 million worth of products, services and financial support for Americans, along with other efforts including a donation of more than 200,000 masks to local New Jersey hospitals. Unilever also worked with a service called the Right to Shower, a national program in San Francisco and New York. With bathrooms in coffee shops currently inaccessible, they are providing mobile showers, restrooms and laundry facilities. With the organization Lava Mae, Unilever also made 10,000 hygiene kits for grassroots distribution. Dove donated $2.5 million worth of products, while the Englewood Cliffs, NJ-based US branch of the corporation also donated $2 million to Direct Relief for personal protective equipment, ventilators and medicine for health-care workers on the front line, following a 200,000-mask donation to local hospitals in New Jersey. Dove also created the powerful “Courage is Beautiful” film, featuring images of workers putting their patients and community first. The images of medical workers with sweat-drenched faces, lined from wearing tight masks over long shifts, brought home the reality of the front line. Lipton, of tea fame, was on the front line too, in the form of a free tea cart outside of Mount Sinai Hospital in Manhattan. Lipton products were sent to firehouses, food banks and Meals on Wheels in New Jersey and Virginia. Hellmann’s, the New York City condiments company, teamed up with Grubhub, the food delivery service that has kept many a kitchen-averse New Yorker fed. Their relief fund is providing $500,000 worth of meals, teaming up with local restaurants to provide 30,000 catered meals to health-care workers at three New York City hospitals.  Vaseline was part of the $2 million donation to Direct Relief for front-line health-care workers. Their donation will also go to supply hospitals and patients with essential equipment such as oxygen tanks. In addition, Vaseline donated 300,000 units of Suave hand sanitizer and $606,000 worth of products to approximately 1,400 free clinics and community health centers. Bracey independently helped raise money for food for the emergency room at the Harlem Hospital. The Upper West Sider and some friends launched the Cause We Care Harlem Emergency Aid Response Team (H.E.A.R.T.) initiative to help feed doctors and medical staff. The GoFundMe page raised $7,000 and helped them donate hundreds of meals and supplies. “I think this [pandemic] rocked everyone’s world,” says Bracey. “When you work in a business, you have a business plan and you work the plan. And then when the world changes, your plan has to change. You figure out how you can be of service today.”

The coronavirus pandemic is still ongoing, but the virus has seemingly started to subside in many areas across the country. This, coupled with the fact that many people are growing increasingly restless on quarantine, has prompted a number of states to loosen up coronavirus-related restrictions. Some states, for example, are now allowing non-essential businesses like barbershops to reopen. In light of the above, some medical researchers have cautioned that reopening states up too soon could result in a second and potentially more deadly, wave to emerge. Indeed, we’re already starting to see this play out in a few countries across the world. Take Israel, for example. The government there responded aggressively to the coronavirus pandemic and swiftly implemented nationwide lockdowns and enforced curfews for non-essential workers. As a result, Israel was able to effectively prevent the coronavirus pandemic from spreading far and wide. That being the case, the country recently started to loosen up existing restrictions regarding the operation of bars and restaurants. What’s more, the Health Ministry also eased restrictions with respect to public transportation. Buses, for example, are now allowed to run at 75 percent occupancy. Public transportation, however, typically involves individuals sitting and standing in relatively close proximity to one another. Consequently, Israel’s decision to loosen public transportation safety measures led to an uptick in coronavirus cases, according to a recent report from YnetNews: The Health Ministry posted the epidemiologic tracing of those confirmed to have contracted the virus on its website… A confirmed carrier of COVID-19 traveled on Thursday from Ashdod to the Haredi city of Elad. Two other people who were exposed to the virus traveled on an inter-city bus from Tel Aviv to Netanya. A day earlier, seven people who had since been confirmed to have the virus also traveled on public buses. Since Midnight on Saturday, 32 passengers using public buses, have tested positive with COVID-19, double the number of the day before. Notably, the dangers associated with mass public transportation prompted the British Government to issue the following directive two weeks ago:  “Consider all other forms of transport before using public transport.” Israel’s experience underscores how important it is for people to adhere to social distancing guidelines and other safety precautions. While it’s only natural to assume that things are back to normal once previously closed establishments open back up for business, the coronavirus pandemic is far from conquered. Indeed, without a vaccine, some researchers have suggested the pandemic may linger on for as long as two years. The good news, though, is that Dr. Anthony Fauci recently said that a second coronavirus wave isn’t necessarily an inevitability. “We often talk about the possibility of a second wave, or of an outbreak when you reopen. We don’t have to accept that as an inevitability,” Fauci explained. “Particularly when people start thinking about the fall, I want people to really appreciate that it could happen, but it is not inevitable.”

“Mission: Impossible 7” is preparing to leap back into action again in September after the Paramount feature was forced to radically change its shooting plans in February because of the coronavirus pandemic. Speaking to the BBC on Tuesday following the publication of British Film Commission safety protocols, first assistant director Tommy Gormley said he was “convinced” that the Tom Cruise franchise can get back to work again in the next three months and be wrapped by May 2021. “We hope to start shooting again in September. We were days from shooting in Venice — we were right at the epicenter when it all kicked off — so we had to shut down in Venice where we were four or five days from shooting,” Gormley told BBC Radio 4’s “Today” program. “We hope to restart in September, we hope to visit all the countries we planned to and look to do a big chunk of it back in the UK on the backlot and in the studio, so September through to end April/May is our targets. We are convinced we can do this.” Gormley added that the British Film Commission guidelines are “excellent” and were extremely bullish about the return to production on the Christopher McQuarrie-directed movie. He said it would not be without significant challenges given the scale of the shoot, its multiple locations, and “giant” crew, but added that it will be possible if “we break down all the procedures very carefully.” “We have to get back to work for every person in the film industry, tens of thousands of us, we have to get back to work. We have to do it safely and protect our colleagues, but it is definitely possible and we’re working flat out to make it happen,” Gormley said.

China delayed releasing critical information about the coronavirus in the weeks after the outbreak was first reported — even as the World Health Organization publicly lauded the Communist country for its quick response to the pandemic, according to a report Tuesday. The WHO in January praised China for “immediately” releasing a genetic map of the coronavirus and said its efforts to be transparent were “very impressive, and beyond words,” the Associated Press reported. At the same time, WHO officials behind the scenes were frustrated that China was slow-walking their ability to get information to combat the spread of the virus, which had first been reported in late December in Wuhan, China, because they were losing valuable time, according to the report. “We’re going on very minimal information,” said American epidemiologist Maria Van Kerkhove, now the WHO’s technical lead for COVID-19, in one internal meeting during the week of Jan. 6. “It’s clearly not enough for you to do proper planning.” “We’re currently at the stage where, yes, they’re giving it to us 15 minutes before it appears on CCTV,” the WHO’s top official in China, Dr. Gauden Galea, referring to the state-owned China Central Television, said in another meeting, the AP reported. The Chinese Communist Party did not release the genetic map of the virus for more than a week after three government labs had decoded the information, the report said, because of tight controls on releasing data. The genetic map was finally released after another lab published it on a virologist website on Jan. 11. It took the Chinese Communist Party another two weeks to provide the WHO with full data on patients and cases, according to recordings of internal meetings by the United Nations health agency. The delay in releasing the genetic data slowed the development of a vaccine and the absence of detailed information about patients made it difficult to determine how quickly the coronavirus was spreading around the world. Between the time a Chinese lab decoded the info on Jan. 2 and Jan. 30, when the WHO declared a global emergency, the virus spread by a factor of 100 to 200 times, the AP reported, citing infection data from the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. “It’s obvious that we could have saved more lives and avoided many, many deaths if China and the WHO had acted faster,” Ali Mokdad, a professor at the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation at the University of Washington, told the wire service. There are now more than 6 million cases worldwide, and the death toll has surpassed 370,000. President Trump, who has accused the WHO of colluding with China to hold back data on the coronavirus, last Friday cut ties with the UN agency. “China has total control over the World Health Organization,” Trump said at the White House, noting that the US contributed $450 million to the WHO each year compared to China’s $40 million.

The coronavirus crisis could make America’s banks easy targets for bandits, a federal regulator warns. Requiring people to wear face masks in public amid the pandemic creates a “very real risk” of a spike in bank robberies, according to Brian P. Brooks, the US Treasury’s acting comptroller of the currency. Brooks issued the warning Monday in letters to the nation’s mayors and governors outlining how lockdowns aimed at curbing the virus could hurt the American banking system. He said many banks relaxed bans on masks and head coverings at the height of the pandemic to protect their customers’ health. “While that may have been a prudent decision when the extent of the health risk was still unknown, recent reports of face-covering-related robberies at bank branches and other establishments make clear that broadly applicable face mask requirements are not safe or sustainable on a permanent basis,” wrote Brooks, whose first day in the post regulating national banks was Friday. Mask-wearing robbers have indeed ransacked banks and other businesses during the pandemic, according to news reports. The feds accused a Connecticut man of robbing several gas stations while wearing a surgical mask in March, before the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s early April recommendation to wear face coverings in public. Brooks’ letter did not detail how many such incidents have occurred nationwide or what kind of financial losses banks have incurred from the robberies. But he said restrictions meant to control the virus pose a range of other risks that could “threaten the stability and orderly functioning of the financial system.” For instance, banks could suffer from higher delinquency rates on loans to small businesses whose revenue has evaporated amid the lockdowns, according to Brooks. Vandals and burglars could hit properties that have been vacant for long periods of time, threatening the collateral for commercial real estate loans, he said. Local officials could also harm that collateral if they cut off utilities for businesses that defy lockdown orders, as some cities have threatened to do, Brooks said. “I ask that your members carefully consider the impact of their lockdown orders on the health and functioning of our shared national financial infrastructure as they implement the President’s guidance to determine when and how to unwind those orders,” Brooks wrote in his letter to the US Conference of Mayors.

Tim Gunn is letting it all hang loose. The fashion consultant says the impossible has happened during the lockdown — he’s fallen in love with comfortable clothes. “I used to condemn the whole notion of comfort dressing,” he said during a 92nd Street Y digital event, adding that after weeks in “pajamas and loose-fitting clothes,” real clothes are “an absolute assault on your body! You think, ‘I feel so constricted … I feel like I’m wearing a wetsuit!’ I have a tremendous amount of empathy now for people who want to dress comfortably.” Gunn revealed how far he’s taken comfort, saying, “I have on, below the waist, only underpants and a pair of socks.”

Hollywood wants badly to reopen — but not enough to give up the hot-and-heavy make-out scenes. In a 22-page document provided to the governors of New York  and California on Monday, Hollywood studios made their case for restarting TV and film production. And while the report is mainly filled with no-brainer recommendations, including that cast and crew members wear masks, wash their hands and social distance when possible, it also includes some headscratchers. For example, while acknowledging that certain activities “such as fight scenes or intimate scenes increase the risk of transmission,” it stops short of vowing to put those activities on hold. “Whenever possible, performers shall practice physical distancing,” the report says. And immediately after filming such scenes, “the performers shall put on their PPE and/or physically distance themselves.” It also recommends keeping unruly children away — unless, of course, they are filming. And warns against the petting of cute animal actors when the camera is not rolling. “As minors may have difficulty adhering to physical distancing, wearing PPE, and practicing hand hygiene, when not working, they should be relocated to a secure off-set location to the extent possible,” the report advises before turning to animal performers. “Animals should not be handled by others except those necessary for shooting a scene (i.e., no petting, cuddling, feeding). All those involved in touching animals should perform hand hygiene before and after.” The white paper — penned by the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, a group comprised of Hollywood studios, as well as Dr. Daniel Uslan, an infectious disease specialist at UCLA Medical Center — was meant to be submitted several weeks ago. But it was held up several times by unions representing Hollywood directors and actors, sources said. The white paper is considered an important first step for Hollywood studios to get back to work as stay-at-home orders begin to lift in the US. “The white paper is the result of an industrywide collaborative effort made up of production companies, unions and guilds to provide governments with a set of guidelines and principles to safely resume production,” said  AMPTP rep Jarryd Gonzales. “The next step is for governments to review the set of guidelines for their consideration.”

The federal government’s first tally of nursing-home deaths from the coronavirus shows nearly 26,000 fatalities nationwide — and that doesn’t even include all of them, according to a new report. A letter sent to state governors said at least 25,923 residents of nursing homes have been killed by COVID-19, ABC News reported. In addition, at least 449 nursing home staffers have died of the disease, according to the Sunday letter from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The staggering toll accounts for more than one-quarter of the nation’s 104,702 coronavirus fatalities counted by Johns Hopkins University as of Monday afternoon. But federal regulators acknowledged that their nursing home numbers don’t include data from some states prior to May, and potentially only account for about 80 percent of all facilities nationwide, ABC said. The letter also notes that the federal numbers may be “inconsistent with state data, particularly state death data,” due to the different ways in which individual states track the coronavirus, ABC said. According to the New York state Department of Health, there were 3,298 confirmed nursing home deaths from the coronavirus as of Sunday. In addition, there were 2,646 deaths presumed to have been caused by COVID-19, for a total of 5,944, according to the official figures. Gov. Andrew Cuomo has faced widespread criticism for his handling of nursing homes amid the coronavirus crisis, including a controversial, March 25 directive from the state Department of Health that mandated they accept patients discharged from hospitals with the infection. Cuomo — who reversed the order last month –has tried to pin the blame for the initial decision on guidance from President Trump’s administration. In addition to providing an initial nationwide death toll, Sunday’s letter warned that the feds plan to crack down on improper infection-control measures at nursing homes by increasing inspections and fines, ABC said. The total number of deaths cited in the letter is significantly lower than the 37,600 that ABC estimated earlier by conducting a mid-May analysis of reports from nursing homes and long-term care facilities in just 40 states and the District of Columbia.

It isn’t just toilet paper and anti-bacterial wipes that the coronavirus pandemic has made hard to get. You can add a known antidepressant to that list, too. Zoloft, which is one of the most widely prescribed antidepressant medications in the US, has fallen into short supply, Bloomberg reports. Why? The hiked-up demand is caused by mental-health issues that the pandemic has triggered, such as anxiety. The shortage also affects the generic drug sertraline, which is expected to face a monthslong back order. Lupin Ltd. and Accord Healthcare, drug companies that make sertraline, have told the Food and Drug Administration they can’t get sufficient active pharmaceutical ingredients to produce the medication. The firms didn’t tell Bloomberg where those ingredients are made. Bloomberg notes that Zoloft prescriptions rose 12% year-over-year to 4.9 million in March — the highest-ever level in the US. A month later, the prescriptions decreased to 4.5 million. Zoloft was first approved for use in 1991 and is prescribed to treat issues such as depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder. A spokesperson for Pfizer, which produces Zoloft, told Bloomberg the company produces its own active ingredients for the drug.

When Geraldine Greenberg decamped from New York City to Long Beach Island, NJ, with her husband and 20-month-old son, she pictured an idyllic, six-week respite from a COVID-consumed world. Instead, she was shamed. “It’s straight-up discrimination against New Yorkers,” Greenberg, a 35-year-old real-estate agent, tells The Post. “We were definitely shunned by the neighbors when we arrived and for the entire time we stayed.” Popular vacation spots by the beach, upstate and in New England have been a magnet for Manhattanites fleeing the coronavirus. But as locals retaliate with verbal insults, pointed signs and other intimidating behaviors, stir-crazed city slickers — even those who were regular visitors before the pandemic — have been branded geographic undesirables. At the end of March, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued a travel advisory for residents of New York, Connecticut and New Jersey. For two weeks, those in the tristate area were asked to halt nonessential travel. Even though those restrictions have been lifted, New Yorkers are still getting slammed for leaving the coronavirus-ravaged city. Memorial Day crowds in the Hamptons prompted Southampton to implement a new residents-only rule. Until at least June 5, beachgoers have to offer proof they live in the town “to prevent the resurgence of coronavirus in our community.” The board of nearby East Hampton implored Gov. Andrew Cuomo to delay the reopening of area hotels and resorts because nonresidents could “overwhelm our town, creating an untenable, and avoidable, surge in the ongoing public health crisis.” Back in March, law enforcement officers in Rhode Island stopped cars with New York license plates and even conducted door-to-door searches to rout out residents seeking shelter there. Andronika Zimmerman/NY Post AP Andronika Zimmerman/NY Post View Slideshow Being from the Big Apple used to be a badge of honor. Now, it’s something to hide. One Union Square resident, who left Manhattan in May for a three-month stint on the Connecticut coast, anticipated such backlash that she begged Hertz for a rental car that would conceal the truth: She was coming from the Empire State. “I don’t even want the dirty look,” says the mom, who fled to the Fairfield area with her husband and 13-year-old son. “I told the manager to save a car for me without New York plates . . . I don’t even care if the plates are from Kentucky.” Jennifer Grasso, 38, is also wary to tout her NYC bona fides — especially after the VRBO host of a Germantown, New York, farmhouse canceled her stay “because we were from the city.” “We felt awful,” says Grasso, 38, who is married with a 3 ½-year-old daughter. The family ultimately landed a Catskills rental through July. “For the first time ever,” she says, “I’m happy to have a New Jersey license plate.” Upper West Side mom of two Myra Smith, 43, jumped at the chance to relax at her upstate Saugerties house, which has served as a haven for her family for the past five years. Even though neighbors know her and her family, she braced for resistance. “What’s here now is a sense of animosity,” Smith, a college professor, says of the anti-city sentiment. While shopping at a nearby Price Chopper, she heard a clerk hiss to another local, “You wonder why our shelves are bare — all those city people coming up and taking your groceries.” Her husband grew up in the area, Smith says, so the harsh treatment stings. She adds, “We’re outsiders despite being insiders.” The Sunshine State is inhospitably stormy for New Yorkers, too. In May, Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis openly discouraged owners of vacation homes from hosting residents from the Big Apple. “If you tell me you’re going to rent them out to people from New York City, I’m probably not going to approve that, OK?” said De Santis, adding that renting to people from other states was acceptable. Karen Armstrong, an Airbnb host who lives in Pensacola, Florida, kicked a Long Island resident out of her house for Memorial Day weekend. When the guest booked the stay, Armstrong, 59, was concerned that his profile showed he hailed from the New York area — until the guest promised he had been staying in North Carolina with family. But when he arrived with three other vehicles from Louisiana (“another banned state,” says Armstrong, who has earned “Superhost” status on the short-term rentals site), she asked them to leave. “I had no choice,” she says. “My neighbors are going to hate me. I’m going to be this town’s worst nightmare if we have a second wave [of infections].” Beth Dimenstein — a longtime resident of North Carolina’s beachy Brunswick Islands — started noticing the Empire State influx in March. “When I drive past the grocery store parking lot, it’s packed with so many New York license plates. It’s unbelievable,” says the paralegal, 60, who adds that she is especially worried because she is immunocompromised and cases in the county have jumped from 50 to 90. “I get it — it’s safer here than walking on Fifth Avenue, but please stay 6 feet apart, and please don’t let your teens walk around without masks,” Dimenstein says. “The tourists are not doing their part. It’s dangerous.” Even decades in a second home doesn’t guarantee goodwill from locals in pandemic times. An Upper East Side-based consultant tells The Post of “violence, threats and intimidation” at her longtime second home in Londonderry, Vermont — her onetime sanctuary. “The local community basically took the opportunity to let every second homeowner know that their diseased New York entitled bodies were no longer welcome in the state,” says the 53-year-old married mother of two, who declined to give her name because she fears retribution from Vermonters. “At one point, someone took over the construction road signs, which were changed to say ‘NY, NJ, CT, turn back.’ There were threats of violence.” “There are a lot of pissed-off people — I’m afraid of these people,” she says of locals’ attitudes, adding that Vermont hasn’t even been hit hard by the coronavirus. (There are 983 confirmed cases total, with zero currently hospitalized and 55 deaths, according to the state’s health department.) “I was so stunned and hurt — they were out for blood.” When she stayed in Londonderry over the Memorial Day holiday, she was too scared to venture out of the house. A friend had told her that a resident hostile toward tourists openly carried a pistol around town. “It’s been disgusting,” says the consultant, whose adult son had recovered from COVID-19 and donated plasma weeks before joining her to quarantine in Vermont. He was harassed, she says, and “confronted by neighbors for simply being at the house.” She says, “People forget how to be American in this thing.”

Lots of testing, protective gear, social distancing and coronavirus safety officers are at the heart of recommendations today from Disney, Netflix, CBS and other top studios, Hollywood’s leading guilds and producers to get the industry restarted from the pandemic that shut down production back in March. “The Industry-Wide Labor-Management Safety Committee Task Force (the “Task Force”) respectfully submits the following guidelines for consideration and adoption for the resumption of motion picture, television, and streaming productions in an environment that minimizes the risk of contracting or spreading COVID-19,” says a report for the governors of the states with the highest level of domestic film and TV production (READ THE REPORT HERE). In that vein, the “Proposed Health and Safety Guidelines for Motion Picture, Television, and Streaming Productions During the COVID-19 Pandemic” document was sent to New York’s Andrew Cuomo and California’s Gavin Newsom on Monday by the Industry-Wide Labor-Management Safety Committee Task Force via AMPTP. “Limiting face-to-face contact with others is the best way to reduce the spread of COVID-19,” the report proclaims. “Cast and crew must practice physical distancing whenever possible,” it adds. “Regular, periodic testing of the cast and crew will be used to mitigate the risk of the spread of COVID-19,” the long-expected document also asserts. “As tests are developed and others become more accurate, the testing protocols shall also change.” Perhaps most significantly, along with procedures of cleaning, protection and prevention that other industries have already began implementing as America reopens in phases and surges from the COVID-19 crisis, the recommendations want a whole new entity created for productions to ensure that safety is never compromised, at least in theory. “An autonomous COVID-19 Compliance Officer(s) with specialized training and responsibility and authority for COVID-19 safety compliance and enforcement will be in the workplace to address issues as they arise,” the 22-page slide heavy offering declares. “COVID-19 safety plan oversight and enforcement shall be the principal responsibilities of the COVID-19 Compliance Officer(s), provided they may be assigned additional responsibilities related to workplace safety.” Over a week after Gov. Newsom’s still unreleased production reopening plan was first set to be unveiled, there was no response from his Sacramento office today if they have received the White Paper from the Hollywood players. No word yet from back East if Gov. Cuomo’s folks have laid eyes on the report yet either. As well as the state executives, the proposal is also going to regional officials and offices like the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health. For all the hopes and plans in this report, it is expected that production in the coronavirus ravaged LA and NYC will need several more steps before anyone feels the time is right to head back on to a set yet. With “special considerations” included for minors, animal performers, craft services making virtual writers’ room the new normal, avoiding location filming as much as possible and live studio audiences “discouraged,” the document was put together with input from the Walt Disney Pictures, Netflix, Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, Apple Studios, CBS Studios Inc., Amazon, Columbia Pictures, Disney Television Studios, Fox Corporation, HBO. HBO Max, NBCUniversal, Paramount Pictures, Sony Pictures Television, and Warner Bros. Entertainment. The DGA, SAG-AFTRA, IATSE (including the Art Directors Guild, the Costume Directors Guild) the Teamsters and others were deeply involved in the process and crafting of the recommendations. What the governors and various state officials will do with this is now to be seen. “The ball is totally in their court,” one industry insider told Deadline today after the White Paper went out.

Hair salons, in-store retail and outdoor dining are set to reopen in New Jersey later this month as the state gradually lifts its coronavirus lockdown, officials announced Monday. The Garden State will reach Stage 2 of its recovery plan on Monday, June 15, Gov. Phil Murphy said. That means dining outside and non-essential shopping can begin again, with some capacity restrictions. Child care centers will also reopen on that day. On June 22, barber shops and hair salons will reopen, and outdoor, non-contact organized sports will be allowed to resume, according to ABC6. Gyms and health clubs will get the green light at a later, yet-to-be announced date. “Over the past several weeks, we’ve been able to take our first steps on our road back because we stayed true to our guiding principles,” Murphy said at a press conference. Murphy said the Stage 2 restart will be phased, and “we will not flick a switch.” “Just because the calendar says June 15, doesn’t mean that everyone should just go back to what they were doing pre-COVID,” he said. “Let’s use common sense for the common good.” The governor stressed that customers should still adhere to social distancing protocols and wear masks. “As we open, we know there is a greater chance of transmission of COVID-19. There is no cure. There is no vaccine,” he said. “There is no proven therapeutic. The only cure is responsibility.” “Safety will continue to be our number one priority.” As of Monday, there were at least 160,918 confirmed coronavirus cases in New Jersey and 11,721 deaths.

Officials across the U.S. South are still scrambling to adjust their hurricane plans to the coronavirus. The big unknown: Where will people fleeing storms go? The Associated Press surveyed more than 70 counties and states from Texas to Virginia, with more than 60% of coastal counties saying as of late May that they’re still solidifying plans for public hurricane shelters. They’re also altering preparations for dealing with the sick and elderly, protective equipment and cleanup costs. In Georgia’s McIntosh County, south of Savannah, Emergency Management Agency Director Ty Poppell said evacuations during the pandemic would be a “nightmare.” He worried about social distancing at shelters and on buses used to get people out. “I’d love to be able to tell you we’ve got that answered right now,” Poppell said. “It’s a work in progress.” Hurricane season officially starts Monday, though Tropical Storms Arthur and Bertha arrived early. Forecasters are expecting a busier-than-normal season. “Everything that we do will be affected in one way or another, big and/or small, by COVID-19,” Florida Emergency Management Director Jared Moskowitz said. Many counties are taking federal advice and hope to use hotels as smaller-scale shelters, while others plan to use more parts of schools besides large gymnasiums. Still others, especially in Louisiana, plan for big shelters with more social distancing. Officials emphasize that shelters are last resorts, urging people to stay with friends or in hotels. But massive unemployment is making the expense of hotels less feasible. “Our biggest change to our hurricane plan is sheltering. How are we going to shelter those that have to evacuate? How are going to shelter those that are positive COVID patients? There are multiple ideas that we are considering right now,” Mississippi Emergency Management Agency Director Greg Michel said. During tornadoes in April, the state used hotels as shelters, which was good practice for hurricane season, he said. Most counties surveyed said they’re still figuring out shelters. While that may sound worrisome, it could be beneficial because emergency managers need to update plans as the pandemic changes, University of South Carolina disaster expert Susan Cutter said. “Disasters are not going to stop for COVID-19,” Brad Kieserman, an American Red Cross executive, told reporters in May. “Hope is not a plan. And we’ve got to plan for tens of thousands of people to evacuate in the face of hurricanes and wildfires and other disasters.” Some officials acknowledged they aren’t as ready for storm season as they were a year ago because of the virus. Others were more confident. “We feel the current rating of preparedness for Craven County (North Carolina) is 50% or lower as we still have not finalized shelter options,” said Stanley Kite, emergency services director of the county hit by 2018′s Hurricane Florence. “Before COVID-19, would have estimated 90%.” Shelters were the most mentioned worry, but comfort levels with other aspects of hurricane preparations varied, reflecting the difference in how states plan for disasters. Having enough staff for shelters is a persistent problem locally and nationally, said Walton County, Florida, emergency management chief Jeff Goldberg. Protective equipment is the biggest shortfall in several North Carolina counties. Money is always an issue, with counties often waiting for federal reimbursement. Handling nursing homes, hospitals and COVID-19 patients “is one of the most difficult challenges and would require a larger state response,” said Jeffrey Johnson, fire chief in Newport News, Virginia. Other places downplayed concerns. Orleans Parish, where 2005′s Hurricane Katrina ravaged New Orleans, has added social distancing and protective equipment to a 10-year-old plan that’s otherwise “essentially unchanged. It’s a good plan,” said Collin Arnold, head of the city’s emergency preparedness office. A year ago, officials in North Carolina’s Beaufort County would have rated their readiness going into hurricane season at a 95 on a 0-to-100 scale. With the virus, that’s down to 75. Brad Baker, emergency management director of Florida’s Santa Rosa County, gave the same numbers “because there’s a lot of unknowns with COVID.” In Nueces County, Texas, which was swamped by 2017’s Hurricane Harvey, officials said they were at a 95 going into hurricane season last year. Now, it’s below 80, emergency management coordinator Melissa Munguia said. If another Harvey brings 50 inches (127 centimeters) of rain, she said the same reinforcements won’t arrive because “everybody’s been working their personnel for many hours for over 100 days.” Florida officials were far more upbeat. “While COVID-19 complicates things and you have to plan around COVID-19, I think Florida is as prepared as ever before in response to a hurricane,” said Moskowitz, the state emergency management chief. In Louisiana, disaster officials said they’re used to “overlapping emergencies, and you just have to plow through.” They anticipate making adjustments, “but it’s hard to pin down what those changes will be,” said Mike Steele, spokesman for the state’s emergency preparedness office. By August and September, typically the height of Louisiana’s hurricane season, the number of infections and social distancing requirements may have changed, he said. Coping with a hurricane is hard, and the coronavirus “is going to make it a little bit more difficult,” Federal Emergency Management Agency Director Pete Gaynor told reporters in May. But he said FEMA has hired 500 people since March and has a record of nearly $80 billion in its disaster fund. Vice President Mike Pence told President Donald Trump on Thursday that the federal government would ensure state and local authorities can handle hurricanes. “Bottom line, Mr. President, we’re ready.” Academics who study disasters aren’t so sure. “I don’t think they (federal officials) are doing the job they should be doing. I worry about their ability to handle a very large hurricane in addition to COVID-19,” University of South Carolina’s Cutter said. She and others said mixed messages on the coronavirus means some people aren’t believing what they’re hearing from Washington in an emergency. “I think our lives are in danger now because we don’t trust the federal government,” Cutter said. Between the pandemic, a crashing economy and patchy federal responses to three 2017 hurricanes, people should prepare for little help from the government, Virginia Commonwealth University emergency preparedness professor Hans-Louis Charles said. Experts also worry that it could take longer to return to normal after a hurricane. Search and rescue teams, utility workers who restore power lines and volunteers who help clean up may be slowed or not respond at all because of concerns over virus exposure, experts said. That and other issues may mean a storm that in the past caused $12 billion in insured damage, like 2018’s Hurricane Michael, may cost 20% more, catastrophic risk modeler Karen Clark said. While many officials are still trying to figure out shelters, they said if people are told to evacuate in a hurricane, residents must go. Storm surge is more dangerous than the virus, officials said. “In hurricane season, we can’t have mixed messages. If you live in an evacuation zone, your plan is to evacuate if ordered to do so by local officials,” former FEMA director Craig Fugate said. “This message will not change, COVID or no COVID.”

The FDA this week approved a coronavirus testing kit from Quest Diagnostics that will allow individuals to test themselves for COVID-19 from the comfort of their own home. After taking a swab from their nostril, users can then FedEx the sample overnight to a testing lab whereupon they’ll receive their results. In the wake of the approval, Quest Diagnostics said it’s planning to 500,000 kits ready to send out by the end of June. The approval of the new testing kits is significant because a lack of widespread testing has been a longstanding issue. Without expansive coronavirus testing, it becomes that much more challenging to ascertain the full impact of the virus and whether or not the number of cases are rising or falling. More importantly, accessible testing helps ensure that asymptomatic coronavirus patients — who would otherwise be unaware that they have the virus — take appropriate safety precautions. “COVID-19 molecular diagnostic testing has been constrained partly by limited supplies of swabs and trained healthcare professionals to do the specimen collection,” Quest Diagnostics CEO Steve Rusckowski said in a press release. “The self-collection kit enables an individual to self-collect at home, and the process is far less invasive and uncomfortable than many traditional methods.” Quest Diagnostics said it plans to make its testing kits available across a “range of populations,” which is to say it will be available for state-run health programs, healthcare providers, and of course, individuals. The company highlighted a few of the key features of the new testing kits, which you can see below: Interestingly, the FDA approval for the testing kits came in faster than it would ordinarily as the agency approved it via an Emergency Use Authorization (EUA). Though the standard FDA approval process is typically quite stringent, a provision passed by Congress decades ago allows the agency to green light “unapproved uses of approved medical products” in emergency situations if it can help “diagnose, treat, or prevent serious or life-threatening diseases or conditions…”

Sweden will launch a probe into the country’s handling of the coronavirus after controversially refusing lockdown measures, its prime minister announced Monday. Prime Minister Stefan Lofven said a commission would be appointed before the end of summer to look back at the decision to keep most schools, restaurants and businesses open after the virus reached the nation. “We need to take an overall approach to see how it has worked at national, regional and local levels,” Lofven told Swedish newspaper Aftonbladet. “We will make a decision for a commission before the summer.” The Scandinavian country has received criticism for taking a more lax approach in battling the virus, often relying on residents to self-regulate. Through some parts of May, Sweden had the highest number of COVID-19 deaths in Europe relative to the size of its population. More than 4,000 Swedes have died during the pandemic — a per capita rate many times higher than in other Nordic countries, all of which implemented tighter restrictions. With Post wires

Disney’s top brass weighed in on the the protests over the killing of George Floyd, as well as the devastating toll communities of color have taken in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. Disney executive chairman Bob Iger, along with CEO Bob Chapek and company senior vice president and chief diversity officer Latondra Newton circulated a letter to employees Sunday night expressing their grief over the recent events. They joined Netflix, ViacomCBS, Warner Bros. and other media companies in expressing their solidarity with the black community. In a letter called “Resolve in a Time of Unrest,” the trio said they are “struggling to make sense of the recent tragedies that leave us feeling overcome with sorrow.” They cited the killing of Floyd, as well as other instances of “lethal attacks and harassment of unarmed black citizens in our nation,” as well as the pandemic, which has ravaged the African-American community and “pushed the issues of racial disparity into the open.” “While we don’t have all the answers, we resolve to use our compassion, our creative ideas and our collective sense of humanity to ensure we are fostering a culture that acknowledges our people’s feelings and their pain,” Chapek, Iger and Newton said. “We also realize that now more than ever is the time for us all to further strengthen our commitment to diversity and inclusion everywhere,” the executives promised. “We intend to keep the conversation going, not just today, but for as long as it takes to bring about real change,” they concluded.

Detroit — Stephanie Byrd agonized over temporarily laying off nearly the entire staff at her family’s trio of Detroit businesses when the coronavirus pandemic hit. But she’s not just concerned about the impact on their bottom line. She’s worried other black-owned businesses will struggle to withstand another wave of economic uncertainty, following decades of inequity that made it hard for many to flourish in the first place. “Most of the people I know who have businesses and are black are terrified right now,” said Byrd, whose family owns Flood’s Bar & Grille, The Block restaurant and the city’s Garden Theater. “There could be a new wave of black businesses that are able to reinvent themselves post-pandemic, but black businesses could also be wiped out for the most part within a black city. What would it look like without black-owned businesses?” COVID-19 has disproportionately impacted black Americans, infecting and killing them at higher rates across the nation. But experts say the pandemic has also exacerbated existing economic disparities and raised fresh concerns about the survival of black businesses, many of which have been the backbone of cities like Detroit and Atlanta for years. They also worry the pandemic could widen the existing black wealth gap. According to the Federal Reserve’s 2016 Survey of Consumer Finance, the median white family net worth of $171,000 is about 10 times greater than that of a black family’s, which is $17,150. AP AP AP AP View Slideshow Black businesses historically have struggled to gain access to financing due to discriminatory lending practices and a lack of relationships with big banks. But civil rights leaders and historians say their struggles are also rooted in the simmering effects of racism and Jim Crow-era laws that enforced racial segregation and denied black people equal opportunities. “Structural racism has created an environment where black businesses are starved for capital,” said Marc Morial, president and CEO of the National Urban League, a civil rights and urban advocacy organization. Juliet Walker, founder of University of Texas at Austin’s Center of Black Business, History, Entrepreneurship and Technology, said black enterprises existed even prior to the Civil War. They especially thrived during a “golden age” from 1900 to 1930 in areas such as Tulsa, Oklahoma’s Greenwood District, known as Black Wall Street. But those moments were short-lived. Tulsa’s once-thriving African American business community was destroyed in 1921 when a racist white mob killed hundreds of black residents. Black residents attempted to rebuild in the decades that followed, only to see their work erased during urban renewal of the 1960′s. “Blacks were able to establish successful business enterprises during the age of slavery where black people had no political or economic rights,” Walker said. “Yet, here we are today and the position of blacks in business differs very little from the position of blacks during the age of slavery.” Detroit was once home to Black Bottom and Paradise Valley — two predominantly African American neighborhoods, the latter of which had more than 350 black-owned businesses and a music scene that drew the likes of Louis Armstrong and Billie Holiday. Both were wiped out in the 1950′s and 1960’s, when a nearly all-white city government allowed the construction of a freeway system through the heart of the neighborhoods. Jamon Jordan, a black historian based in Detroit, said the pandemic could have a similar crushing impact on black American businesses. “Each time this happens, the amount of energy and time it takes to recreate something that’s even as simple as what was destroyed is monumental,” Jordan said. “Even though the coronavirus isn’t the fault of a single person or leader, the impact of the devastation on the African American community is part of a long legacy of discrimination and segregation for black people and black businesses.” Some black business owners have also expressed frustration with the Small Business Administration’s $659 billion Personal Paycheck Protection Program, which was meant to provide small businesses with loans to keep employees on their payrolls during the COVID-19 crisis. The initial round of funding ran out in just 13 days, with complaints over lag times and confusion over the application process. However, the SBA made improvements in its second round and more than $100 billion remains available. But the Center for Responsible Lending, a nonprofit group that works to end predatory lending practices aimed at low-income communities, said challenges remain. “This is just a new public health crisis and economic crisis that is coming after so many decades and centuries of structural inequality,” said Ashley Harrington, the center’s federal advocacy director and senior counsel. National Business League President and CEO Ken Harris said his team has been fielding hundreds of questions from members who are struggling to survive. The league, founded in 1900 by Booker T. Washington, is launching its own $1.8 million digital platform to help business owners gain access to funding. “It’s going to be a rebuilding process and we’re going to have to focus on economic recovery,” Harris said. Pinky Cole, the African American owner of the popular Atlanta-area Slutty Vegan restaurants and food trucks, said she’s been able to shift toward being a carryout business but others haven’t been so lucky. Through her Pinky Cole Foundation, she’s been paying the rent for small businesses that are struggling. “Black-owned businesses, we’ve always landed at the bottom of the totem pole as it relates to resources,” Cole said. “We put our blood, sweat and tears into these businesses and everything you’ve worked hard for can be lost in a matter of days.” Several business companies and entrepreneurs, including Facebook, Magic Johnson and Mark Cuban, the billionaire owner of the Dallas Mavericks, have announced plans to help businesses owned by people of color, but some worry the assistance might come too late. The Michigan Minority Supplier Development Council, which represents minority-owned firms that serve the country’s automotive industry, took matters into its own hands and worked to identify lenders willing to help small firms. “The difference for minority businesses is they can’t walk into a bank and get the same treatment and if anything, I believe COVID-19 has exposed much of our disparity,” said Michelle Sourie Robinson, the council’s president and CEO. OneUnited Bank, the nation’s largest black-owned bank, announced its participation in the Small Business Administration program in April to help minority-owned businesses gain access to the stimulus funding. “A lot of our customers as well as businesses who are in the community, I’ve counted on one hand the number that actually applied and got funded,” said Teri Williams, president and chief operating officer. “Our community was really getting shut out.” On Thursday, the SBA announced it was setting aside $10 billion exclusively for Community Development Financial Institutions, which work to expand economic opportunity in minority and other under-served communities. Bernard Kanjoma and his fiancée Jessika-Katherine Naranjo Colina, who co-own the graphic design and marketing firm Naranjo Designs, said they received an $8,000 loan May 5. Kanjoma, who emigrated to the United States from Malawi, said their 12-person team has seen an 80% drop in business but they’re identifying creative ways to weather the crisis. “We have been heavily impacted and it’s been challenging but I felt like all the hardships that I went through with immigration and everything else to be where I am now, this is something that is just going to blow over,” Kanjoma said.

President Donald Trump will resume in-person fundraising events this month — hosting two big-dollar events as he moves to restart a campaign season paused by the coronavirus pandemic. On June 11, Trump will host a fundraiser at a private home in Dallas, Texas before flying out to his Bedminster, New Jersey golf club for a June 13 event, a campaign official confirmed to The Post. Admission to the Dallas fundraiser costs $580,600 per couple, while the New Jersey event will cost each attendee $250,000. All proceeds will go to Trump Victory, the joint fundraising committee of the Trump reelection campaign, the Republican National Committee and state parties. A third event is reportedly in the works for July 4 weekend in Florida, according to Bloomberg. A campaign official told The Post of the two confirmed events that about 25 people are expected to attend each, and that event coordinators were taking extensive safety precautions to ensure that social distancing would be observed. Those attending the events will be evaluated by the White House medical unit and Secret Service. They will be required to test negative for the virus on the day of the event, as well as complete a health questionnaire and pass a temperature test. The president’s rival, presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden, announced in early march that it was postponing in-person fundraising events “indefinitely” as the pandemic forced Americans into self-quarantine. Since then, the former vice president has taken to hosting virtual fundraisers for donors, using methods like conference calls and video events. Biden has defended his remaining on lockdown amid the pandemic, despite it throwing a wrench in typical general election plans. Last week, presidential hopeful clapped back at Trump and his GOP allies after weeks of being mocked for observing social distancing guidelines and remaining on lockdown in his Delaware home. “All this stuff about ‘Biden’s hidin,’ well, you know, the fact of the matter is, it’s working pretty well so far, doing the rules,” he told CNN last Tuesday. “He’s behind in almost every — every state,” he continued, noting that he recognized that the numbers could change between now and the November election. Biden was referencing his climbing poll numbers, which have recently shown him ahead of Trump both nationally and in key swing states. Since making those comments, the 77-year-old Democrat has made three public appearances, most recently assessing the damage and speaking to voters in Wilmington, Delaware after a night of protests and riots in response to the murder of George Floyd. A Biden campaign spokesperson did not immediately respond to The Post’s request for comment regarding his in-person fundraising plans.

We may not have seen the last of this year’s Knicks after all. There is a chance they could be back in some form. Although the Knicks are unlikely to be part of the postponed season’s restart in Orlando, as The Post previously reported, there is dialogue that the teams not involved may return to the court, according to ESPN. That would enable said teams to remain somewhat relevant in their respective markets, go through a mandatory training camp this summer and take part in regional fall leagues of four-to-five teams, so they wouldn’t go from March to December – when next season could start — without playing games. There is the belief the NBA will offer such a plan to the Players Association, ESPN reported, after shutting down the season on March 11 due to the novel coronavirus pandemic. “The message was something bigger, reminding people that some teams can’t just re-open the doors in nine of 10 months and so easily sell tickets or a sponsorship without having played basketball for that long,” an Eastern Conference official said. With the date of the 2020 NBA Draft still uncertain and unclear when free agency will be held, it is unknown how these rosters would be formulated. As for the Knicks in particular, it could be an opportunity for its new coach to get to know the roster, with new president Leon Rose expected to replace interim coach Mike Miller. Tom Thibodeau is considered the frontrunner right now. Submit your Knicks questions here to be answered in an upcoming Post mailbag A source told The Post there is expected to be more clarity for everyone after Thursday’s Board of Governors vote, when approval of a 22-team restart plan is expected. Three-fourths of the league has to approve the plan for it to pass, but the belief is that will not be an issue. On a recent conference call, commissioner Adam Silver told league owners that he is targeting July 31 for reopening the league and teams could hold a three-week training camp in Orlando beginning in early July. On Friday, the Knicks opened their practice facility in Tarrytown to give their players in the area a safe place to work out. Most of the roster had left to be with their families in the midst of the pandemic.

An NYC man is suing Delta Airlines and British Airways for $16,000 — demanding refunds for two flights that were canceled because of the coronavirus pandemic, new court papers show. Steven Schiesel says he bought himself and his wife a pair of one-way tickets for himself and wife Elaine to fly from New York City to Tenerife, Spain via Delta on April 14. But they were unable to go as both the US and Spain were under lock down at the time, a Manhattan Supreme Court lawsuit from Saturday says. Schiesel bought the Delta tickets on January 24 for $5,543 each and he requested a full refund prior to the flight, the court papers say. And he also booked a second one-way flight for the pair from Portugal back to the Big Apple on May 2 from British Airways for $5,952, which he also asked for a refund for ahead of the flight, the court filings say. But both airlines, “failed and refused to provide plaintiff with a full cash refund, and offered plaintiff a voucher to be used on another flight in the future, for which plaintiff had no use,” the court documents charge. The suit says this goes against British government, US government and US Department of Transportation rules “requiring  airlines to provide full cash refunds to passengers who purchased plane tickets on flights affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.” Schiesel is suing for breach of contract. In April, a Minnesota cop filed a similar lawsuit against United Airlines for a refund of a canceled South Carolina trip scheduled for April 4. Delta and British Airways did not immediately return a request for comment.

The Public Theater has postponed its digital gala, “We Are One Public,” due to the protests around the country. “In this time of national trauma, when the Covid crisis has so disproportionately impacted the Black community, when the injustices of our way of life have been made so clear, it just feels wrong for us to sail ahead with our event,” a note on the theater’s website stated. “This is a time for mourning and reflection,” the statement continued. “It has taken us far too long to proclaim the simple truth: Black Lives Matter,” the New York City-based theater company further stated. “We must stand in solidarity with Black artists, Black staff members, and the Black community … The Public is determined to be on the side that fights racism and inequality manifested inside and outside of our walls.” Meryl Streep, Alicia Keys, Jesse Tyler Ferguson, Antonio Banderas, Glenn Close and more had been scheduled to participate in the event scheduled for Monday night.

To help enforce social distancing restrictions due to the coronavirus pandemic, Walt Disney World has enlisted Stormtroopers from “Star Wars.” On May 20, parts of its Disney World reopened, including outdoor restaurants, entertainment venues and its shopping district, Disney Springs. Visitors must now follow rules that require all guests to wear face coverings, pass fever tests and maintain a distance of 6 feet from other guests whenever possible. Attractions Magazine shared a video last week of two Imperial soldiers encouraging visitors to “move along” and “stay in your sector” as they patrol from a balcony above a shopping plaza. Pre-recorded banter between the two troopers can be heard over a loudspeaker. “Hey, you! With the face covering!” yells one Stormtrooper in the video. “They all have face coverings,” the other mocks. “Well, we made them all look,” the first trooper responds. The Disney World amusement park has been closed since mid-March due to the COVID-19 crisis and went on to furlough some 43,000 Disney World Resort employees in April. Park officials plan to launch an incremental reopening on their theme parks starting on July 11, with Animal Kingdom and Magic Kingdom slated to open first. While fans await the relaunch of Disney’s Star Wars: Galaxy’s Edge attraction, which just opened in late 2019, they may be able to get their Force fix with Lucasfilm’s new immersive VR experience, “Star Wars: Tales From the Galaxy’s Edge,” due later this year.

Cancer patients infected with COVID-19 had a much higher risk of dying within a month than non-cancerous COVID-19 patients, recent studies say. In a study published May 28 in The Lancet, 50 percent of 928 cancer patients and survivors with COVID-19 were hospitalized and 13 percent died. The most common malignancies were breast cancer and prostate cancer. According to data from Johns Hopkins University, the majority of the 10 countries most affected by coronavirus have death rates less than 13 percent. The US has a COVID-related mortality rate of 5.8 percent, whereas countries like Belgium, France and Italy have death rates exceeding 14 percent. Another study in The Lancet of cancer patients facing COVID-19 found an even higher death rate at 28 percent, increasing with age and underlying health problems like cardiovascular disease and hypertension. The study also found 22 percent of patients had interrupted anticancer treatment due to the pandemic. What do these findings mean for more than a million Americans diagnosed with cancer each year? Data from the American Cancer Society says there will be an estimated 1.8 million new cancer diagnoses and more than 600,000 cancer deaths in the US in 2020. The number of cancer survivors in the US will approach 18 million this year, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Dr. Jeremy Warner, a Vanderbilt University data scientist who led the wider study, told the Associated Press that the “results show the wisdom of measures that many hospitals have taken to delay or modify care for many cancer patients and the need for people treated in the past to be extra careful now.” “If they don’t have COVID-19, they want to do anything they can to avoid getting it,” Warner told AP.

Mayor Bill de Blasio said Monday it is time for protesters taking to the streets over the police-involved death of George Floyd to “stay home” as he warned that there could be a spike in coronavirus infections. “You’ve made your point. It’s time to stay home,” de Blasio said during his daily City Hall press briefing regarding the thousands of protesters and many looters who have flooded Big Apple streets for days. “People have a right to protest freely, but there is a line,” the mayor said, as he explained that “there’s a real danger this could” further spread the deadly bug “when we were starting to beat it back profoundly.” Demonstrators have inundated the streets of New York City over the past three days — sometimes turning violent and clashing with police — over the May 25 Minneapolis death of Floyd, who was black, at the hands of a white cop. “This is just a horribly complex situation,” said de Blasio. “We’ve never dealt with anything like this.” The Big Apple has been in a coronavirus-induced shutdown for more than two months and remains seven days away from entering phase one of the state’s four-phase reopening plan. “The safest thing at this point is for people to stay home,” said the mayor. “We don’t want people out there where they could spread this disease, where they could catch this disease.” Commenting on the protests, which Hizzoner has characterized as overall “peaceful,” he said, “This moment is the outpouring of such pain and suffering. “These things are happening outdoors, which, thank God, is better than it happening indoors,” the mayor said of the demonstrations amid the virus. Meanwhile, speaking during his own press conference Monday in Manhattan, Gov. Andrew Cuomo echoed some of those concerns about the potential impact the protests could have on the spread of coronavirus. “We don’t even know the consequence of the COVID virus of those mass gatherings. We don’t even know. We won’t know possibly for weeks. How many super spreaders were in that crowd?” Cuomo asked. “How many young people went home and kissed their mother hello … and spread a virus?” Cuomo continued, “We still have to be smart and at the same time we have a fundamental issue, which is we just spent 93 days limiting behavior, closing down, no school, no business, thousands of small businesses destroyed. People who have lost their jobs, people who wiped out their savings and now, mass gatherings with thousands of people in close proximity. One week before we’re gonna open in New York City? “What sense does that make?” the governor asked. “Took us 93 days to get here,” Cuomo said, referring to New York’s progress when it comes to the coronavirus crisis, including its steep decline in COVID-19-related hospitalizations, intubations and deaths. “Is this smart?”

A streaming Broadway-themed fundraising special scheduled to air on Sunday, June 7 – the night that originally had been set for the annual Tony Awards – has been postponed in the wake of national unrest over the police killing of George Floyd. “We stand in solidarity with Black Lives Matter,” said an executive producer of the special. In announcing the postponement today, Broadway on Demand CEO/President Sean Cercone said, “This is a pivotal moment in our nation’s history and our priorities at this time are to listen, to engage in meaningful dialogue and to do our best to enact real change in our industry and in our nation.” The special, which was to have streamed on the recently launched Broadway On Demand platform, will be rescheduled at a future date. “We are collectively saddened and angered by the senseless murders of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Tony McDade, Breonna Taylor and disheartened by the ongoing racism and injustices that continue to permeate our society,” said Cercone in a statement. “We at Broadway On Demand do not tolerate hate, racism, injustice or bigotry of any kind. The continued violence against Black Americans is inexcusable. We stand in solidarity with Black Lives Matter.” Read the entire statement below. With the Broadway coronavirus shutdown in place, the annual Tony Awards ceremony has been postponed, with no announcement yet on when or if the trophies will be handed out at all this year. CBS, the network home of the Tonys, has scheduled a Grease Sing-a-Long as a replacement, a move that disappointed some Broadway insiders who hoped for some sort of Tony-related programming. Broadway On Demand then stepped in by planning a one-hour celebration of theater and the Tony Awards, with the support of, and as a fundraiser for, the American Theatre Wing and The Broadway League, presenters of the annual Tonys. The special is the latest Broadway-related postponement since the protests began: Yesterday, New York’s Drama Desk Awards postponed its streaming event to a date TBD. That same day, New York’s Public Theater postponed its virtual We Are One Public gala. Here is Cercone’s statement in full: We are collectively saddened and angered by the senseless murders of George Floyd, Ahmaud Arbery, Tony McDade, Breonna Taylor and disheartened by the ongoing racism and injustices that continue to permeate our society. We at Broadway On Demand do not tolerate hate, racism, injustice or bigotry of any kind. The continued violence against Black Americans is inexcusable. We stand in solidarity with Black Lives Matter. This is a pivotal moment in our nation’s history and our priorities at this time are to listen, to engage in meaningful dialogue and to do our best to enact real change in our industry and in our nation. We truly believe theater has the power to educate, inspire, develop empathy, bridge cultural divides and ultimately unite under the banner of humanity. Broadway On Demand recognizes that we have the power to influence and change the world through art. Our goal as an organization is to create a platform where underrepresented voices can be amplified and uplifted. That is why it is of the utmost importance that the programs we deliver adhere to these beliefs and reflect the world in which we live.

China has ordered two major state-run agricultural businesses to suspend purchases of US farm goods, according to a report. The move will almost certainly impact China’s pledge as part of the US-China phase one trade deal to purchase $250 billion in US goods annually. Cofco and Sinograin, two state-owned traders, were ordered by Chinese Communist Party officials to cease the purchasing of US farm goods including soybeans and pork, Bloomberg reported Monday. President Trump signed phase one of the deal with China in January, ending a bitter trade war between the two countries that took place amid months of tense negotiations. Since then, relations have soured as the Communist nation has faced a wave of international scrutiny for its lack of transparency at the onset of the coronavirus outbreak. President Trump and top administration officials — most notably Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo — have squarely blamed China for the global health emergency. Beijing, meanwhile, has been engaged in a months-long smear campaign against the three men. In early May, Trump told The Post in an Oval Office interview that Chinese authorities were responsible for the virus’ spread. “I think the worst part of it was they could have extinguished the fire. And they could have stopped people from traveling and extinguished the fire. And they did stop people from traveling to China, but not to other parts of the world. So it’s a very sad event, I will tell you,” he remarked. The commander-in-chief asserted during a Fox News town hall last month that if China did not uphold its end of the bargain, there would be consequences. Responding to a question from a business owner who said he was losing money on tariffs placed on China, Trump said the duties in the trade agreement required China to make those $250 billion in purchases. “Now they have to buy, and if they don’t buy, we’ll terminate the deal. Very simple,” he assured the man. Asked by a reporter in the Oval Office one week later whether he was pleased with how China was fulfilling the trade deal, the president said he would have an answer “in a week or two,” but added that it was something the White House was “watching closely.” “They’re buying a lot of farm product, but are they buying to the level that they were supposed to? You know, they were going to buy $50 billion worth [of US farm goods], the most they ever did was $15 or 16 [billion]. And now they’re going to … anywhere between $40 to 50 [billion] in terms of farm [goods], but $250 billion overall,” he added. In the weeks since making those comments, Trump administration officials have been in debate over whether to stick with the deal if China is unable to meet its purchasing requirements, according to Reuters. Officials close to Trump have said that both he and the administration have little hope that China will be able to maintain its end of the deal, the outlet reported. Still, walking away from the deal could cause further economic harm, a risk the commander-in-chief is aware of. Canceling the agreement could risk an increase in unemployment at a time when US job losses are already at an all-time high, reigniting a fraught trade dispute as the global economy struggles to bounce back. Despite doubts, Chinese Vice Premier Liu He maintained China’s pledge last month that it would implement the agreement. White House Economic Adviser Larry Kudlow was not as enthusiastic during a CNBC appearance last week on the deal, calling the relationship between the two countries “complex” and saying that the agreement “does continue to go on for the moment.” Adding further tensions to the two countries’ relationship is the Communist country’s handling of Hong Kong. Pro-democracy protests took over the city for nearly all of last year and left the region in a tense power struggle with the Chinese Communist Party. The mobilization was sparked by the CCP introducing a plan that would allow for the extradition of criminal suspects from Hong Kong to mainland China. The bill was withdrawn last September but the rallies continued to support full democratic reforms and investigations into the police’s actions. Demonstrations were slowed down by the coronavirus pandemic, which forced the movement indoors. Since then, with more in the country going outside again, the protests have started up again, leading to numerous high-profile arrests. Renewed protests have also been motivated by Beijing’s push to impose a new “national security law” on Hong Kong, which White House National Security Adviser Robert O’Brien has threatened to sanction the country over. The law would restrict Hong Kong’s autonomy, which was established when the former British colony was returned to China in 1997. In response to US criticism of the Hong Kong measure, Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian slammed American leadership on Monday, saying their allegations against the Chinese Communist Party “show a total disregard of facts.” “Any words or actions by the US that hurt China’s interests will be met with firm counterattacks,” Zhao continued. A spokesperson for the office of the US trade representative did not immediately respond to The Post’s request for comment. With Post wires

Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Monday raised the possibility of imposing a curfew on New York City — saying looters had “hijacked” protests over the police killing of George Floyd to break into luxury stores like Rolex and Chanel. “Many cities use a curfew,” Cuomo said. “My basic point is, last night was bad. The criminality, the looting was the most egregious, the people exploiting the circumstance.” During his daily coronavirus briefing in Albany, Cuomo said there was “no doubt that there are people who just use this moment to steal.” “What, is it a coincidence that they broke into a Rolex watch company? That was a coincidence? High-end stores, Chanel — that was a coincidence? That was random? That was not random,” he said. “So, can you have a legitimate protest movement hijacked? Yes, you can. And there are people and forces who will exploit that moment, and I believe that’s happening.” Cuomo also said that “extremist groups” had been infiltrating protests across the state to “come in to disrupt.” “I hear the same thing from all the local officials. They have people in their communities who are there to, quote-unquote, protest,” he said. “They’re not from their communities. They don’t know where they’re from.” Cuomo said he would speak later Monday with Mayor Bill de Blasio about imposing a curfew. “I could impose a curfew. Legally, I could impose a curfew,” he said. “I’m not at that point. But I know something has to be done. Because last night was not acceptable, and the night before was not acceptable on any level.” Cuomo has said previously that the National Guard was “on standby” to help quell protests across the state and on Monday noted, “We have 13,000 National Guard, who we can use at any moment.” About 5,000 guard members have been mobilized in 15 states and the District of Columbia since protests over Floyd’s killing turned violent last week, according to the Military Times.

Turkish mogul Baran Süzer has been forced to pull out of buying Miami’s Delano Hotel amid the COVID-19 pandemic, Page Six is told. Süzer, who is the owner of The Ritz-Carlton, Istanbul, had to forfeit the deposit he had put down in March ahead of a deal where he would have won majority ownership of the swanky South Beach hotspot. Per the terms of the deal, hospitality group SBE would oversee operations and management of the hotel, while Baran’s family business, Süzer Group, would hold majority ownership and fund the property. Süzer had previously been involved in other potential deals to buy shares of LA’s Sunset Tower and the Miami Setai, which never went ahead.

US stocks rebounded Monday as Wall Street cautiously bet on an economic recovery despite mounting unrest over police brutality and continued tensions with China. The Dow Jones industrial average rose as much as 93.12 points, or 0.3 percent, to 25,476.23, after shedding 0.5 percent at the open. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq similarly clawed back early losses in choppy trading to rise as much as 0.2 and 0.5 percent, respectively. Wall Street appeared focused on the prospects of the economy shaking off the coronavirus crisis despite a weekend of violent protests across the nation sparked by the police killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis. “History shows effectively no correlation between social, political turmoil and stock markets,” said David Trainer, CEO of investment research firm New Constructs. He noted that the market posted a significant gain in 1968, a year marred by civil unrest and two major political assassinations. Investors also shrugged off China’s Monday threat of retaliation against President Trump’s move to start ending the US’s special trade relationship with Hong Kong after Beijing moved to restrict the territory’s autonomy. The protests and China tensions “just get dwarfed by the fact that the economy everywhere is coming back online, and I just don’t know how the market moves away from that,” said Jim Paulsen, chief investment strategist at the Minneapolis-based Leuthold Group. Some recent economic data has suggested that the US economy is starting to turn around after the coronavirus pandemic sparked the worst downturn since the Great Depression. Reports released Monday showed manufacturing activity improving last month in both the US and China as the world emerged from lockdowns aimed at controlling the virus. New jobless claims in the US have also fallen steadily in recent weeks, though Friday’s monthly jobs report is expected to show unemployment at or near 20 percent. Optimism about an economic reopening has helped spur a significant rally on Wall Street since March, when the virus crisis tanked global markets. The S&P ended May just about 10.3 percent below its all-time high reached in February. With Post wires

I think the players have a responsibility to help find a financial solution that allows major league baseball to be played this year. For the long-term damage to reputation and revenue without games will make the 2020 salary dispute feel like fighting for a drop of water and ending up with an ocean of problems. I think the players are more than just the employees. They also are stewards of the game and they have a chance in the next few weeks to renew positive nostalgic ties with baseball and Americana while creating new fans that will ultimately lead to more revenue streams that set them, future players and the sport up in a better fashion. Here is what I don’t think: The players are greedy. That designation was tired when it was said about Babe Ruth and Sandy Koufax and Reggie Jackson. I get it you played baseball as a kid and think you would do it for free as a profession. You wouldn’t. No one works for free. You think the money would be better spent on nurses and teachers. Agreed. Redirect all you spent that helped make MLB an $11 billion industry last year to nurses and teachers. If there is less money in the game, players will make less. You think the players should be grateful. Most are. But also we should be grateful. I watched the owners’ replacement baseball folly in spring 1995 and sorry to break it to you, but you were not one better coach in high school away from the majors. These are the best players distilled through a Darwinian system that separates those who can and cannot. As a society we have decided to value this particular rare skill set. You and corporations paid the $11 billion. Owners gave roughly half of that to players, as they did pretty much every year before a pandemic. No one had a gun to anyone’s head to spend it. You think the players’ salaries have priced you out of tickets. Except the Orioles and Tigers cut their payrolls by $100 million each from 2017 to 2020. Were either lowering ticket prices to reflect the savings and certitude of a worse product? Add it all up and returning to the “greedy” player feels like wool uniforms — something that should have been retired long ago. The owners have gotten used to winning negotiations, the last collective bargaining agreement for sure, with the minor leagues, with umpires, with getting caps on the draft and international spending. They have done this with a strategy more jackhammer than stiletto. This is what any business does — tries to get the most production for the least cost. The players stood up to the jackhammer this time. It is not just that after years of rising revenues and franchise values, the owners now are asking for the players to help lessen their financial burden/loss. It is that the first official offer, among other things, asked the players who make the most to be walloped. On its surface — like believing high ticket prices are due to high player salaries — that makes sense. Many businesses are asking top earners for cuts to spare lower earners. But baseball is not other businesses. Players endure capped systems in either the draft or internationally at the entry level. They have to work through the minors, often for several years, making wages often below poverty levels. Those who reach the majors cannot seek an open market for six or, if their service time is manipulated, seven seasons (think those who have had their service manipulated trust owners right now?). In the first three years, teams can pay major leaguers whatever they want, usually close to the minimum. The next three to four years, the teams have an arbitration system that, yes, begins to pay players better, but within confines and without a free market providing true value in what often are players’ most productive seasons. In recent years, analytic front offices have smartly — but coldly — figured out how to get similar production for less cost, lowering many bars for arbitration-eligible players and free agents. One of the strategies is to keep the pay down on one end with all of the rules, then say the player is too old to get real money when he is finally free. Those who navigate all of that to command lucrative contracts are being asked to incur the brunt of the savings for owners. And, as opposed to owners and their heirs who have decades of runway to make back losses, players who get in 10-plus years in The Show are a small percentage. Also, whatever a player earns, we all will know it. We have no idea what owners make, which is central to the union complaint. MLB is crying poor but the Players Association is dubious. I have no idea if this is really crippling this year for the owners, or if players could be convinced of it even if true. But I do believe that within their suspicion, players must find a way to solution. Perhaps that is playing chicken and getting the owners to pay them the full prorated share. But it can’t be misreading that, which leads to no games, which would mean no salary now and less in the future. It would be calamitous 1) if MLB was approved by political and medical leaders to play amid the pandemic and didn’t for financial reasons when unemployment and monetary anguish is so high in the country, 2) if MLB didn’t play and every other major sport got back, 3) MLB failed to grab the goodwill and potential for long-term financial benefit by being the first sports league back and do it on July 4 weekend. Yes, the owners are bigger stewards. Still, the players cannot let this all burn. They are not greedy. But they must be big-picture thinkers and not let 2020 money blind them to the long-term costs without games.

NYPD cops will begin working 12-hour shifts this week — a “war time” response to the increasingly violent George Floyd protests and looting in New York, sources told The Post. Starting Tuesday, some cops will work a 5 a.m.-to-5 p.m. tour, while others will be on the clock from 5 p.m. until 5 a.m. the next day, according to an internal department memo obtained by The Post. “It’s obviously a dire response to the ongoing civil unrest,” a police source said Monday. “The fact that the NYPD would mandate such a drastic measure in light of the economic state of the city is austere indeed. It means the mayor and NYPD are at their ropes’ end to enact such a metaphorical ‘war time’ measure.” The move is a sign that the NYPD needs “all and every hand on deck,” and it is “a measure reserved for citywide catastrophes,” the source added. It’s unclear how long the new regulations will last or whether any officers will be exempt from them. The Big Apple faced a fourth straight night of violence and looting late Sunday into early Monday. More than 200 people were arrested, a dozen department vehicles were vandalized and at least seven officers were injured, according to the NYPD. More than 700 people have been arrested since Thursday. The extended shifts come as the city continues to battle the coronavirus — but the NYPD said last month that the number of cops calling out sick has dropped to pre-pandemic levels. The NYPD did not respond to a request for comment.

A majority of Americans believe controlling the spread of the coronavirus is more important than trying to restart the nation’s ailing economy, a new poll has found. The poll, conducted late last month by the Washington Post and ABC News, found that 57 percent of those surveyed think curbing the coronavirus pandemic is most important right now — even if it’s detrimental to the US economy. Thirty-seven percent of respondents felt the opposite, saying they believe giving a jolt to the nation’s reeling economy is more vital at the moment, the poll found. The divide was even starker along political lines, as 81 percent of Democrats said they thought controlling the virus’ spread was of greater importance, compared to 59 percent of independents and just 27 percent of Republicans. Given the choice between the two, restarting the economy was the top concern for 66 percent of Republicans, followed by 35 percent of independents and 14 percent of Democrats, poll data shows. Other key findings include 42 percent of people who said they know someone who has been diagnosed with COVID-19 — up from 11 percent in late March — and 68 percent who said they’re worried about a possible second wave of infections this fall. Fifty-eight percent of those polled also said they believe it’s too early to return to stores, restaurants and other public places, while 40 percent said they’re ready to head back. The poll of 1,001 US adults was conducted by phone from May 25 to 28 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points.

An Indiana-based pharmaceutical company announced Monday it has started the world’s first human trial of an antibody therapy designed to treat the coronavirus. Eli Lilly and Co. said its potential treatment, known as LY-CoV555, is modeled after the antibodies found in the plasma of people who have recovered from the virus. The experimental treatment doesn’t contain plasma, but uses clones of the antibodies for the therapy, which is taken intravenously, the Wall Street Journal reported. The treatment is designed to target the spike-shaped protein structures of the virus and block it from locking on to human cells, thus neutralizing the bug. “We’re not experienced in vaccines, or antiviral small molecules,” Daniel Skovronsky, the company’s chief scientific officer, told the outlet. “But we’re really good at antibodies, engineering them, testing them, manufacturing them. That’s a capability we have, so the opportunity to work on antibodies against Covid-19 made total sense.” The company said the first phase of the study will assess how safe the medicine is and how well it is tolerated by patients hospitalized with COVID-19 — with the results expected by the end of June. New York University Grossman School of Medicine is one of the sites that will be testing it in the first phase. “What we’re doing here is taking patients with Covid, offering the opportunity to participate in a new treatment, hopefully to help them recover more quickly and uneventfully from their infection,” said Dr. Mark J. Mulligan, director of the infectious disease and vaccine research units at NYU Langone Health, according to the newspaper. If the drug is found to be safe, the company will move on to studying the potential treatment in non-hospitalized patients. With Post wires

Gilead Sciences’ antiviral drug remdesivir showed signs of helping certain coronavirus patients in a study showing better results from a shorter course of treatment, the company said Monday. People with moderate COVID-19 pneumonia who took a five-day treatment of remdesivir were 65 percent more likely to show “clinical improvement” at day 11 than people who received standard care, according to results of the phase-three study Gilead released. Patients who got a 10-day course of remdesivir also had “favorable” odds of improvement compared to standard care, the California-based company said — but they were not statistically significant, raising questions about why a longer course of treatment did not work better. “The lack of benefit in the 10-day arm is a surprise, in our view,” Bloomberg Intelligence analysts Marc Engelsgjerd and Jenna Li said in a note. “We need details on the standard-of-care arm and expected a greater benefit, given this was an open-label study.” Gilead shares dropped as much as 4.4 percent, to $74.40, on the news Monday. The company said it plans to submit the full research data to a peer-reviewed journal in the coming weeks. The results still added to the evidence that remdesivir can help treat the deadly coronavirus disease that has killed more than 100,000 Americans. The US Food and Drug Administration approved it for emergency use last month after a federal trial showed it could help speed recovery. “The additional data we have in hand today will further guide our research efforts, including evaluating treatment earlier in the course of disease, combination studies with other therapies for the most critically ill patients, pediatric studies and the development of alternate formulations,” Dr. Merdad Parsey, Gilead’s chief medical officer, said in a statement Monday. First developed to treat Ebola, remdesivir remains an experimental drug and can only be used to treat severely ill COVID-19 patients, according to Gilead. The company says the medicine was “generally well-tolerated” among the moderately sick patients it studied, though some experienced nausea, diarrhea and headache.

GUDELIAI, Lithuania – It took 13 seconds for Olivija, a 9-month-old girl, to crawl 5 meters from her family’s living room to the kitchen to be declared the fastest baby in Lithuania, where the annual baby crawlers race was moved online due to the coronavirus lockdown. The 13 babies competed by crawling through courses set up at their homes and broadcast live on Facebook via parents’ mobiles. The 14th competitor chose to take a mid-day nap instead. “Of course she does not understand what has happened. She is just a baby”, Olivija’s mother Ana said after the race, surrounded by three more of her children. “We believed Olivija will win because she crawls very fast. And you know what was at the finish? It was our pet’s food bowl. That is the top thing for her, she doesn’t need toys”, said Ana. An hour before the race, in a house just outside the country’s capital, Audrone, 29 and Tomas, 33, were continuously coaching their 10-month-old son Rokas to follow a 5-meter-long red ribbon marking the course. Various methods to tempt the baby towards the finish line were tested, from favorite toys and a promise of a hug from mother to an invitation to explore the open dishwasher. “Our baby was the best, even if he didn’t win”, said Tomas after Rokas finished not higher than fourth. Parents were told to lift up their baby as soon as his or her hand touched the finish line, to make it easier to time the runs and organizers pleaded with parents to avoid cheating.

SEOUL, South Korea — In a cramped office in eastern Seoul, Hwang Seungwon points a remote control toward a huge NASA-like overhead screen stretching across one of the walls. With each flick of the control, a colorful array of pie charts, graphs and maps reveals the search habits of thousands of South Korean senior citizens being monitored by voice-enabled “smart” speakers, an experimental remote care service the company says is increasingly needed during the coronavirus crisis. “We closely monitor for signs of danger, whether they are more frequently using search words that indicate rising states of loneliness or insecurity,” said Hwang, director of a social enterprise that handles SK Telecom’s services. Trigger words lead to a recommendation for a visit by public health officials. As South Korea’s government pushes to allow businesses to access vast amounts of personal information and to ease restrictions holding back telemedicine, tech firms could potentially find much bigger markets for their artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies. The drive, resisted for years by civil liberty advocates and medical professionals, has been reinvigorated by a technology-driven fight against COVID-19. It has so far allowed South Korea to emerge as something of a coronavirus success story but also raised broader worries that privacy is being sacrificed for epidemiological gains. Armed with an infectious disease law that was strengthened after a 2015 outbreak of a different coronavirus, MERS, health authorities have aggressively used credit-card records, surveillance videos and cellphone data to find and isolate potential virus carriers. Locations where patients went before they were diagnosed are published on websites and released through cellphone alerts. Smartphone tracking apps are used to monitor around 30,000 individuals quarantined at home. Starting Monday, entertainment venues in Seoul, Incheon and Daejeon will be required to register customers with smartphone QR codes so they can be easily located if needed. The requirement expands nationwide on June 10. But there’s a dark side. People here have often managed to trace back the online information to the unnamed virus carriers, exposing embarrassing personal details and making them targets of public contempt. A low point came in early May when local media described some Seoul nightclubs linked to hundreds of infections as catering to sexual minorities, triggering homophobic responses. Officials reacted by expanding “anonymous testing,” which allowed people to provide only their phone numbers and not their names during tests. There was a subsequent increase in tests. The past months have exposed a stark division about the best ways to make important decisions when privacy concerns collide with public health needs, said Haksoo Ko, a Seoul National University law professor and co-director of the school’s Artificial Intelligence Policy Initiative. Around 3,200 people across the country, mostly older than 70 and living alone, have so far allowed the SK Telecom speakers to listen to them 24 hours a day since the service launched in April 2019. The company expects users to at least double by the end of the year, judging by local government interest. The technology has reduced human contact in welfare services while still providing governments with a tool to prevent elderly residents from dying alone. That’s especially needed in a country grappling with an aging population and high poverty rates among retirees. The speakers are built with an artificial intelligence called “Aria” and a lamp that turns blue when processing voice commands for news, music and internet searches. The devices can also use quizzes to monitor the memory and cognitive functions of their elderly users, which would be potentially useful for advising treatments. But it’s difficult for SK Telecom’s clients to use the information without clear legal guidelines for handling health data on private networks. Similar reasons may also impede domestic use of health technologies developed by Samsung Electronics, which recently received approval for a smartwatch application that monitors blood pressure. KT, SK Telecom’s telecommunications rival, is focused on business customers, providing artificial intelligence devices such as speakers and service robots to hotels, offices and new apartments. President Moon Jae-in’s administration has said data-driven industries will be critical in boosting a pandemic-hit economy. Officials are preparing regulations for revised data laws that lawmakers passed in January after months of wrangling. They aim to allow businesses greater freedom in collecting and analyzing anonymous personal data without seeking individual consent. If they work as intended, optimists say the laws would allow artificial intelligence to truly take off and pave the way for highly customized financial and health care services after they start in August. But activist Oh Byoung-il said the changes could bring excessive privacy infringements unless robust safeguards are installed. “Companies will always have an endless thirst for data, but you can’t give it to them all,” he said. Doctors’ groups have also resisted government calls for legalizing telemedicine, raising concerns related to data security and a negative impact on smaller hospitals. Industrial benefits will be limited if officials can’t find the right combination of techniques to process personal information so that it can’t be used to identify individuals. Health and government authorities have failed to do this during the pandemic. South Korea’s anti-virus experience provides “lots of lessons and implications” as it steps toward a data-driven economy, Ko said. “With data, it’s bad to take ‘the more, the better’ approach,” he said. “An appropriate control system needs to be baked into the process, to make decisions on data access based on necessity and sensitivity and restrict access to information that isn’t really needed.” In Seoul’s Yangcheon district, officials are using SK Telecom’s tech to monitor some 200 seniors who live alone. Social workers, who have smartphone apps that look like a mini version of the main dashboard, make calls or visits when users don’t use their devices for more than 24 hours. “It’s nice to have something to talk to,” said Lee Chang-geun, an 89-year-old who has lived alone in his small apartment since his wife died three years ago. “But I wish they developed an Aria function for opening doors. What good is a distress signal if I die while emergency workers try to force open my door?”

Follow Eli Manning’s lead. Not just the script for his successor with the Giants, Daniel Jones. That’s also the advice quarterbacks across the NFL are getting during the coronavirus pandemic, courtesy of older brother Peyton Manning. Peyton told NBC Sports’ Peter King he is relaying a story of how Eli led the Giants through the 2011 NFL lockout, when contact between players and coaches was prohibited during the tense Collective Bargaining Agreement negotiations. The Giants finished 9-7 that season but won the NFC East and then beat the Atlanta Falcons, Green Bay Packers, San Francisco 49ers and New England Patriots to finish as Super Bowl 46 champions. Peyton and Eli recently were on a Zoom call for a friend who works in investment banking and someone asked, “How would you handle this situation as a quarterback?” “Eli talked about organizing their own workouts and taking some ownership,” Peyton said. “Eli got practice scripts, like blitz walk-through drawings, diagrams, he got practice jerseys, he organized workouts at a high school. He was kind of the head coach/coordinator and they were doing full routes and doing 7-on-7 and blitzes at practice. He was really thorough.” Submit your Giants questions here to be answered in an upcoming Post mailbag Comparisons between 2011 and 2020 are frequent around the NFL because of the closed facilities and lack of offseason practices. The key differences: In 2011, players could not talk to coaches. In 2020, players and coaches are having virtual meetings and, in some cases, workouts. In 2011, players could meet up for joint self-run practices. In 2020, social distancing limits the size of gatherings. “I’ve done a few Zoom calls,” Peyton said. “I did the Buffalo Bills quarterback room meeting. Did the Los Angeles Rams full team meeting. Did the Bears quarterbacks. That was kinda my message … follow Eli’s lead. Quarterbacks, take ownership. All these Zoom meetings, right now, the coaches are leading them. “My message was to the quarterbacks. ‘Hey, organize your own Zoom meetings without the coaches, just get you and the tight ends, you and the receivers.’ It’s actually an opportunity to even have better communication. Because there’s nothing else to do, right? Hey, every Tuesday, 9 a.m., quarterbacks and the offensive line, Zoom, watching film. Instead of complaining about it, see it as an opportunity to really improve. There’s no reason you shouldn’t have every play from last year studied down to the T.” If there is an NFL season and a Super Bowl, the popular favorites are the Kansas City Chiefs, Baltimore Ravens and San Francisco 49ers. But Peyton, who was 2-2 in the big game, favors whichever team quietly wins May and June. “I think the team that wins it all this year is gonna be the team that’s really getting an edge during this time,” he said. “Kind of like the Giants in 2011.”

Roller coasters are about to get lonelier. Theme parks in Denmark preparing to reopen are figuring out how to implement new regulations put in place to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. One impact of these new rules means that some roller coaster riders may get more space to themselves. The guidelines require theme parks to limit the number of riders on each attraction, The OC Register reports. This reportedly means that theme parks will only allow one family or rider per train. Authorities are concerned that the virus can be spread by riders as they scream during the thrill ride, possibly spreading microscopic droplets to other riders around them. Aside from roller coasters, these new rules will reportedly also apply to high-speed rides, fast-spinning attractions and any other rides that passengers are likely to scream on. These new restrictions may mean that riders get more space to themselves, but they may also experience longer wait times on lines. Denmark isn’t the only country worried about screams spreading the virus. Fox News previously reported that an association of theme park operators in Japan has outlined a set of recommended guidelines for the country’s popular amusements upon reopening and it would seem they’ll be much cleaner — and quieter — than ever before. Among the guidelines proposed by the East Japan and West Japan Amusement Park Associations, operators are being urged to comply with dozens of expected coronavirus prevention measures already being utilized by parks across the globe, such as operating at reduced capacity, increasing the frequency of cleanings, installing handwashing stations and pre-selling tickets to control the flow of guests. Visitors should also be given temperature checks before entering, wear masks at all times and practice social distancing once inside, the guidelines stipulate.

Pearl Jam, Ciara, Dave Matthews and Macklemore, among others, are set to perform at a virtual benefit for “All In WA,” a fund to help citizens of Washington state affected by the pandemic. Amazon boss Jeff Bezos will match up to $20 million in donations, and the concert will be held June 10.

German scientists are working on a crappy way to detect new waves of the coronavirus – by testing human feces for remnants of the virus in the sewage system, according to a report. The Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research is conducting a trial that’s sampling sewage from plants serving some of the biggest urban areas in efforts to detect evidence of the bug, CNN reported. Sewage plants would detect spiking concentrations of the virus, allowing health authorities to take quick action in target testing the area in question. “It would be the first test line,” microbiologist Hauke Harms, one of the leaders of the study told CNN.
“You would start with our measurement and then you would know where to go to look for the reasons. Normally it is a hospital, or I don’t know, a factory where you have an outbreak. And then one would have to test the people,” he said. The ultimate goal is for almost all sewage plants to install such early-warning systems to track the spread of the deadly disease, according to the report. Sewage plants around the eastern city of Leipzig are among those taking part in the study. “If it would be possible to have an idea of the concentration of coronavirus in the wastewater, we can calculate the number of infected people in Leipzig and this would be very interesting in the coronavirus strategies,” Ulrich Meyer, technical director of Leipzig’s waterworks, told CNN. Helmholtz researchers acknowledge that finding a tiny amount of genetic material from the virus in sewage is no small task. “We have a high, high volume of wastewaters and it is a challenge to find the traces of the virus in the wastewaters,” Rene Kallies, a virologist working on the research, told the network. “So we have liters and we have to scale it down to microliters to get a sufficient amount for RNA extraction and that’s the challenge.” The low number of new infections in Germany also poses a challenge because a single infected person could skew test results. “You may have heard about these super spreaders and there are also super excreters, for instance,” Harms said. “People who excrete much more virus than others and of course this gives you a wrong idea about the number of infected people.” German scientists are not the only ones working to try and use sewage as an alarm system. In February, researchers at the Dutch KWR Water Research Institute found the virus in six sewage plants in the country. The institute said it has developed a method to monitor the presence of the virus in sewage, CNN reported. “Whereas the testing of individuals requires individual tests, testing in sewage can give an early indication of the contamination within a whole population,” KWR said on its website. The German researchers acknowledge there are still kinks to work out, although they say they are confident the system will be operational in the latter half of 2020. “I think we can offer something before the next wave. So if the next wave is coming in fall or early winter or so, then we should have something,” Harms said.

Delta Air Lines Inc (DAL.N) and its pilots union said on Sunday they are working to avoid furloughs of roughly 2,300 pilots following a reshuffling process meant to match staffing to summer 2021 flying. Delta said this month that it would have more pilots than needed as it reduces its network and fleet due to a drop in demand from the COVID-19 pandemic, but is working to avoid involuntary furloughs. Following the results on Sunday of a so-called “surplus” bid in which employees were asked to petition available positions at one of Delta’s seven US pilot bases, the airline will be shifting around 7,000 pilots to different locations or aircraft types, while 2,327 have not been assigned to any category, Delta’s Master Executive Council (MEC) of the Air Line Pilots Association (ALPA) said in a statement. Delta confirmed the release of the results of the bid “to better align our staffing with our future flying demand” and said it is “looking at all options to mitigate or minimize furloughs and will continue working with ALPA in the coming weeks to explore those options.” Atlanta-based Delta, with around 91,000 employees, announced on Thursday details of early out options for non-union employees that include cash severance, full healthcare coverage and travel benefits. Major U.S. airlines, which have received billions of dollars in taxpayer aid for payroll, have all warned that they will need to reduce their workforce once a government-imposed ban on job cuts expires on Sept. 30. After air travel demand virtually disappeared in April, US airline executives have pointed to some green shoots, but the industry is not expected to return to pre-pandemic passenger traffic for at least three years. ALPA said it was continuing to meet with Delta on potential early-out or voluntary leave programs, saying it is “optimistic that management will continue to engage with ALPA to protect pilot jobs.”

A cash-strapped airport spa chain snagged $5.6 million in federal coronavirus aid weeks after warning investors that its independent auditor had raised “substantial doubt” about its ability to continue operating amid hefty losses, The Post has learned. New York-based XpresSpa told investors it had obtained the Payroll Protection Program loan in a May 7 regulatory filing — just days after its board cut ties with an auditor critical of its business. XpresSpa didn’t say why it fired CohnReznick, but on April 20 the company revealed the auditor had issued a warning about the state of the company’s financials before the pandemic forced it to shutter its US operations. “The report of our independent registered public accounting firm on our financial statements for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 included an explanatory paragraph indicating that there is substantial doubt about our ability to continue as a going concern,” the company said in the April regulatory filing. “Our auditors’ doubts are based on our recurring losses from operations and working-capital deficiency.” XpresSpa operates 51 stores across 25 airports that offer passengers chair massages and mani-pedis. It also sells head pillows and eye masks, according to its Web site. “XpresSpa was developed to address the stress and idle time spent at the airport, allowing travelers to spend this time productively, by relaxing and focusing on personal care and wellness,” the company said in its annual report. CEO Doug Satzman says XpresSpa cut ties with CohnReznick because it decided to switch to a less expensive accounting firm, not because of any disagreements. He also said the coronavirus pandemic slammed the company just as it was starting to turn around, noting that comparable store sales rose 2.9 percent last year after dropping 3.2 percent in 2018. “There’s a lot of cleanup work to do when you do a turnaround,” Satzman told The Post. “… With the PPP loan opportunity, it gave us a tool to use for our workforce who are furloughed to help keep them loyal to us and ready to come back full-time when the airports get busy.” Yet, before the coronavirus slammed retailers across the nation with coast-to-coast stay-at-home orders, XpresSpa was in the red. Last year, XpresSpa suffered a $20.5 million net loss as its liabilities dwarfed its assets by some $12.2 million. As of Dec. 31, the company had just $2.1 million in cash and cash equivalents and current assets of $3.9 million. Its current liabilities, by contrast, totaled $16.2 million, including accounts payable and accrued expenses, it said. “We expect to incur net losses for the foreseeable future, especially considering the negative impact COVID-19 will have on our liquidity and financial position,” the company said in the filing. XpresSpa is the latest company to receive a taxpayer-backed loan despite troubles that predated the virus, which has slammed retailers with coast-to-coast stay-at-home orders. Some firms got sizable loans after telling investors they had no products to sell or that they were at risk of running out of cash, according to an Associated Press report. The government’s $659 billion effort to help small businesses weather the crisis also has been criticised for helping companies that have access to fundraising through public markets at the expense of Main Street operations. “It’s a gut punch to the tens of thousands of shuttered mom-and-pop small businesses that never received the help they were promised,” blasted Jeremy Funk, spokesman for the nonpartisan corruption watchdog Accountable.US. XpresSpa has snapped up $9.4 million outside financing in recent months, including $7.9 million from four separate stock offerings in March and April, records show. In the most recent offering, on April 6, the firm sold $1 million worth of shares to Alpha Capital Anstalt, a Lichtenstein-based hedge fund that came into regulators’ crosshairs two years ago. Alpha, which didn’t respond to a request for comment, was among nearly two dozen defendants accused in 2018 by the Securities Exchange Commission of participating in a $27 million penny-stock fraud led by disgraced venture capitalist Barry Honig. Alpha allegedly bought shares in a company at a discount and then sold them after Honig helped inflate the stock price. The fund had to pay $908,000 under a judgment issued last year, though it did not admit any wrongdoing. XpresSpa is now trying to turn some of its 46 US locations into COVID-19 testing centers for airport workers, which has helped boost the stock price. The stock jumped nearly 70 percent on May 22, for example, after it announced a contract with JFK International Air Terminal to provide a diagnostic COVID-19 testing facility. Shares of XpresSpa closed at 83 cents on Friday, and the penny stock traded as low as 12 cents in March.

For a moment in April, the Internet tried to cancel Florida. Photos showing crowds flocking to Jacksonville Beach amid the pandemic sent the hashtag #FloridaMorons trending on Twitter. The media spun scenes of ignorant spring breakers endangering themselves and others. Here was Florida’s Republican governor, Ron DeSantis, joining neighboring state Georgia’s “experiment in human sacrifice,” as a writer for The Atlantic put it, by letting locals lift restrictions on their own. Nearly a month later, Jacksonville’s Duval County reports new COVID-19 hospitalizations in the single digits. Rates of hospitalizations, cases and deaths remain steady across Florida. So far, fewer Floridians have died of the novel coronavirus than in New York’s nursing homes alone (2,259 compared with 5,800, at least). As Politico recently concluded, “Florida just doesn’t look nearly as bad as the national news media . . . have been predicting for about two months now.” Florida’s approach — a decentralized health response with targeted lockdowns and quarantines reinforced by voluntary social distancing — appears to have worked. Other populous states adopting this approach, such as Tennessee under Gov. Bill Lee, have seen similar success. The lesson: It is possible to keep a lid on the virus even while gradually reopening. Florida is large and diverse. If Jacksonville and Tallahassee are the Deep South, the state’s I-4 corridor, running from Tampa through Orlando to Daytona Beach, is pure Middle America. South Florida is the polyglot “New Havana,” a bubbling melting pot between the Gulf and Gold Coasts. Unsurprisingly, DeSantis gave counties leeway in responding to COVID-19. Miami-Dade County shuttered all its nonessential businesses before New York City did, and it was local leaders who first closed many Florida beaches and cracked down against large gatherings. When Florida did issue a stay-at-home order (two days after New York), it targeted the state’s 4 million seniors and residents with underlying medical conditions. Statewide rules issued on April 1 broadly limited “nonessential” activities and business, but by this point, Floridians had already imposed their own restrictions. Meantime, the state government in Tallahassee was ramping up testing and issuing personal protective equipment, ultimately totaling more than 7 million masks and 1 million gloves. By late April, the state was conducting some 12,000 daily COVID-19 tests, with capacity for more, and drive-through facilities alone had conducted more than 100,000 tests by early May. (New York, by contrast, was doing 20,000 tests daily in mid-April, at least 100,000 below what it needed, considering the size of its outbreak.) Florida’s response to COVID-19 focused on nursing homes. More than a third of the nation’s COVID-19 deaths have occurred among the residents and staff of long-term-care facilities — a share that jumps as high as 80 percent in Minnesota and West Virginia. Florida counts more than 350,000 people living or working in such facilities, and has one of the highest shares of residents over the age of 65. At the start of the outbreak, Florida deployed rapid-response teams to these facilities to test, treat and, if necessary, isolate or quarantine residents testing positive for the virus. The state issued PPE to these facilities and mandated its use. While New York was moving sick patients into nursing homes, Florida was moving them out. On March 15, DeSantis prohibited the transfer of COVID-19-positive patients into long-term-care facilities and established COVID-only homes. By contrast, Gov. Cuomo — celebrated in the media, while DeSantis was pilloried — required that infected patients be admitted into nursing homes, where Cuomo himself had said the virus could spread “like fire through grass.” Florida’s beaches and businesses are slowly opening, and life is returning to a semblance of normalcy. Retailers and restaurants, hair and nail salons, gyms and hotels are opening with reduced occupancy; soon, “phase two” will allow gatherings of up to 50 people and further loosen occupancy limits. Partly-opened Tampa was among the first US cities to let restaurants extend dining space onto closed streets and open sidewalks, helping them stay in business while preserving social distancing. Governors should be judged by their states’ records going into and coming out of this crisis. It’s a standard that elevates governors like Ron DeSantis and Bill Lee — and likely condemns Andrew Cuomo. Michael Hendrix is a contributor to City Journal, from which this column was adapted.

The state has suspended the liquor licenses of 18 establishments since late March because of social-distancing violations — including one in Queens that allegedly claims local racists are behind the move. The Hangar 11 Bar & Grill in Kew Gardens landed in hot water after a flood of 311 calls complaining of such things as crowds milling around inside and out. The State Liquor Authority says on its Web site that the Metropolitan Avenue bar had patrons buy a bag of chips just so the establishment could say it was selling them “food’’ to go along with their booze as required by law — and enough of a crowd was created that a flood of local residents called authorities to complain. But a tweet apparently posted by the bar Friday, the day its license was temporarily suspended, said, “Due to the efforts of a tiny percentage of racist neighbors in our beautiful Kew Gardens neighborhood, we will be shut down for a few days.’’ The alleged tweet included the hash tags #staysafe, #icantbreathe and #racism sucks. It has since been taken down, but not before someone took a screenshot and sent it to The Post. The bar tweeted the next day, “NYC is a melting pot. We have always welcomed everyone. Most of our 23,000 community members too. Just a handful of hateful and bored members flooding 311 with calls yet we’ve had zero fights.’’ The neighborhood around the bar is predominantly white, while the business attracts customers of all races. There were 80 complaints lodged against the bar over social-distancing rules between March 20 and May 9, the liquor authority said. It is still closed and will face a hearing before the SLA over its license. “The people who filed legitimate complaints received justice,” wrote a member of a Kew Gardens Facebook page. Another resident was incensed over the bar’s tweets. “The fact that they played the race card is so outrageous,’’ the person wrote on the closed page. “All I can say, this establishment seems to not understand the community they serve.’’ The bar did not respond to a request for comment from The Post. Hangar was one of seven New York City establishments to have its liquor license temporarily suspended because of social-distancing issues amid the coronavirus pandemic. Another Hangar, on Steinway Street in Astoria, Queens, also had its license yanked. Other bars whose licenses were temporarily suspended included the Atlantic Boat Club in Brooklyn, Sam Ceccilio in Queens and St. Bee’s bar in The Bronx.

The number of coronavirus cases in New York City topped 200,000 Sunday, authorities said. The figure hit 200,547, or 654 more cases than the day before, according to the city Health Department. Meanwhile, a total of 21,569 people in the city have died from the contagion, with 57 additional fatalities being reported overnight, according to city Health Department. Still, the numbers reflect a slowing trend, officials say.

Neocon: The Riots’ Other Cause Commentary’s Noah Rothman says it’s a mistake to think that the “social disorder the nation witnessed over this weekend” had a single cause. Yes, many are “moved to this expression of rage by the perception that they are the target of outrageous persecution,” not least African-Americans. “But there is a factor that may be fueling this nightmarish violence that has been thus far overlooked: the lockdowns. . . . This blunt-force ­approach to a public-health crisis has imposed what would otherwise be intolerable conditions upon millions of Americans, many of whom are likely to be overrepresented among those engaging in this unrest”: More than half of blacks, nearly half of Hispanics and more than a third of young adults ages 18 to 29 report “pandemic-related financial hardships.” They’re jobless and bored, and “all we’ve allowed them to do since the weather has warmed is to languish in the heat, consume alcohol and commiserate.” Is it any wonder they’d rise up? Iconoclast: Sigh — Our Predictable Catastrophe “I cannot be the only observer for whom the killing of George Floyd in Minneapolis has elicited feelings of despair,” confides The Week’s Matthew Walther. “Something like this was going to happen. It was going to happen, because it is, simply put, the sort of thing that happens in this country: a brute fact, an unremarkable feature” of our deeply polarized nation. The reaction to the reaction was equally predictable: “protests, rioting, looting; a lunatic ­cycle of online recrimination and tone policing.” Add the “prolonged atomizing of the lockdown” to these elements, and we had our “gunpowder and match.” Foreign desk: Escaping the Chinese Dragon Britain’s approach to China will “clearly be different” after the novel-coronavirus crisis, predicts The Spectator USA’s James Forsyth. Because of the ­virus, Prime Minister Boris Johnson and his Cabinet now aim to put an end to the United Kingdom’s reliance on the Beijing regime for “vital goods — particularly personal protective equipment.” Hence, Johnson’s new policy, which “will, at first, take three forms”: ensuring that “Britain is not reliant on China for any essential imports, medical or otherwise”; toughening “rules on foreign takeovers” to prohibit the use of “Chinese cash to plug gaps”; and finally, scrapping the Communist Party-linked telecom giant ­Huawei’s role in the development of Britain’s 56 infrastructure. Whatever happens, Britain has realized that it is “becoming overly dependent on China” — but can it get out “from under the dragon before it is too late?” Pandemic journal: So Much for ‘Listen to Science’ For months, observes The Orange County Register’s Steve Greenhut, California Gov. Gavin Newsom claimed he was basing his coronavirus ­response on “science,” meaning “lockdowns must continue” — until last week, when he suddenly “announced a much broader reopening.” Yet the science hadn’t changed, merely “the standard by which the state evaluates the science.” Why? Newsom knows he will never get “the $1 trillion bailout” he has requested from the federal government. He is facing a huge deficit. Without reopening, then, he and other Democrats “will have to give up their big-spending dreams” and cut state pensions even while most Californians are “largely ignoring the restriction.” That’s “excellent news,” as it shows “the governor is finally looking at costs and benefits” — but it has nothing to do with “science.” From the right: The Perniciously Invisible Enemy “We move pretty quick, and are pretty cooperative, when we can see a threat,” notes National Review’s Jim Geraghty — emphasis on see. Thus, if the coronavirus had “manifested as a visible green gas,” we would see “little or no dispute about wearing masks” — but we can’t see the virus, ­“except through a microscope,” leading to skepticism. Similarly, when we heard of the virus, we probably expected images of “apocalyptic fiction,” but “coronavirus deaths are almost entirely occurring far away from the cameras,” and many have chalked up our “eerie” empty cities to “the lockdown” rather than to the virus. That, Geraghty sighs, is why we’ve seen so much skepticism of the virus’ danger: We’re fighting this threat “behind closed doors — in hospitals, in medical-research facilities, with only brief, fleeting glimpses.”  — Compiled by Karl Salzmann & Sohrab Ahmari

A nurse who treated the state’s coronavirus “patient zero” says in a new lawsuit that she and her family ended up battling the contagion — and debilitating fallout — because of gross negligence at her hospital. The healthcare worker and others at NewYork-Presbyterian Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville “were offered up as sacrificial lambs to be slaughtered by the COVID-19 virus,’’ her lawyers told The Post. The nurse, who is anonymous in the Manhattan Supreme Court suit filed Saturday, helped care for onetime ailing lawyer Lawrence Garbuz at the Westchester County hospital after he was admitted Feb. 27, the court papers say. Garbuz, 50 — who Gov. Cuomo dubbed the state’s coronavirus “patient zero’’ — was admitted “with an initial intake diagnosis of pneumonia and exhibiting apparent signs of COVID-19 infection’’ — yet it would take him up to five days to be tested, the suit says. A different nurse who tended to Garbuz in the intensive-care unit told a doctor Feb. 29, “I think this patient is COVID’’ — but her concerns were ignored as “alarmist” and “paranoid,” the court papers allege. A day later, the plaintiff nurse also “voiced grave concerns” to her supervisor that Garbuz was “exhibiting obvious signs of COVID-19,” the papers say. Yet she and other staff were provided surgical masks instead of the N-95 masks and face shields that the hospital was already requiring for its workers who were coming into contact with coronavirus patients, the document says. Garbuz of New Rochelle tested positive for the deadly contagion by March 2, the suit says. But the plaintiff nurse — who lives in Hartsdale and still works at the facility — already had contracted the virus and gave it to her husband and son, the court papers say. The nurse and her husband are in their early 50s, while the boy is a teen, her lawyers said. The nurse and her family “sustained serious, irreversible injuries as a result of her exposure to COVID-19,” including “decrease or loss of lung function,” mental anguish and other physical and mental injuries, the court documents claim. The hospital failed to follow CDC and Occupational Safety and Health Administration guidelines “for the treatment of suspected COVID-19 positive patients,” the papers allege. New York Presbyterian “completely disregarded the signs that Westchester Patient Zero was COVID-19 positive, as well as those warnings provided by hospital staff, including the concerns voiced by a critical care nurse on February 29, 2020 and by plaintiff NURSE ANONYMOUS on March 1, 2020,” the filings charge. The “intentional and/or wonton disregard for the safety of NURSE ANONYMOUS, and others, was so extreme and outrageous in character as to go beyond all bounds of decency,” the suit adds. The nurse’s lawyers, Michael Barrows and Jason Goldfarb, told The Post, “Knowingly allowing these dedicated health workers to treat a suspected COVID-19 positive patient without proper PPE equipment shocks the conscience.” Garbuz was the first known coronavirus case in New Rochelle, the state’s initial epicenter of the pandemic. He was released from the hospital in late March and has said he had no idea he had the contagion when he started suffering symptoms in late February. NewYork-Presbyterian declined comment to The Post. Additional reporting by Kate Sheehy

Connecticut met Gov. Ned Lamont’s ambitious deadline for launching a coronavirus contact tracing program but municipal health directors said it could be weeks before it is actually effective, according to a report. That’s because of delays associated with software, training and recruitment of volunteer workers, according to the Hartford Courant. The paper reported interviewing health directors responsible for implementing the contract tracing program who said they are unable to properly operate the new software program, either because of lack of training or possible bugs in the operating system. Some said they hadn’t been trained, according to the paper. Others said the training was inadequate. One director told the newspaper he was given a one-hour webinar presentation. Most said they had not been provided with software manuals. All of the directors said they have not been given specific offers of assistance from hundreds of volunteers the department said it has recruited or is in the process of recruiting. The Lamont administration said it was working closely with the health directors to build “the first-of-its-kind statewide contact tracing program” and now hopes to be fully staffed by late June, the Courant reported. The directors said implementing a contact tracing program as part of Lamont’s phase one reopening may have been overly optimistic, the paper reported. “I don’t want any of my comments to suggest that I am throwing the state health department under the bus,” Farmington Valley Health District Director Jennifer Kertanis said. “The bigger picture here is you can’t expect systems to just automatically click a switch and be prepared to deal with situations of the magnitude of which we are dealing with when you have disinvested in your public health system for eons.”

The state’s daily coronavirus death toll hit its lowest mark in more than two months over the weekend. There were 56 deaths from the contagion reported Saturday, “which is, in this absurd reality we live in, actually very, very good news,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday at his daily press briefing. “This reduction in the number is tremendous progress from where we were,” Cuomo said. “We have been to hell and back, but we are on the other side, which is a lesson for all of us.” Saturday’s reported death toll was the lowest number since late March, when the state was in the grip of the pandemic and the daily fatality rate hovered around 800. The figure was down from the previous low Friday of 67. Asked by a reporter at the briefing when state workers might be allowed to return to their offices as the contagion appears to be on the wane, Cuomo’s budget director, Robert Mujica, said it would not be up to individuals to decide when they can go back. He said the state will decide who can go back when based on whatever phase-in plan a region is in and “when offices are safe,” when “social-distancing protocols” are in place.

Roger Brown can’t wait to work in the office again. The 23-year-old cybersecurity analyst, who lives in Brooklyn, says it’s “detrimental for me to eat, sleep and work in an apartment the size of my mother’s walk-in closet. I’ve been trapped in here for months.” Brown, who asked that his real name be kept confidential, says he’s not the only Gen Z worker who feels this way. “Did you know that loneliness can lead to depression?” he says. That’s something that many employers and experts are aware of. But while white-collar and gray-collar workers are important, they are not “essential” under the current definition. In other words, they can perform their duties without physically being in the office. Workers like Brown may be stuck in place for a while longer. At many companies and organizations, there’s no clear plan or timeline for when personnel can return or what the workplace will look like when they do. “We’re going to look at what the government, the data, the World Health Organization, and the trends for positive tests and deaths indicate before we decide,” says Dr. Lydia Campbell, chief medical officer at IBM. She adds that “returning to work won’t be a single event.” In fact, Campbell doesn’t anticipate that everyone will be back before the end of the year. Companies like Facebook, Google and Salesforce — all of which have a large presence in the city — have told staff that even when their offices reopen, working from home will remain an option until 2021. Square and Twitter recently announced that most of their employees can steer clear of the office “forever.” While that may make more affluent or suburban workers with larger abodes and longer commutes happy, it doesn’t do much for the younger set that was drawn to office coffee bars, gourmet meals, in-house training, rooftop yoga classes, city life and elbow-rubbing opportunities with like-minded individuals. “Shark Tank” judge and real-estate entrepreneur Barbara Corcoran doesn’t offer these folks much sympathy; in fact, she predicts that CEOs and CFOs will require more employees to permanently work from home for one reason: It will save their companies money. “Why pay the real-estate overhead?” she says. Corcoran seems sure that companies will want to reduce the amount of expensive square footage they pay for and renegotiate their leases. “It’s not that employees won’t come into the office at all, [it’s that] they will come in when they want,” she says. “And yes, they will miss each other, but not enough to deal with rush hour.” What working from home means to you personally creates a divide. “An ability to work from home, comfortably, creates a new type of inequity,” says Rocco Giannetti, principal and co-managing director of design, architecture and planning firm Gensler’s New York location. Working from home when home is a tiny apartment and your desk is a kitchen table, is very different than enjoying a sunny home office with a large external monitor, keyboard and high-speed Internet. For those who do go back, the workplace will be different, too. Salesforce CEO Marc Benioff imagines that employees will have their temperatures taken as soon as they walk in the door. Web site maker Squarespace anticipates that its staff will have to ride the elevators one at a time in its West Village headquarters. Vertical circulation (getting up the elevator then down) “presents a challenge, and even more so because with social distancing, you can’t have crowds in the lobby waiting in line,” says Michael Chappell, principal and strategy director at Gensler. Workers will probably be required to arrive at very specific times and then be admitted into elevators via a Disney-like virtual line system. On its recently launched Web site, commercial real-estate firm Cushman & Wakefield indicates that workplaces will include “a visually displayed unique foot traffic routing for each office to ensure employees maintain the recommended 6 feet apart for social distancing.” There will be signs on the floor and people will walk in only one direction. Colleagues might share workspaces almost regardless of status, working in shifts to prevent overcrowding. Yet, while there’s been some talk about bringing back cubicles, Chappell doesn’t think it will happen, nor Plexiglass separators between desks. “They might make workers feel safer psychologically, but from a physical perspective, there’s not enough science to prove that’s the case,” he says. Since workers will come to the office for three reasons — convening, collaboration and connection — neither cubicles nor Plexiglass separations serve those needs, say experts. These things can happen in large conference rooms where workers are 6 feet apart, or in open settings with physical distancing. Workers can talk to and see each other from their desks using phone lines and headsets. What about meals and snacks? Chappell suspects that they will be either delivered to you or placed in a central location where you can pick them up. Bathrooms, incidentally, are likely to be single-stall affairs. Staffers will need to be tracked, as well. Software-makers like PwC, Salesforce and ServiceNow, among others, have unveiled contact-tracing applications that will identify employees who may have come in contact with individuals affected by illness, so that they can be sent home to self-quarantine. Chappell notes that most companies are still figuring out what their workplaces will look like, and in New York City’s large, multi-tenant office buildings, landlords will also have a say. One possible new perk: “coffee on demand” — at many companies, you won’t even have to get up to enjoy your favorite beverage.

Protesters flooding streets across America are putting themselves at risk of catching the coronavirus — and likely exacerbating its ongoing spread, officials have warned. “If you were out protesting last night, you probably need to go get a COVID test this week,” Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms warned those taking to the streets in her city. Bottoms was one of many to note the dangers of thousands suddenly ignoring any form of lockdown or social distancing to protest George Floyd’s caught-on-camera death in police custody. She stressed that “there is still a pandemic in America that’s killing black and brown people at higher numbers.” Health experts fear that silent carriers of the virus who have no symptoms could unwittingly infect others at protests where people are packed cheek to jowl, many without masks. Even those with masks are not guaranteed protection, with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) saying cloth masks are more for stopping infected people spreading the virus than protecting the wearer. “Whether they’re fired up or not, that doesn’t prevent them from getting the virus,” warned Bradley Pollock, chairman of the Department of Public Health Sciences at the University of California, Davis. The protests are almost certainly going to fuel infections and damage efforts to contain the pandemic through lockdowns and tightly organized social distancing, Minnesota’s health commissioner warned. “We have two crises that are sandwiched on top of one other,” said Jacob Frey, the mayor of Minneapolis where Floyd died during the Memorial Day arrest. The ongoing protests come as the US has seen more than 1.7 million confirmed coronavirus cases with 103,781 deaths, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. With Post wires

AIR FORCE ONE — President Donald Trump said Saturday that he will postpone until the fall a meeting of Group of 7 nations he had planned to hold next month at the White House despite the ongoing coronavirus pandemic. And he said he plans to invite Russia, Australia, South Korea and India as he again advocated for the group’s expansion. Trump told reporters on Air Force One as he returned to Washington from Florida that he feels the current makeup of the group is “very outdated” and doesn’t properly represent “what’s going on in the world.” He said he had not yet set a new date for the meeting, but thought the gathering could take place in September, around the time of the annual meeting of the United Nations in New York, or perhaps after the U.S. election in November. Alyssa Farah, White House director of strategic communications, said that Trump wanted to bring in some of the country’s traditional allies and those impacted by the coronavirus to discuss the future of China. The surprise announcement came after German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s office said Saturday that she would not attend the meeting unless the course of the coronavirus spread had changed by then. The leaders of the world’s major economies were slated to meet in June in the U.S. at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland, but the coronavirus outbreak hobbled those plans. Trump announced in March he was canceling the summit because of the pandemic and that the leaders would confer by video conference instead. But Trump then switched course, saying a week ago that he was again planning to host an in-person meeting. “Now that our Country is ‘Transitioning back to Greatness’, I am considering rescheduling the G-7, on the same or similar date, in Washington, D.C., at the legendary Camp David,” Trump tweeted. “The other members are also beginning their COMEBACK. It would be a great sign to all – normalization!” The G7 members are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. The group’s presidency rotates annually among member countries. Trump has repeatedly advocated for expanding the group to include Russia, prompting opposition from some members, including Canada’s Justin Trudeau, who told reporters he had privately aired his objection to Russian readmittance. “Russia has yet to change the behavior that led to its expulsion in 2014, and therefore should not be allowed back into the G7,” he said at a news conference. The House also passed a bipartisan resolution in December 2019 that supports Russia’s previous expulsion from the annual gathering. Russia had been invited to attend the gathering of the world’s most advanced economies since 1997 but was suspended in 2014 following its invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea.

Health officials will flood 10 coronavirus hot spots with more testing and supplies ahead of New York City’s planned June 8 reopening. Gov. Cuomo said Saturday that some of the 10 neighborhoods in Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx had a 50 percent or higher infection rate for the deadly bug. Overall, the number of New Yorkers who died of COVID-19 Friday stood at 67, the same as the previous day. The horrific statewide body count rose to 23,848. The overall number of hospitalization was down, but there was a small increase in new patients being admitted with COVID-19, up nine to 178. The hardest hit area in NYC has been the 10457 ZIP code of Mount Hope and Claremont in the Bronx with a 51 percent infection rate. The citywide infection rate is 20 percent. “We’re targeting those ZIP codes,” Cuomo said. “We want to get down that infection rate. Get down the new cases in those hot spots.” In addition to additional testing sites, he said there would be “more PPE, more hand sanitizer,  more education, more communication about how important these things are.” Cuomo said there was also more to do on the subways before the city’s reopening. “They’re disinfecting trains like never before,” he said. “They have another week of work to do and they will be ready.” New York City is poised to enter Phase 1 of its opening next week allowing about 400,000 workers in the construction, wholesale, manufacturing and curbside retail industries to go back to work. Cuomo at his daily briefing, held at a Bronx community center, praised frontline workers and signed into law legislation passed earlier in the week that provides death benefits to their relatives. The benefits will go to the families of publicly-employed responders including health-care workers, cops and firefighters and be paid out of state and local pension funds. “It is the least we can do to say thank you, and we honor you and we remember you,” the governor said.
Cuomo said he was troubled by those protesting George Floyd’s death Friday who were not taking proper precautions against the virus and called for them to “demonstrate with a mask on. “You don’t have a right to infect other people,” he said. “You don’t have a right to act in a way that’s going to jeopardize public health.” Mayor de Blasio on Saturday said the chaotic protests over Floyd’s death at the hands of a white Minneapolis cop were a culmination of recent events that hit the black community particularly hard — including the coronavirus. “The coronavirus crisis has created a depth of pain that still has not been accounted for,” he said.  “So many New Yorkers have lost someone, but that is particularly true in communities of color, particularly true in the African American community. That loss is being felt so deeply, because everyone knows it’s not based on equality … communities of color lost so much more.” De Blasio said he was also worried that the coronavirus could spread as protestors gathered. “The last thing we would want to see is members of our community harmed because the virus spread in one of these settings,” he said. In hard hit Italy Saturday, the country’s foreign minister warned other countries not to blacklist Italians from travel. Greece has barred Italians, as well as those from other countries, from visiting this summer. “If anyone thinks they can treat us like a leper colony, then they should know that we will not stand for it,” Luigi Di Maio wrote on Facebook. Meanwhile, Pope Francis recited a special prayer for the end of the coronavirus pandemic along with a group that included a doctor, nurse, hospital chaplain,  pharmacist and recovered COVID-19 patient. The gathering of more than 100 guests was the pope’s largest since Italy’s lockdown ended. The pontiff did not wear a mask, although many in the crowd did. In India, where cases continued to rise in major cities, an ongoing lockdown in designated coronavirus-containment zones was extended until June 30. But economic activity was allowed to resume in areas outside those zones. Additional reporting by Sara Dorn With Post wires

President Trump had to stop himself from committing the worst etiquette sin of the coronavirus age: going in for a handshake. The president gestured theatrically when his official military greeter approached him with an outstretched palm Saturday as Trump stepped off Marine One onto the tarmac of Andrews Air Force Base. “No,” he appeared to say — then patted U.S. Air Force Col. Donald Schmidt on the back. The two laughed and chatted as they walked side by side — and not quite 6 feet apart — to a waiting Air Force One. Trump was on his way to Cape Canaveral, Florida, for a rescheduled NASA launch that sent American astronauts into space from U.S. soil for the first time in a decade.

Americans have spoken with their clickers — and they’re sick of Chris and Andrew Cuomo show. Chris Cuomo yuks it up with his governor bro during an almost daily “check-in” on his CNN show since the coronavirus started ravaging New York — and America wants it to stop. At first, the shtick was successful. Ratings hit an all-time high on March 30, with 862,000 daily viewers in the 25-54 age demographic. But since then, according to the Daily Mail, the ratings for Cuomo Prime Time have tanked, plummeting by 50 percent since Chris recovered from COVID. While all the cable news shows have seen ratings drop due to COVID exhaustion, Cuomo has particularly grated with his “frequently silly and un-substantive interviews” with his older brother — in which they have fought over who their mother loved more; Andrew’s “double barrel shotgun” nose, and Andrew’s “single status.” The segments have been panned as ratings stunts done for laughs while thousands of New Yorkers died of the coronavirus. The Cuomos were slammed again last week by Queens lawmaker Eric Ulrich, who is demanding the City Council investigate Gov. Cuomo’s handling of the COVID-19 crisis in nursing homes, where over 5,800 elderly have perished. “Thus far, the Governor has avoided answering tough questions about his decision. His recent appearance on CNN’s Cuomo Prime Time was equally disgraceful,” Ulrich fumed. “Journalism that truly aims to restore trust in media would hold Andrew Cuomo to account for these missteps,” David A. Graham wrote in the Atlantic this week. “The problem comes when the efforts to juice ratings start to get in the way of accurate journalism that holds officials accountable.” “The View” host Meghan McCain also blasted the bros on Twitter for the nursing home crisis, retweeting journalist Nicholas Fondacaro who posted a clip of the Cuomos and said: “Instead of asking his brother, @NYGovCuomo why he decided to pack COVID patients into nursing homes, killing untold amounts of people, @ChrisCuomo pulled out oversized, prop cotton swabs to mock how big his brother’s nose was. This is the state of ‘journalism’ on @CNN.” Viewers have also been upset with hair-trigger tempered Chris Cuomo’s hypocritical behavior during the pandemic. At the end of April, CNN aired a posed video of Cuomo “re-emerging” from his quarantine in the basement of his Hamptons mansion, despite Cuomo having been out and about in East Hampton a week earlier and getting into a fight with a “jackass loser fat-tire biker” who had asked why an infected unmasked Cuomo was breaking quarantine.

Luis Severino went a combined 33-14 in 2017-18, which made him the Yankees’ ace even if Joe Girardi and Aaron Boone shied away from hanging that tag on him. A shoulder problem in spring training last year and a lat issue during the rehab process limited the talented right-hander to three games, a dozen regular-season innings and two postseason starts. With the offseason addition of Gerrit Cole, there was no question who the Yankees’ ace was when spring training opened in February. Teams don’t bestow nine-year deals for $324 million on anyone other than the best in the business, which Cole is. The way Severino, 26, looked at the Cole addition was that he had a fellow right-hander to learn from. But following the Feb. 25 announcement that Severino required Tommy John surgery on the right elbow and camps being shuttered on March 12 due to the coronavirus, the classroom was closed. “For me, even though it wasn’t for a long time, we were together for a couple of days in spring training and I already started learning from him. He’s a great pitcher. He’s got a lot of stuff in his mind that I can learn from,’’ Severino told The Post in an email. “I’ll be excited when I come back. I’ll be excited to be in New York next to all the guys on our staff that have been successful for a lot of years. I know it’s going to be a lot of fun when I come back.’’ Even if there is a 2020 season, Severino won’t be ready to pitch at least until next June and that might be too early. When Severino, who signed a four-year deal for $40 million before the start of the 2019 season, returns in 2021, he might not see some familiar rotation faces. James Paxton, Masahiro Tanaka and J.A. Happ will be free agents this coming winter and jump into an arena that likely will be financially impacted by a shortened 2020 season. Asked how difficult it has been knowing he won’t be ready until next year, Severino put his situation into perspective. “Of course it’s frustrating, but this year has been a frustrating year for everybody. So right now I’m just focused on trying to be healthy for next year,’’ Severino wrote. “With everything that’s been going on there hasn’t been any baseball. But right now there are more things to worry about than playing baseball, you know, like the health of everyone and staying safe. I’m just focused on the day-to-day.’’ And that means working out at Steinbrenner Field. Submit your Yankees questions here to be answered in an upcoming Post mailbag “I’ve been down in Tampa since the day after I had my surgery. I do arm bike, dumbbell exercises, and I just follow the routine that [trainers] Timmy [Lentych] and Alfonso [Malaguti] plan out for me. I spend an hour and half with them in the trainer’s room before I move into the gym, every day, five days a week,” Severino explained. “Things have been progressing well. I’ve been making steady progress — lifting, doing exercises. Since three months ago — I think when I first had my surgery — I feel way better. I’m doing everything I need to do right now so that I can start throwing this summer.’’ The return from Tommy John surgery is long and boring compared to the excitement of belonging to a major league rotation, and the only way to stay focused is to look at a very large picture. “Of course it’s disappointing, but I want to look long-term. I want to be healthy for a long time. So I want to use this year — and last year — to get better, listen to my body,’’ Severino said. “Of course I was mad at that time [of the injuries] but right now I just want to worry about getting healthy again and having a long career.’’ As for the safety of his family, Severino wrote that the coronavirus hasn’t touched members. “Thank God, nobody. Everyone is healthy,’’ Severino wrote. “Actually, where my mom lives [Las Canitas Sabana De La Mar in the Dominican Republic] there are no cases yet.’’

As Europe started undoing its lockdown, an astounding mile-long line for food formed in Geneva, Switzerland, last Saturday. Comprised of over 3,000 people living in one of the world’s richest cities, the line to collect $25 worth of food at an ice hockey stadium started forming at 2 a.m. last Saturday, according to the New York Times. The majority of the people worked in hotels or as cleaners in homes and the city’s hotel industry which has been shuttered since the pandemic started. Most of them are undocumented immigrants and thus were unable to collect government benefits. “If you wanted to pictogram Geneva, what would you put?” said Laura Cotton, a Swiss-British hospital decorator who volunteers at the stadium, to the Times. “Money, money, money. And, OK — cheese and chocolate. But COVID-19 has showed the flip-side.”

The growing expectation is that the Players Association is not going to deliver a financial response to MLB’s initial proposal in time to reach an accord before Monday’s soft June 1 deadline to restart the game by Independence Day weekend. So let’s start a game of seven questions on that subject: 1. Does the deadline matter? Not really. The general feeling has been that the sides have until next weekend, maybe a day or two more, to reach an agreement that would allow teams to gather by the weekend of June 12-14 and have three weeks of spring training 2.0 and start the season July 3. 2. So then next weekend is the deadline? Kinda. Sorta. And no. The best outcome for the game is to renew the national pastime on Independence Day weekend. But there is no rule that it must start then. For example, it could start Aug. 1 with the regular season extended through October and a postseason, perhaps at neutral sites, played in November. But MLB has cautioned that cooler weather could bring a stronger wave of the coronavirus, jeopardizing the postseason, when owners make their largest outlay from national TV. Also, there are concerns about national TV partners having schedule openings in November that already are set aside for October. 3. So why wouldn’t it get done this week? Maybe it will. A fruitful 24-48 hours would change everything. But the sides are fighting about money, and the relationship is bathed in distrust, especially from the players toward the owners. Owners want the players, who already know they will lose their salaries for games not played in 2020, to take another financial haircut from their prorated salaries, which would total around $800 million. The owners say they need this reduction because of lack of revenues from not having paying spectators. 4. So it’s the money, stupid? Yes. Well, mainly. The folks I talk to on both sides still feel for the good of the game a deal will get done. But no one puts it at 100 percent. In fact, many put it at quite less than that. Beyond the money, the biggest reason is divisions on both sides. There are owners who would just as soon not play already, and that number will grow if, in their calculation, they have to lose even more to stage games. There are players and agents who believe the March 26 agreement did — as MLB states — necessitate a new negotiation over salaries if games were played without paying customers, versus the union’s stated position that the March 26 deal said players will be paid their prorated salaries for games played, period. Thus, this is not just a fight against each other. Infighting on both sides is not new. But the levels are high and the environment unique, producing quite a lot of internal tension on both sides. The extra soap opera layer is what is creating doubt as much as anything. 5. So is there a solution? There’s always a solution. Understand that a lot goes on below the surface that are not formal bargaining sessions. For example, sub-committees for both sides are in regular contact discussing health/safety protocols and rules — like the DH, expanded playoffs, etc. And, despite the rhetoric, I have yet to hear anyone privately say issues from those arenas will scuttle a deal. Perhaps momentum will come out of especially agreements on how to return the game safely, since it bonds the owners and players versus the virus. Also, there could be moderating voices. What you tend to hear publicly are the firebrands. But, for example, the Players Association has been in steady dialogue with its members and has forever stated that the players run the union, not the union staff. Thus, the percentage of players who are willing to give on full prorated salaries will be vital. Is it 5 percent or 55 percent, for example? Conversely, no person would take a greater historic hit than commissioner Rob Manfred if there is no major league baseball this year, particularly if every other sports league gets going within the pandemic. Perhaps union executive director Tony Clark’s job is more immediately in peril depending on the resolution — another external pressure point, by the way — but Manfred’s reputation could be sealed in the next week or two. That should be a pressure point toward a deal because commissioners are always thinking about legacy. 6. So how does a deal get done? The sense received by both sides is to find a way not to be trapped by just 2020 pay. Manfred is going to need to convince hawkish owners to budge more because whatever financial hardship is endured this year will be made so much worse if the sport plays no meaningful games for 18 months. Think, save $1 today to lose $5 tomorrow. The players should, yes, try to make as much as possible this year, but the next couple of markets will look bleak, especially for arbitration-eligible players and free agents, no matter what. Thus, any safeguards to the system that can be applied for 2021 and 2022 to help players with compensation — such as a higher minimum wage, no luxury-tax penalties, etc. — should be extracted. Not playing this year, if governmental and medical officials provide their blessings, would clobber the reputations of the institution and individuals, plus damage earning power and perhaps franchise value. Imagine not rising to the common good amid a pandemic and expecting your fan base to just be waiting for you anyway when spring training opens in February 2021. It leads to the last question: 7. Will those strong external pressures motivate a deal? Probably. But there are real bad feelings, historic hate and other hurdles making it less than a sure thing.

After one sailor tested positive for the coronavirus, about 100 members of a fighter squadron aboard the USS Gerald Ford were taken off the ship as a “precautionary measure,” US Navy officials said Friday. The unidentified sailor is a member of the Strike Fighter Squadron (VFA) 213, which flies F/A-18F Super Hornet aircrafts and is based out of Naval Air Station Oceana, Virginia, Stars and Stripes reported. He was never aboard the Ford but he did have contact with other squadron members who had been on the ship Tuesday. Most of the sailors will be able to return to work Saturday, but those who had been in close contact with the sailor will be quarantining for 14 days. “At this time, the risk to other USS Gerald R. Ford sailors and embarked personnel is believed to be very low,” Cmdr. Jennifer Cragg, a spokeswoman with Naval Air Force Atlantic, said. “All sailors who may have come into contact with the [coronavirus] positive sailor were removed from the ship, placed in a precautionary quarantine, and will be tested for [the coronavirus] prior to returning to the ship.” Based out of Norfolk, Virginia, the USS Ford is conducting carrier qualifications for pilots in the Atlantic Ocean. The Navy has the highest number of coronavirus cases in the military at 2,396, as of Friday, according to the Pentagon.

President Trump is heading back to the campaign trail after a three-month coronavirus hiatus. The president’s re-election effort is hosting two in-person fundraisers — one in Texas and one at his New Jersey golf resort — in early June, The Hill reported Saturday. Only 25 supporters will be allowed to attend — and each of them will have to pass a coronavirus test on the day of the event, administered by the White House medical unit and paid for by Trump’s fundraising committee. The group should have plenty of cash to cover the bill. Tickets for the outdoor gathering at the Trump National Golf Club on June 13 in Bedminster, New Jersey, will go for $250,000 a pop. Couples wanting in on the Dallas, Texas, event on June 11 will have to pony up $580,600. Trump has been champing at the bit to reopen the economy after widespread coronavirus shutdowns — but his campaign events will abide by local rules. Texas has relaxed most restrictions statewide. But hard-hit New Jersey, which has been slower to reopen, only allows outdoor crowds of 25 people or fewer. He was forced to cancel a March 12 fundraiser when the coronavirus crisis hit critical mass.

The coronavirus has killed over 365,000 people worldwide in just five months — but that’s nothing compared to what could be coming if humans don’t clean up their act when it comes to chickens. In his new book, “How to Survive a Pandemic,” Dr. Michael Gregor, a scientist and physician who once testified for Oprah Winfrey in her “meat defamation” trial, warns that an apocalyptic virus emanating from overcrowded and unsanitary chicken farms has the potential to wipe out half of humanity. Greger, a vegan, writes that “In the ‘hurricane scale’ of epidemics, COVID-19, with a death rate of around half of one percent, rates a measly Category Two, possibly a Three. … The Big One, the typhoon to end all typhoons, will be 100 times worse when it comes, a Category Five producing a fatality rate of one in two. … Civilization as we know it would cease.” While environmentalists warned earlier this month that the world would face another stronger epidemic if we continue to have contact with wildlife, Gregor places the blame squarely on chickens. “With pandemics explosively spreading a virus from human to human, it’s never a matter of if, but when,” Greger writes. Citing the bird-based Spanish Flu outbreak of 1920, and the H5N1 outbreak in Hong Kong in 1997, Gregor writes, “the worry is that the virus never stands still but is always mutating. … This is the monster lurking in the undergrowth, the one that makes epidemiologists shudder.” The Hong Kong outbreak, which originated in a bird market, “started with a three-year-old boy in Hong Kong, whose sore throat and tummy ache turned into a disease that curdled his blood and killed him within a week from acute respiratory and organ failure.” While only 18 people contracted that flu – a third of them died. During that pandemic, the government killed 1.3 million chickens in an attempt to eliminate the virus – but there have since been two more outbreaks between 2003 and 2009 outside of China. But with over 24 billion chickens on earth feeding the world, what can be done? Gregor writes we have to change the entire system – away from large scale farms where chickens are fed antibiotics and are crammed together and pass diseases from one to another easily to smaller, free-range farms … and eventually not eating chickens or ducks at all. “The pandemic cycle could theoretically be broken for good,” he writes. “Bird flu could be grounded.” But until then, he warns, “as long as there is poultry, there will be pandemics. In the end, it may be us or them.”

It’s an ATM to die for. A conveyor belt of cash-strapped New Yorkers — most of them unemployed and some from as far as Queens — queue up every day at an ATM on East 22nd Street. They wait more than two hours on a block-long line, where there is little social distancing and plenty of frustration. The weary individuals risk catching the coronavirus, in part, because the state issued them — and thousands of other city residents — debit cards for unemployment benefits through KeyBank, which has only a single branch and ATM in the entire city. The branch in Flatiron is closed due to COVID-19, but one ATM is open. On Wednesday, customers baked in 79-degree temperatures as they waited, many listlessly looking at cell phones and others agitated, sitting on curbs and leaning on cars. Some said they endured the line and rolled the dice on their health to avoid getting gouged with surcharges at out-of-network banks. Others said the KeyBank machine was the only one where they could get a daily maximum withdrawal of $1,500. And some simply didn’t know that the bank was part of a network of 1,000 ATMs — because neither the state nor the bank told them when they sent the “Key2Benefits” cards. “It’s crazy, but we have to do it,” said May Adams, 73, who withdrew $500 for rent. She walked across town to the East 22nd Street branch from her home in Chelsea. Eric Kwan, 40, a former Food Network “Chopped” champion who is now out of work, said he biked from Chinatown to save $3. “I have all the time in the world now,” he said. “But I wish the government would at least waive these fees for the other banks. The lack of social distancing on the giant line worries him. “We’re all crowding,” he said. “Not everyone knows what six feet apart is. … Some people don’t wear masks.” “If this continues … it’s going to get crazier,” he said. “People will do desperate things.” Siouxche Sharpe, 33, who was furloughed by FedEx in April, stood off to the side of the line because she has “slight claustrophobia” and fears catching the deadly virus. She traveled to the ATM from the Bronx. “This sucks. This is ridiculous that there’s just one branch,” she said. “There’s no organization and no consideration.” She also lamented that “it’s hard to keep the mask on this long under the hot sun.” Sharpe wouldn’t disclose how much cash she needed, but said, “Like everybody else, I gotta live, I gotta eat, I gotta keep the lights on.” One man walked up to the ATM door and asked the line-sitters, “You guys waiting for the ATM?” Told where the end of the line was, he groaned, “Oh, sh-t.” Vicente Flores, 45, an out-of-work line cook from Queens, waited nearly three hours before getting to the teller machine. “I feel tired … but I need the money,” he said. Flores, who has a wife and two children, withdrew $500 towards his $1,500-a-month apartment rent in Astoria. Flores said he pays his landlord piecemeal because he also needs to buy food. Flores said he didn’t have “any idea” there were other free ATMs available and since it was a KeyBank card he simply went to the KeyBank branch and took his place in line. “This is every day since the beginning of April,” groused a doorman, who spends most of his shift trying to clear the bank patrons blocking the entrance to the luxe, 60-story condo 1 Madison. It’s where superstar NFL quarterback Tom Brady and Brazilian supermodel wife Gisele Bündchen lived until 2018. A crisis communications professional who lives in the neighborhood said he’s witnessed the long lines of  “exhausted, frustrated” customers for weeks. He walks in the middle of the roadway now to keep his distance from the sidewalk sitters. “You are always hoping the money doesn’t run out or the machine doesn’t break down,” said Kelvin Hale, 50, a former boxer and current actor who cooled his heels for two hours. “Everybody is just trying to keep it together right now.” A KeyBank spokeswoman said they will be adding signage at the East 22nd Street branch “to remind of the importance of social distancing.” The spokeswoman noted KeyBank has branches in Westchester County towns of Eastchester and New Rochelle. That was little solace to Maya Sultanova, who said, “KeyBank bad!” The bank also has surcharge-free access to cardholders at any Allpoint ATM locations, of which there are more than 100 in Manhattan, the spokeswoman said. Furloughed FedEx worker Sharpe said she noticed a reference to Allpoint on the state Labor Department and KeyBank websites and paperwork that came with her card but “it seemed like another hassle.” She said after all the aggravation people experienced getting the cards, “no one is going through the labor” of examining “the fine print.” Kwan agreed, saying he’s been withdrawing money on his debit card since April, each time at the East 22nd Street bank. “It’s not efficient for sure. They should have at least one person working in the bank offering customer service. I didn’t even think to look for that information (about alternate ATMs). Maybe I’m clueless but the information should be shown to me without hassle.” KeyBank is a Cleveland-based institution with $156 billion in assets and branches in 15 states, but only one in New York City. “There are more than 1,000 ATMs in New York City that KeyBank debit cardholders can use for free, including over 100 in each borough, and it is entirely unacceptable that the bank failed to communicate those options to unemployed New Yorkers,” said state Department of Labor spokeswoman Deanna Cohen. “Every business has a responsibility to provide services in a way that ensures public health during this pandemic and the bank must implement immediate corrective measures.” In addition, Governor Cuomo waived ATM fees from state-regulated banks through at least June 6, she said. Also, Allpoint ATMs have a lower single transaction limit, but an individual can make back-to-back transactions until they reach the $1,500 daily limit, she said. Cohen said nearly 80% of unemployed New Yorkers receive their benefits through direct deposit — “which is the fastest, most efficient way to access your benefits and allows you to use your existing bank — the remainder choose to use KeyBank debit cards at no cost.” The state said KeyBank was selected in 2015 to handle the state’s unemployment insurance payments via a competitive Request for Proposals. After reading the Post story Saturday, Manhattan Borough President Gale Brewer fired off a letter to Cuomo saying “KeyBank and the state must work together to fully communicate these options to unemployed New Yorkers who are already faced with burdensome and challenging conditions as it is. I suggest that text messages and emails be regularly sent to remind New Yorkers of where their debit cards can be used without surcharges, and in addition, that this information be conveyed during the unemployment certification process.”

Shanell Brunson had to jump through hoops to get remote-learning devices for her kids. On March 16, the day after Mayor de Blasio announced buildings would close and classes go online, Brunson went to PS 119, which her son Navon, 9, and daughter Nariah, 5, attend, to pick up laptops. The school called the night before, saying it had 200 to loan out. But Brunson didn’t get one. She arrived early to find a long line already. Somehow, her children’s names were not on the list. “We were denied,” she said. Only her sixth-grader, Nevaeh, 12, picked up a Chromebook from nearby Blueprint Middle School. Brunson filled out an online request for two iPads for her kids. ”They said I had to wait until all priorities were met,” including people in shelters, public housing, high school students and children with disabilities. It took a month, while her kids missed out on remote classes, to get both iPads. The DOE spent $269 million to buy and equip 300,000 iPads that come with WiFi and Internet, but the devices are “not what it’s cracked up to be,” Brunson said. The Internet connection is often lost, leaving her kids suddenly unable to log onto classes, turn in homework or keep appointments with teachers. Brunson said she alerts the teachers when that happens. The mom added, “I’m not the only family having problems with these iPads.” She calls it a blessing that a Bronx non-profit, Team First, gave her family two free Chromebooks for the kids use to complete their classwork, which they transfer from the iPads. Team First has handed out 130 laptops to families since the DOE switched to remote instruction. Families can keep them; the DOE iPads are loaned and must eventually be returned. “There have been many challenges,” said Tyrone Grant, Team First founder and CEO. “The DOE has made a significant attempt, but this pandemic has brought to light the digital divide, especially for families in the South Bronx.” The charity group New York Community Trust gave  $96,000 last month for the laptop initiative as part of its  COVID-19 grant program, said Team First executive director Yvette Morgan, Ph.D.

The Supreme Court has ruled that state officials can limit in-person church gatherings during the pandemic. The 5-4 decision saw Chief Justice John Roberts joining forces with the court’s liberal wing. The South Bay United Pentecostal Church of Chula Vista in California had argued that state-imposed limits to church attendance had been unfair given that secular institutions like supermarkets and factories were not subject to the same, the Wall Street Journal reported. In his opinion, Roberts said the matter was best left to politicians on the ground whose decisions could be evaluated by the voters. “The precise question of when restrictions on particular social activities should be lifted during the pandemic is a dynamic and fact-intensive matter subject to reasonable disagreement,” Roberts wrote. He added that state officials “should not be subject to second-guessing by an ‘unelected federal judiciary,’ which lacks the background, competence, and expertise to assess public health and is not accountable to the people.”

How did Vietnam, a country without wealth or an advanced healthcare system, avoid even one coronavirus death among its 97 million people? Simple, say medical authorities, it acted early and swiftly. Vietnam ignored China and the World Health Organization’s initial insistence that there was no evidence of human-to-human transmission and deployed rapid measures like strict quarantining, and contact tracing before its first case was even detected, CNN reported. “We were not only waiting for guidelines from WHO. We used the data we gathered from outside and inside (the country to) decide to take action early,” said Pham Quang Thai, deputy head of the Infection Control Department at the National Institute of Hygiene and Epidemiology in Hanoi. Temperature screenings were enacted at the airports in early January for passengers arriving from Wuhan, China, the virus epicenter. Just a week or so later, government officials put more stringent medical quarantine regulations in place at border gates, seaports and airports. Vietnam’s first coronavirus cases were not reported until Jan. 23, but by that time the country was prepared. Vietnam declared a national epidemic on Feb. 1 though it had just six confirmed cases in the country. All flights between Vietnam and China were halted, followed by the suspension of visas to Chinese citizens the next day. Vietnam lifted social distancing rules in late April after a three-week shutdown but hasn’t reported any local infections for more than 40 days. Businesses and schools have reopened, and life is slowly resuming a normal pace.

The Knicks are open for business — kind of. On Friday, the Knicks announced they would reopen their Tarrytown training facility for voluntary individual workouts for players on the same day it appeared their season may be over. The reopening comes seven days after Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced teams in the state could reopen their training facilities for players. “The Knicks re-opened the MSG Training Center today for voluntary player workouts,’’ the team announced in a statement. “As the safety of our players and staff remains our priority, we will continue to follow the guidelines established by the State of New York and the NBA.” Under NBA guidelines, only four players are allowed inside the facility at any one time for individual workouts. Most of the Knicks players and coaches left town during the lockdown. The opening, according to a person debriefed on the situation, gives their players a chance to safely work out if they so choose — even if there are no more games this season for the Knicks. Taj Gibson and Mo Harkless were two Knicks who stayed in New York during the pandemic after the season shut down March 11. Mitchell Robinson has come in from New Orleans to train, according to his Instagram. Some coaches also are expected back in town to survey the situation. The Knicks’ chances of restarting the season are “a long shot,’’ according to a source, as the league is leaning against bringing back all 30 teams.

One of the revelers at the wild, caught-on-video pool parties at the Lake of the Ozarks over Memorial Day weekend has tested positive for the coronavirus, it was revealed Friday. And the partier was already sick when he or she joined in the non-socially-distanced fun, officials said — and so may have spread the virus to others who were there. “The case arrived here on Saturday and developed illness on Sunday, so was likely incubating illness and possibly infectious at the time of the visit,” Camden County Health Department said in a press release. Officials also released a timeline of the infected partier’s activity to help trace people who might have come into contact with them. The unidentified person, a resident of nearby Boone County, defied the state’s social distancing orders to indulge in their debauchery at a bar called Backwater Jacks — where they stayed from 1 to 5 p.m. on Saturday. The partier then spent some time at the waterfront restaurant and live music venue Shady Gators and Lazy Gators Pool until 9 p.m. On Sunday, the carouser had lunch at Buffalo Wild Wings before returning to Shady Gators — leaving around 7 p.m. Camden County has not reported any new cases of COVID-19 this week, officials said.

While several major league teams have released minor league players and the A’s say they will stop paying their non-40-man roster minor leaguers at the end of the month, the Yankees continue to avoid those unfortunate and sad steps. As of Friday, the Yankees continued to pay minor league players $400 per week and hadn’t released any. Both situations are subject to change. With baseball’s landscape seemingly shifting hourly as major league players and owners disagree over how the players will be compensated if a season gets underway in July, situations can — and will — change. Undoubtedly, the number of teams releasing minor leaguers is tied to the likelihood no minor league games will be played this year. Minor leaguers deemed capable of being included on a 20-man “taxi squad” should a season start would have access to workout facilities to stay ready in case they are needed at the big-league level. Submit questions on your favorite New York teams to be answered in an upcoming mailbag According to reports the Mets, Dodgers, Marlins, Pirates, Rays, Brewers and Cardinals are paying their non-40-man roster minor leaguers $400 per week through June. And the Dodgers have help since lefty starter David Price is giving each non-40-man minor leaguer in the system $1,000. As far as non-uniform personnel (front office, scouts, staff members, etc.), the Yankees recently told them they were going to pay them through June 15. NJ.com reported the news on May 26. In April the Yankees said they would look at the situation at the end of May. What awaits after June 15 is unknown but the options are cutting salaries, instituting furloughs or letting people go.

Live in New York City and want to play golf? Get out of the city. It’s your only option. You’ll have to go play elsewhere — Long Island, Westchester, New Jersey or Connecticut, Pennsylvania, wherever … if you’re lucky enough to find a precious tee time. Inexplicably, while golf courses all over the tristate area — and around the country for that matter — are open for play, the 13 courses in the five boroughs of the city remain closed, as they’ve been since they were ordered to shut down on March 22. Not only have city golfers been deprived of critical outdoor recreation, but the operators of the golf courses are hemorrhaging money as they struggle to maintain the expensive upkeep of the properties without the business revenue to offset the significant costs. “It’s devastating,’’ Rich McDonough, the director of golf at Marine Park in Brooklyn, told The Post on Friday. “You’re talking about multi-million-dollars-a-year businesses that have absolutely no ability to operate, and there’s no reason whatsoever why they’re not open.’’ Mike Giordano, who operates Marine Park as the concessionaire, said he “thought initially it was going to end in a couple weeks, then it became a month now we’re into our third month.’’ “This could be a death blow to us,’’ Giordano told The Post. “Nobody has unlimited funds. You exhaust your funds as the clock keeps ticking.’’ Giordano said he’s spending $100,000 per month to maintain the golf course with no revenue coming in and — most appallingly — no communication from City Hall. “Mike is obligated to maintain these properties with no revenue, which is ridiculous,’’ McDonough said. “Every Nassau County and Suffolk County course is operating, New Jersey is operating, everything around the five boroughs is wide open. The nonsense behind this is all coming out of City Hall and [Mayor Bill de Blasio] doesn’t seem to have any kind of a plan.’’ Giordano said “the most troubling thing about this is nobody has identified any sort of finish line’’ for the end of the closures. When The Post reached out to de Blasio’s office Friday asking for an explanation as to why 98 percent of the golf courses in the country are open but New York City’s are not, one of his representatives responded with this nondescript email: “Our golf courses remain closed to protect the health and safety of New Yorkers. We have been making progress though, and are currently assessing when these courses should reopen and how it can be done safely.’’ According to the city Parks Department website, all other city recreational activities, such as tennis, basketball and handball courts, are also closed. The difference, however, is that it doesn’t cost anything to close those down as opposed to the golf courses, which cost thousands of dollars per day to maintain. “I’m very sensitive to the fact that this pandemic is very serious and that people are sick and dying and that New York City is the epicenter of the virus,’’ said Michael Tafet, who operates four of the city courses. “But I still feel that golf can be done in New York City in a safe way — the same way it’s being done all over the country. Golf has opened up in 98 percent of the U.S., and the courses are operating under very strict social distance guidelines which have been very effective. “Right now, New Yorkers are dying to get out there and get some exercise and recreation. They need it for their mental health. Our phones are ringing off the hook with hundreds of calls a day from our golfers asking, ‘When are you opening? When are you opening?’ And we don’t have an answer for them, because we’re not being told anything.’’ Tafet, who along with his father operates Van Cortlandt Park in The Bronx, along with Kissena, Forest Park and Douglaston in Queens, said they’ve already lost $535,000 with no revenue since the city courses were shuttered. “We’re almost running out of money,’’ Tafet said. “If I had a store, I can close the store and control majority of my expenses,’’ Giordano said. “But with the golf course, it’s a living entity. If we don’t maintain it, it will die. And if it dies, you’re talking about millions of dollars to get it back. I’ve got 10 years of my life and millions of dollars tied up in this.’’ Giordano said, “if not’’ for the government’s Paycheck Protection Program, “I’d have had to shut the lights off already, but the clock is ticking.’’ Giordano has had other issues at Marine Park that have had a piling-on effect. On Sunday night, he had more than a quarter of his golf carts destroyed by vandals who broke into the cart barn — a cost he estimates to be about $100,000. He also has had trespassers on the golf course. “Our 12th hole looks like Flushing Meadow Park, with people picnicking with beach balls and hanging out,’’ McDonough said. “I can’t keep the people off the course,’’ Giordano said. “People are so desperate to get out and into an open space or a space that isn’t their apartment, we’re getting hundreds of people on the course picnicking on the greens with children playing in the sand traps. We don’t have police power and we’re trying to be as diplomatic as we can. But I can see as this thing goes on, it’s going to be a problem. “People are really fed up.’’

Brittney Gwynn, a 32-year-old project manager, was growing weary of her boyfriend after weeks of lockdown in Brooklyn. “Our love is unlimited,” she told the New York Times. “But in terms of the time we’re spending together, we’re getting on each other’s nerves.” So Gwynn turned to Globe, a year-old app that offers daytime short-term rentals by the hour. Its main pitch — that people will pay for a quiet space to make calls, do work or just be alone — rings especially true now, as New Yorkers wrap up the 10th week of the state’s stay-at-home order. Gwynn shelled out $100 for two hours in a a blissfully boyfriend-free apartment in a Downtown Brooklyn high-rise, where she held a work call for 45 minutes after wiping down all surfaces with an antibacterial wipe. She happily hung out solo for the remainder of her allotted time. Globe was founded in San Francisco, which is still home to the most Globe rentals — though New York is both its second-biggest and fastest-growing market. Since the coronavirus outbreak, the company reports, it has seen 25,000 new users worldwide. And in New York, there’s now a wait list of more than 10,400 people who want to become guests, according to cofounder Emmanuel Bamfo, no doubt fueled by coronavirus-related cabin fever. About 2,000 people have come off it and been approved to use the app, adds Bamfo, 30. Initially, Bamfo says, Globe appealed to space-starved New Yorkers who wanted a place to decompress between meetings or during a lengthy flight layover. (Gwynn herself, per the Times, learned of the company in the autumn when she needed a place for her and her friends to get ready for a gala.) Many spaces run about $40/hour; spending the night is strictly prohibited. But now, with no in-person meetings happening or evening events being thrown, “the demand has changed,” Bamfo tells The Post. “We weren’t meant to be cooped up like this.” While some clients no doubt book to escape from loved ones in close quarters, Bamfo says, the primary reason people reserve is for work reasons. “ ‘I have a bunch of roommates,’ ‘I don’t have a desk,’ ‘I want to go somewhere to bang out that core call,’ ” says Bamfo, running through reasons customers cite for needing some fresh, unoccupied square footage. He also cites, as additional examples, mothers who need a quick break from work and childcare, yogis who want to exercise privately and, during Ramadan, observant Muslims who needed space to pray. “Right now we have way more demand than we have supply,” he adds. Crows New York host Brendon W., in a testimonial on Globe’s website, “Renting my home to professionals who take Zoom calls during the day after Airbnb tanked is saving my mortgage.” Because coronavirus concerns persist, Globe has added some precautions. People must come alone to their hourly rentals and, most importantly, they need to submit a photo proving their body temperature. There are stringent rules for cleaning between guests. “I did feel safe,” says 31-year-old Brooklyn resident Ali Hussain, who has booked a Fort Greene unit twice since the outbreak began in March. He adds that when he cautiously entered the apartment the first time, he could immediately tell that the space had been professionally tidied. “You could smell the cleaning products,” he says. “You knew it was clean.” But unlike other users in need of a quiet zone distinct from roommates or spouses, Hussain lives alone. He just needed a change of scenery from his own rental. “It’s hard to adjust to home as my workplace,” says Hussain, the COO at smartphone-operated door access system Latch. He got off the wait list in February, and initially intended to use Globe as a way to find spots for a quick nap before nighttime business meetings. But since the lockdown started, Hussain has seen it as a way to find satellite office space. “It’s a good place for me to focus, hammer out work, take Zoom calls,” he says. “It makes lockdown more doable for me.” But Hussain will save his pennies for when he has especially big tasks at hand. “It’s the big stuff when I go to Globe,” he says. “I need to be Superman today.” San Francisco officials have served Globe a letter stating that hourly rentals appear to violate that city’s shelter-in-place order, TechCruch reports, and the company is preparing to respond next week.

It’s 2009 again, or feels like it. That was when spontaneous, grassroots protests against overweening government sprang up and were widely derided in the media as dangerous and wrongheaded. Protesters then were inveighing against Obamacare; protesters now are striking out against the coronavirus lockdowns. The anti-lockdown agitation shows that, despite the revolution in Republican politics wrought by Donald Trump, opposition to government impositions is deeply embedded in the DNA of the right and likely will re-emerge even more starkly if Joe Biden is elected president. The tea party that was so powerful in the Obama years, roiling Republican Party politics and making stars out of the likes of Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, sputtered out and was subsumed by the Trump movement in 2016. The emphasis on constitutionalism, opposition to deficit spending, and American exceptionalism gave way to an emphasis on American strength, opposition to immigration and nationalism. The differences shouldn’t be exaggerated — the tea party was opposed to amnesty for undocumented immigrants, and Trump has faithfully nominated constitutionalist judges. The tea party, like Trump, hated the mainstream media with a passion. But the shift from an overwhelming focus on fiscal issues to Trumpian cultural politics was very real. The change was exemplified by the House Freedom Caucus, founded in 2015 and defined by its hard line on government spending, reliably lining up behind Trump, who has pursued a notably expansionary fiscal policy — with huge budget deficits — even before the coronavirus crisis. The intellectual fashion among populists and religious traditionalists has been to attempt to forge a post-liberty or “post-liberal” agenda to forge a deeper foundation for the new Republican Party. Instead of obsessing over freedom and rights, conservatives would look to government to protect the common good. This project, though, has been rocked by its first real-life encounter with governments acting to protect, as they see it, the common good. One of its architects, the editor of the religious journal First Things, R.R. Reno, has sounded during the crisis like one of the libertarians he so scorns. First, he complained that he might get shamed if he were to host a dinner party during the height of the pandemic, although delaying a party would seem a small price to pay for someone so intensely committed to the common good. More recently, he went on a tirade against wearing masks. Reno is apparently fine with a much stronger government, as long as it never issues public-health guidance not to his liking. Reno has published vituperative attacks on the conservative writer (and my friend and former colleague) David French, supposedly for having a blinkered commitment to classical liberalism. But it is the hated French who has actually tried to thoughtfully balance liberty and the common good during the crisis, favoring the lockdowns at first and favoring re-opening now that the lockdowns’ goals have been achieved. What’s happened during the lockdowns is that the natural distrust that populists have of experts has expressed itself in opposition to government rules. Being told what to do by epidemiologists and government officials wielding all-caps SCIENCE as their authority has been enough to bring tea party-era liberty back in vogue. We’ve also seen a return of the glue that has held moral traditionalists and libertarians together in the conservative coalition for so long — the belief that big government is a threat to traditional institutions. Hence, the focus on resuming church services. In retrospect, the tea party wasn’t as much a pure liberty movement as it seemed at the time. A populist anti-elitism was an enormously important factor, which is why it faded into the Trump movement so seamlessly. On the other hand, Trumpian populism has a big streak of liberty to it. All it has taken to bring it to the fore is extraordinary government intrusion into our lives. If Biden is elected president, there’s more where that came from. Twitter: @RichLowry

Talk about throwing cash away. The Treasury Department has started delivering some coronavirus stimulus payments in the form of mailed prepaid debit cards, in lieu of actual paper checks. Unfortunately, some recipients are coming close to tossing their envelopes in the trash because they’re mistaking them for scams or junk mail. The government started distributing payments by direct deposit in April and has already delivered more than 140 million stimulus payments worth $239 billion. Prepaid card versions, issued through MetaBank, may be used to make purchases, withdraw funds at in-network ATMs and transfer money to recipients’ own bank accounts. And they’ve been touted as “secure, easy to use, and allow us to deliver Americans their money quickly” by Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin. However, Americans hoping to use their money to splurge on household goods — or perhaps other questionable expenditures — first have to realize what, exactly, just arrived in their mailboxes before they can do so. The cards are sent in a plain envelope indicating it’s from “Money Network Cardholder Services” — and not specifically from the US government — according to a post on the Internal Revenue Service site. That doesn’t suggest it’s official government business. That has thrown some people off. Upper West Side resident Dan Gerstein himself faced the issue. “Exactly what happened to us. The envelope gives you no clue it is a payment from the government,” he wrote in a Facebook post on Friday. He added that he was thankful his wife actually “felt the card inside and read it closely.” And Virginia resident Eric Green this week told the Washington Post that he and his wife questioned the envelope originating from Omaha, Nebraska, wondering, “Is it a scam or legitimate?” The couple, who had expected their stimulus payment to be delivered via direct deposit, took the delivery to two banks they use, and personnel there were even unfamiliar with the contents. “They didn’t seem to know about it either,” Green said, adding that he only activated the card after the newspaper confirmed it was the real deal. Even a TV reporter in Massachusetts confessed that she received her own check card in the mail and “thought it was a scam at first,” then advised folks to “keep your eyes focused while checking your mail!” The AARP is trying to help its own members with an explicit warning on its site — in bold type — that reads, “Don’t throw it away thinking it’s junk mail or a scam.” One Twitter poster suggested the cards — which are emblazoned with a patriotic blue field and white stars, plus the words “VISA DEBIT” — resembled “a shady looking pre-paid debit card.” A tweeter said she received hers and “can confirm: looks just like junk mail.” And another apparently saved his mother from putting hers through a paper shredder. I just retrieved this from my mom’s “shred” trash. It’s her stimulus check, er debit card. pic.twitter.com/hWIHDt1p9V — Eric Garland (@garland) May 29, 2020  This wasn’t the first hiccup for the stimulus program. Many users of the IRS’ online Get My Payment tracker were hit with error messages on April 15 when they tried to find out when their stimulus checks would arrive. Last month some people also discovered that electronic deposits had been made to the wrong bank accounts.

Roman Khait is a patient representative at Mount Sinai Brooklyn whose main job is to advocate for patients, communicate with their families and make sure all of their needs are met.  And even when he wasn’t putting in 12 hours a day, five days a week, Khait was volunteering on his off-hours and during the weekend to make sure every family call was returned.  “When you hear the voices of families of patients, they’re almost crying,” Khait, 44, recalled of his work at the height of the coronavirus pandemic’s crush on Big Apple hospitals.  “If a person was saying ‘I want to see my loved one before something final will happen with them, before they go away but I can’t do it now, can you stay over?’ Yeah, sure. I can. And if they want to pick up the belongings and they can’t pick it up during the day, only in the evening then, I mean, I can’t tell them sorry, right? I have to stay and to help out.”  Khait is the only patient representative for the 212-bed Coney Island hospital and at the peak of the pandemic, they stretched their capacity to 230-240 beds. “It’s a nonstop movement from the moment I arrive to the hospital until the moment I leave. In fact, I know that it’s time for me to go home when I don’t get calls for more than 10 minutes. That’s how I know that things are quieting down,” Khait said.  “It was so overwhelming at certain points that I don’t think our hospital was able to accommodate all the people who come in and we began transferring some of them to Javits Center, to Samaritan’s Purse, to [USNS] Comfort,” Khait said of the field hospitals created to handle the surge.  But things were moving so quickly, families didn’t always immediately know when someone was transferred, so it was Khait’s job to make sure that message was relayed, he said.  “On weekends, I was calling the families of . . . patients, warning them about the transfer, giving them the phone number where to call to get more information,” Khait said.  “It was very overwhelming and I wasn’t sure that everybody was informed. Half of the time they would already know about the transfers, but you know, just make sure that everybody is aware of transfers.” Khait also had the tedious job of handling the belongings of patients. He often found himself running from floor to floor of the hospital, trying to track down eyeglasses or trousers for a family member desperate for their loved one’s remaining relics.  “At times I had to skip lunch for like, two days, just eat breakfast, and then the next meal is like 8:30 p.m. because there was not enough time in the day,” Khait said.  “Sometimes it takes a lot of emotional toll. So basically when I come home, I just eat and go to bed because some days you hear a lot of emotional calls about let’s say expirations. And I mean, it is mentally, emotionally tough, you know. I understand when it’s one or two per day, but this pandemic has taken a lot of lives.”  “But you work through it,” Khait continued.  “It’s tough, but you know that everybody else is going through tough times.”  Despite the grueling work, when Khait gets home, he feels accomplished. Missives from family members thanking him for his time are the fuel that keeps him going.  “When I come home from work, I feel that I really worked a lot and did a lot of good, you know. Some people believe that working is laying bricks and maybe doing a lot of physical stuff but I actually feel very physically and emotionally drained every time I come home,” Khait said.  “So I feel like I did my job well and I helped a lot of people and their positive responses is proof that, you know, I am in the right place.”  Do you have a nominee for The Post’s Hero of the Day? E-mail heroes@nypost.com.

Election watch: Why Twitter Flagged Trump In slamming Twitter for fact-checking President Trump, many have ignored the key questions, Liz Peek argues at The Hill: “Why this issue? Why now?” The answer: to help Democrats, who need “massive, if not record-breaking, voter turnout” in November — especially with Joe Biden leading the ticket. Twitter flagged two Trump tweets, blasting mail-in ballots and warning of voter fraud, and directed readers to a CNN assertion that Trump’s claims are “unsubstantiated.” Dems are hoping mail-in voting will “ease the process,” boost turnout and perhaps open the door to ballot-harvesting, and the pandemic has given them an excuse to push for it. Yet that will “undermine the integrity of our elections” and only rally Trump’s supporters. As will “Twitter leaping to their aid.” Eye on 2024: GOP Primary Is Underway “In a very real sense,” declares Kristen Soltis Anderson at the Washington Examiner, the 2024 GOP primary is “already underway.” Its central issue: China. Beijing “is hardly just a foreign-policy issue”; it’s “deeply interwoven” into key voter issues, like health care and the economy. “Apprehension about China predates” both COVID-19 and the Trump era, but “Republicans are now even more focused” on it. Their frustration won’t go away in four years. Nor are feelings about China “confined to any one wing of the Republican Party.” Which is why, whatever happens in November, dealing with China “will be at the heart of the debate” over who’s best for the GOP, post-Trump. Iconoclast: Georgia on Their Minds “I hate to be the bearer of bad news, but Atlanta is not burning,” snarks The Week’s Matthew Walther. Democrats and their media allies looked forward to gloating “about the cravenness and stupidity of yet another GOP politician” after Gov. Brian Kemp reopened the state. But “bodies are not piled up in the streets,” and hospitals are “virtually empty,” even as Georgians “are returning to some semblance of normal life: working outside their homes, going to restaurants and bars” and spending time with friends. Why were the doomsayers wrong? Data suggest “the lifting of lockdowns is positively correlated with a decrease in rates of infection.” And maybe that’s because lockdowns, at least in part, “are inherently ineffective at slowing down a disease” that spreads mostly through families and hospitals. Culture beat: Left-Wing Authoritarians Are Real Decades ago, Bob Altemeyer, famous for his studies on right-wing authoritarian-personality traits, dismissed the idea of similar traits on the left, observes André Spicer at the New Statesman. But now a graduate student, Thomas Costello, and his colleagues have used “standard” psychological testing procedures and identified “tell-tale signs” of just that: left-wing beliefs that “people with opposing political views” are “inherently immoral,” those in power “should be punished” and government should “forcefully stop people from sharing views they find abhorrent.” Other researchers report that “left-wing authoritarians tend to reject mainstream political institutions.” Some, like Altemeyer, still think the notion is “a myth.” Nonetheless, asserts Spicer, “left-wing authoritarianism will continue to play a decisive role in some of the most contentious political issues of our time.” COVID journal: Behind the Conspiracy Theories “There is no COVID-19 vaccine, but there are already COVID-19 vaccine conspiracies,” sighs Sarah Zhang at The Atlantic. “Even as vaccines for the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2 are being held up as the last hope for a return to normalcy, misinformation about them is spreading.” There were false rumors, for example, about a British woman said to have died after a shot. Vaccine scientist Peter Hotez explains that “recent missteps,” like unrealistic timelines and the government’s response to the crisis, have “given vaccine skeptics ammunition.” In any case, Zhang laments, “by the time a vaccine is on the market, the worst of the coronavirus crisis may very well be over,” and — all the misinformation aside — a vaccine may feel like “too little, too late.” — Compiled by The Post Editorial Board 

Coronavirus began slowly spreading in the US as early as late January or early February — and went undetected for a month, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The federal study released Friday — the most comprehensive look yet as to when the virus that causes COVID-19 began spreading — found limited spread in some US communities between Jan. 18 and Feb. 9. “As America begins to reopen, looking back at how COVID-19 made its way to the United States will contribute to a better understanding to prepare for the future,” CDC Director Dr. Robert Redfield said in a call with reporters, according to NBC News. The study relied on four types of data. Researchers looked at reported illnesses by hospital emergency departments across the country and an examination of about 11,000 respiratory specimens collected in January and February. They also looked at genetic analysis of viruses taken from patients in California, Washington and the northeast and autopsy findings from California. The first US infection to be identified was a Washington state man who became sick after returning to Wuhan on Jan. 15. He sought help from a clinic on Jan. 19. Meanwhile, early instances of infection were found in the 11,000 airway samples taken from six states — the earliest collected Feb. 21 in the Seattle area. The US’s ban on travelers from China began on Feb. 3. The first non-travel related cases were confirmed on Feb. 26 in California and two days later in Washington State. That was around the same time the virus began making its way into the US from Europe. “The findings do show that in late February, early March, there were several importations of the virus from Europe to California and northeastern United States and possibly elsewhere,” Redfield said. The virus did not spread in the US any earlier, in November or December, meaning anyone who believed they had coronavirus during this time likely had the flu. Trevor Bedford, one of the report’s authors who has been tracking the pandemic using the virus’s genetic code, said there may have been a few undetected cases of coronavirus in the US in December or January — but the flu season was at its height. “Based on just symptoms in January, it’s almost certainly flu or another respiratory infection,” Bedford told the Associated Press in an email. A separate study released Friday provided clear evidence for multiple introductions of coronavirus infections, largely from Europe, into New York during the first weeks of March. With Post wires

An NYPD cop will face misconduct charges for putting his knee on a suspect’s neck — the same move that led to the controversial police death of George Floyd in Minnesota. “The internal investigation is recommending discipline for several members of the Department involved in the incident. Charges are expected as early as next week,” the NYPD said in a statement Friday. Officer Francisco Garcia was suspended pending an Internal Affairs Bureau probe after he was caught on camera violently subduing a suspect in the East Village on May 2. Cellphone video shows Garcia, who was wearing street clothes, wielding a Taser as he shouts at bystanders as other cops confronted two men for allegedly violating coronavirus social-distancing rules near East 9th Street and Avenue D. “Move the f–k back right now!” he was recorded saying. “What you flexing for? Don’t flex!” Garcia then holstered the Taser and grabbed an onlooker, wrestling him down and punching him in his head before using his knee to pin the man’s neck to the sidewalk, the video shows. The Manhattan District Attorney’s Office later deferred prosecution of the man — Donni Wright, 33 — on charges of assaulting a police officer, menacing and resisting arrest. In addition to Garcia, at least two other cops are expected to face disciplinary charges over the incident, according to a source familiar with the matter. Garcia has been sued seven times during the past six years, leading to more than $200,000 in settlements by the city, records show. Following the May 2 incident, Police Commissioner Dermot Shea said there were “certainly some tactics that I was not happy with.” “I think we got to be better and that’s what was most troubling to me,” Shea said. “I would also like to remind you that de-escalation takes two, unfortunately.” Garcia’s union, the Police Benevolent Association, didn’t immediately return a request for comment.

The coronavirus pandemic could lead to a quicker expansion of sports betting and internet gambling in the US as states deal with huge budget deficits and look for new tax revenue wherever they can find it. Most major sports remain shut down due to the virus, but European soccer and Asian baseball have begun play, NASCAR is racing again and PGA Tour golf restarts in two weeks. Major US sports leagues including the NBA and NHL are making plans for resuming their seasons. The virus “will accelerate the expansion of sports betting and online casinos in the next 12 to 24 months,” said Chris Krafcik, a managing director with Eilers & Krejcik Gaming, which tracks sports and internet betting legislation in the US. “Both activities provide states, whose economies have been massively disrupted by the outbreak, the opportunity to capture new revenue immediately in the form of upfront license fees, and over time through taxes.” Sports betting is not a golden goose for states seeking new tax revenue. An Associated Press analysis last year found that taxes on sports betting would generate just a fraction of 1 percent of most states’ budgets if they met their estimates — and many states fell far short of those projections. But with many state budgets now resembling smoking craters in the ground as tax revenue disappears in a largely idled economy, even a small revenue boost is better than none. So far, 18 US states plus the District of Columbia offer sports betting, and four offer internet gambling, which can include online casino games, slots and poker. In addition, Virginia and Tennessee have approved sports betting but have yet to launch. North Carolina allows two tribal casinos to offer it, and is considering a bill to allow it statewide. Washington state allows sports betting at tribal casinos once regulations are in place, and Oklahoma allowed two tribes to do so, pending approval from federal authorities. Louisiana, Massachusetts and Ohio are realistic candidates to legalize sports betting this year, Krafcik said. Louisiana is close to approving a November referendum on sports betting, and Ohio’s Legislature is moving forward this week with a bill that could authorize sports betting, including mobile betting, although a competing measure could limit it to in-person bets at casinos and race tracks. On Thursday, legislators in California promoted sports betting as a way to help a state budget facing a $54 billion deficit. The nation’s largest state is considering a November referendum on the topic. Krafcik said Illinois could approve internet gambling by the end of the year, at least in part to recoup tax revenue lost to the virus outbreak. “States are facing unprecedented financial challenges,” said Matt King, CEO of FanDuel Group. “We are firm believers that mobile sports betting and online gaming legislation will be the type of commonsense legislation that states will look to when legislatures return.” New York state Sen. Joseph Addabbo has been pushing his state to adopt mobile and online sports betting as a way to generate new revenue, including recapturing money from gamblers crossing the border into New Jersey to bet on sports. He said his state faces a budget deficit of up to $17 billion, “largely because of the virus.” Other estimates have placed the shortfall around $13 billion. “We should be preparing now — creating regulations, lining up vendors, setting up servers,” said Addabbo, a Democrat. “Let’s get it ready so that when we come back, we don’t miss another Super Bowl.” New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, also a Democrat, maintains that approving mobile sports betting would require amending the state’s constitution. While casinos in many states are moving to reopen, including Nevada next week, not all gamblers will be anxious to race back into crowded, enclosed buildings with the virus still spreading. “If social distancing safeguards remain in place, it is possible that some gamblers would prefer to play from home rather than going into a casino,” said David Schwartz, a gambling historian with the University of Nevada Las Vegas. Yaniv Sherman, head of commercial development for the online gambling company 888 Holdings, said the virus is accelerating trends that were already in motion before the virus hit, including growing acceptance of sports and online betting. “The virus has highlighted the need for revenue diversification,” he said. “The future is around online growth, and it’s right now, not in 5 or 10 years. We hope to get additional states on board.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s administration has to respond by early June to a federal lawsuit by a Long Island strip club that has sought to reopen amid the coronavirus outbreak, a judge ruled Friday. The owner of Blush Gentleman’s Club in Suffolk County has sought a temporary restraining order from Cuomo’s executive orders that forced his establishment and other non-essential businesses across the state to shut during the outbreak. The restraining order would allow the club to reopen “immediately” if granted, according to the suit. A judge in the Eastern District of New York ordered the governor to respond by June 11. The club owner, Sean McCarthy, is suing Cuomo and the US Small Business Administration for, respectively, forcing him to close during the coronavirus outbreak and then denying him a loan from the federal Paycheck Protection Program. In an amended complaint filed this week, McCarthy added claims to his original suit that Cuomo’s executive orders violated the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment in the US Constitution, and that the executive orders were an illegal transfer of power from the state legislature to the governor’s office. McCarthy’s lawyer, Joe Murray, said Cuomo’s executive orders were a blatant overreach. “The legislature wrongfully transferred their legislative powers to the governor, which is against Article 4, Section 4 of the US Constitution and Article 3 Section 10 of the NY state constitution,” Murray asserted. “The changes transformed him from governor to king,” he added. The suit also targets the federal government and the SBA for denying businesses such as Blush a Payment Protection Program loan because they offer live performances that are sexual in nature. McCarthy has owned Blush, in Commack, since 1997, according to the suit. He’s described in court papers as a humble man who once risked his life to work with federal agents in an operation to arrest members of the Pagans motorcycle gang. He’s seeking a jury trial for the claims outlined in the suit.

Los Angeles can reopen its restaurants, barbershops and hair salons for sit-down service, California officials said Friday — even though the county is still the epicenter of the state’s coronavirus outbreak. The move by Gov. Gavin Newsom lets LA join the vast majority of California’s other counties, where restaurants and hair salons have already reopened with social-distancing rules in effect, the Los Angeles Times reported. Newsom began greenlighting restaurants, retail shops and hair salons last week. The LA area remains a coronavirus hot spot, however. As of Friday afternoon, it had nearly 50,000 confirmed cases, the fourth-highest of any county in the US, according to tracking by Johns Hopkins University. Chicago had the most, at 74,521 cases. Queens and Brooklyn had the second- and third-highest numbers of cases at 54,000 and 48,700, respectively.

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Friday announced he is suspending the United States’ relationship with the World Health Organization — accusing the global body of covering up the coronavirus crisis with China. At a press conference in the White House’s Rose Garden, Trump accused the United Nations organization of being under the control of the Communist nation and said it failed to provide transparency over the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak. “China has total control over the World Health Organization,” Trump said, noting that the US contributed $450 million to the WHO each year compared to China’s $40 million. “We have detailed reforms that it must make and engaged with them directly, but they have refused to act,” he continued. “Because they have failed to make the requested and greatly needed reforms, we will today be terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs.” The president last month announced he was temporarily suspending US payments to the WHO pending a review, accusing it of “severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.” The US is by far the largest contributor to the public health body, with WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus saying the decision would impact vulnerable people around the world. “We regret the decision of the President of the United States to order a hold in funding to the WHO,” Tedros said. “With the support of the people and government of the US, WHO works to improve the health of many of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people.” Trump also blasted China for “ripping off” the United States and blamed previous presidents for letting it happen. “China raided our factories, off-shored our jobs, gutted our industries, stole our intellectual property and violated their commitments under the World Trade Organization.”

Distraught public housing residents plan to sue the New York City Housing Authority after 1241 tenants died of COVID-19 and thousands more were sickened because the buildings were not properly sanitized, their lawyer said Friday. “These are the people who need to be protected the most and when you talk about the government’s function to protect the most vulnerable, obviously here that wasn’t done,” said attorney Robert Vilensky, who is currently representing 20 claimants who hope to file a class action suit against the city and the New York Housing Authority. The tenants are seeking $5 billion in compensation, including for medical conditions and complications, medical expenses, loss of earnings and funeral expenses for those who died. “The number is just to send a message to the city,” said Vilensky, after filing a notice of claim this week. “Why is it that NYCHA buildings have a significantly higher percentage of people who develop COVID and die than the rest of the city?” The health department said over 6000 NYCHA tenants have been infected with the virus. NYCHA employees allowed the virus to spread by failing to enforce social distancing guidelines while also neglecting to disinfect commonly touched surfaces such as doorknobs, mailboxes, handrails and staircases, according to the claim. Mitchel Houses resident Ariel Brito was left fighting for his life at New York Presbyterian Hospital in Manhattan after catching the virus in late March. The 28-year-old was placed in a medically induced coma on March 27 and was hooked up to a ventilator for over a month. “Doctors said I was a miracle because a lot of people don’t make it out of the ventilator,” said the Bronx resident, who is named in the claim. “ I don’t remember them putting me to sleep. All I remember was waking up on my own power and it was May 2.” After a six-week hospital stay, Brito was transferred to a rehab center for an additional two weeks, where he had to learn to walk again. “I was really weak. I lost 45 pounds after I left the ICU. I had no strength. They even had to help me eat.” Brito believes NYCHA didn’t take the crisis seriously and didn’t follow proper disinfecting techniques. “It’s always been filthy in here. Nobody was protected,” he said. Hector Vasquez believes he caught the contagion along with his wife and son in the Manhattanville Houses on Amsterdam Avenue, where he’s resided for 20 years. His wife and their 20-year-old son recovered at home but Vasquez, who suffers from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, diabetes, heart failure and vascular disease, was hit hard on May 8. “I had chills, diarrhea, fever, I couldn’t eat. I had trouble breathing. I really felt like I was going to die,” the 59-year-old said. His primary doctor prescribed antibiotics that failed to ease his symptoms. “I almost died in my house but called the ambulance. I didn’t know if I would make it.” Vasquez landed in the ER room at Mount Sinai Hospital on May 15. “I got six liters of oxygen in the hospital along with T-cells and other treatment,” Vasquez said.  “I had a lot of friends praying for me. I feel lucky I made it.” The housing agency allegedly did not have any plans for managing crowds while hundreds of people walked in and out of the building, Vasquez said. “I hold NYCHA accountable,” he said. Awilda Cordero said she fell ill in mid-March after visiting the Mitchell Houses Senior Center on Lincoln Avenue in the Bronx. Cordero, who runs a community services organization, had been monitoring her 79-year-old uncle’s apartment, after he had transferred to a rehab center for another medical condition in February. “There were signs of rats everywhere. The elevator was always dirty,” the 57-year-old said. She tested positive for the virus and was treated with intravenous antibiotics as an outpatient. A NYCHA spokeswoman said “We do not comment on pending litigation.”

Kerron Johnson is trapped half a world away, fearful he will miss the birth of his first born. The former Belmont basketball star — and brother of Lions running back Kerryon Johnson — who plays professionally in Europe, has been unable to get a flight out of Romania for two months due to COVID-19 travel restrictions, while his wife, Gina, approaches her eighth month of pregnancy in Huntsville, Alabama. “To me, that’s my worst fear,” Johnson told Yahoo Sports of missing the impending birth. “To not be there for his first breath and for my wife. That’s my worry out of all this. I’ll miss that moment. You don’t get those moments back.” Johnson wasn’t worried initially. After Romania’s Liga Nationala was suspended, he booked a flight home in mid-March. Then, he learned the night before he was to travel that pets were no longer being allowed on-board. Kerron and Gina, who had already returned to the US, had adopted an Australian Shepherd the previous year. “We didn’t want to abandon him,” Johnson said. As Johnson attempted to make arrangements for the dog, new travel restrictions prevented him from catching a direct flight back to the United States, or to several countries in Europe, which were only accepting passengers who were citizens of the respective nation.     Happy birthday to the woman who has changed my life from the moment she came into it love you baby girl! A post shared by  Kerron Johnson (@kjbbruin03) on Oct 14, 2018 at 6:51am PDT “It feels like he’s been abandoned,” Gina told the site. “He’s alone in his apartment. He has no family and no friends in a country where he knows no one. Me, having to be here, I’m enjoying time with my family and friends. And it feels so unfair.” It feels nothing like they imagined the incredible time would be like. “This is our first child,” Kerron said. “Most of my day is spent trying to keep her nerves down. She just wants me to be home. I’m just trying to keep it together.” After months of calls and incalculable hours on hold, Johnson now possesses a ticket to return to the States on June 15. However, that date has been changed several times. “It’s come to the point where I’m probably accepting the fact he may not be here for the birth,” Gina Johnson said. “I’m preparing for that. “It’s very sad that he may miss the birth of his own first son because of this pandemic. We planned on this baby to be born in the summer on purpose because we knew he would be home during that time while the season was off.”

A mob of monkeys stormed a lab worker in India and snatched several coronavirus-positive blood samples — causing outbreak-fearing neighbors to go ape, according to a report Friday. In the totally bananas attack, the laboratory technician was carrying boxes of the blood across the campus of a state-run medical college in Meerut, near Delhi, when the primates pounced, according to Reuters. “Monkeys grabbed and fled with the blood samples of four COVID-19 patients who are undergoing treatment,” said S. K. Garg, a top official at the college. “We had to take their blood samples again.” The mischievous mammals scampered into a tree and began nibbling a container holding the infected loot, according to the Guardian. People living near the college campus feared the virus would spread if monkeys carried the samples into their neighborhoods, authorities said. But it wasn’t clear if the animals had spilled the samples, or whether monkeys can contract COVID-19. “No evidence has been found that monkeys can contract the infection,” Garg said. On Friday, India had reported 165,799 cases of the coronavirus and 4,706 deaths. The virus is believed to have transferred from animals to people in a wildlife market in the city of Wuhan, China, late last year. With Post wires

Picture Marine Corps boot camp. You probably see a huge drill instructor screaming directly into the face of a determined young recruit. Well, all that’s on hold for now. Roughly 2,000 new recruits have passed through Marine Corps Recruit Depot Parris Island, South Carolina, since the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic, and their experiences have looked quite different compared to those who came before them. After an uptick in COVID-19 cases during March first forced social distancing aboard the base, there have been a lot of changes: Training companies have been at anywhere from 50 to 75-percent capacity, with open bay sleeping areas measured to an exact six feet between every bunk; trainees and cadre are keeping their distance both inside facilities as well as outside, and wearing masks wherever they can’t stay apart; and a two-week quarantine period prior to the start of practical training has turned into something of an extended study and acclimation session. “They said they’re coming out of their restricted period more confident and more at ease,” Defense Secretary Mark Esper told reporters traveling with him to Parris Island on Wednesday. “They had more time to study and focus and are just coming in a little bit smarter.” It started with an ad hoc tent city, sealed off white structures with shower trailers and outdoor handwashing stations, not unlike those you’d see at a pre-deployment training center. Dubbed the “expeditionary staging area,” 900 recruits called it home for their first two weeks of boot camp, before the Citadel — a nearby military college that had sent all of its students home for the semester — opened up its housing as a more comfortable option. During that initial period, recruits are living in dorm rooms with two to four each, studying written and online materials that include customs and courtesies, history, rank structure and other basics. That isolation time is building more thoughtful recruits, officials said, as they’ve been able to focus, rest up and study before the onslaught of combat training. “The two weeks of restrictied movement on the front end … its given those men and women that are new to this ― they’re singularly focused on two weeks of mental and emotional preparation for what you guys are seeing here today,” Maj. Gen. James Glynn, the base commander, told reporters Wednesday. They are regularly screened for fevers and other symptoms during the isolation, then tested for COVID-19 at the end. If they come back positive, it’s another two weeks in isolation, along with their roommates and anyone else they came in contact with. The rate of positives has been anywhere from one to three per cohort of 200 or 300 recruits, as the numbers who ship to boot camp have fluctuated throughout the spring. “Really, the only big difference is the amount of recruits that I have in my series, because I’m used to having double what I have right now,” Staff Sgt. Katheryn Hunter, a Parris Island senior drill instructor, told reporters. Though the social distancing and masks haven’t made much of a difference in the training, she said, there has been a noticeable decrease in another issue ― other communicable disease. “The crud,” the stuffy-nose-wet-cough cold that routinely makes its way around every type of military unit from a deploying ship to a special operations team in field training, hasn’t had nearly as much of an impact on boot camp these past few months as it usually does. The same goes for other notorious basic training illnesses, like strep throat and the flu. “We’ve seen our illness rate come down precipitously,” Glynn said, meaning more recruits than usual are getting through training without having to take time out for sick call. Both Hunter and Glynn attributed that not only to the spaced-out traning and face coverings, but the increased cleaning protocols in common areas. “We need to keep things going through, but I think the future of how infrastructure is built — how many people can you fit in a confined space and how do you build buildings to support that kind of spacing in the future?” Glynn said, pondering a future where training units could be more physically dispersed to prevent spread of illness in general. And despite the pandemic, officials said, there hasn’t been an uptick in wash-outs or issues with failure-to-adapt, despite the compounded stress of the most demanding 13 weeks of most of these recruits’ lives, while fears about contracting an illness ― or maybe worse, being away from family at risk ― abound. “All the recruits here, since they went into two-week quarantine, being here they’ve gotten their mind right and they know that this is where they want to be,” Hunter said. The way forward The end of boot camp’s 13-week slog has traditionally included family coming to visit for graduation, then 10 days of freedom to go back home and decompress. But in the time of COVID-19, that kind of travel has been restricted, so instead, families are staying home and new Marines are staying on base with a few days to prepare for the next step. “With only three or four days of light duty or no duty, as compared to 10 days of going home, they’re showing up at the next phase of training in much better shape, they haven’t been out drinking or causing problems, they’re more focused,” Esper said. That might be a permanent change, Esper said, per his conversation Wednesday with Glynn. “So they’re starting to think, maybe we won’t go back to 10 days off,” Esper said. “He said, a lot of kids join because they’re trying to escape home, and you’re putting them back in an environment that they don’t want to be in, or around bad influences.” Each service is largely responsible for its own initial entry training practices, but Esper said he’s collecting lessons learned from all four corners that might be useful going forward. “How are they tweaking the machine beyond coronavirus?” he said. One new development, which is starting to roll out, is antibody testing. With more than 6,000 service members diagnosed, and estimates that between 50 and 70 percent of the total total number infections could be asymptomatic and undiagnosed, the military will be a key population for studying how coronavirus spreads and how it affects people, particularly the more young and healthy. Researchers from the Defense Health Agency are already tracking asymptomatic cases and, on a volunteer basis, studying troops who’ve been affected. “We may want to ask you to stick your arm out and donate blood,” Joint Chiefs Chairman Army Gen. Mark Milley said Thursday during a senior leader town hall streamed live from the Pentagon, as plasma from survivors could be used in therapy for those experiencing complications. Testing has already begun for high-priority communities, like counter-terror units and Air Force or Navy nuclear deterrence commands, Milley said. And the donations could be sent to the most at-risk military populations. “If we can produce this and give you units of blood to take aboard ships and deploy, would you want that?” Esper told reporters on Wednesday, recalling conversations with Navy officials. “They’re all [saying], ‘Yes, that would be helpful.’ “

The Big Apple’s giant new program to trace and contain coronavirus infections has been marred by a chaotic hiring process, leaving applicants who thought they were hired twisting in the wind and unsure of their future, The Post has learned. “It’s just kind of an endless process,” said one applicant, whose job description changed without warning and saw their start date repeatedly delayed. Another person familiar with the program described the city public hospital system’s management of the program as “a complete s–t show.” “They’re giving confusion direction to the candidates,” the source added. “They don’t know what they want them to do. They have no training program at all.” The massive delays were first reported by Gothamist, which said that much of the confusion was caused by shifting job descriptions and responsibilities. The Post reported Friday on the delays in the state hiring and training program being run by billionaire former Mayor Mike Bloomberg. New York City’s Health + Hospitals Corporation hired the Bachrach Group to staff up the program, which health experts say is crucial to containing future outbreaks of COVID-19. The third-party recruiter describes the job in a posting on its website as performing “remote/field work in support of COVID-19 contact tracing, with alternative work schedules and/or compressed work weeks.”  It adds: “Conducts COVID-19 case interviews and contact tracing using a trauma-informed, culturally respectful approach that builds trust and facilitates the free sharing of information.” Bachrach’s contract is worth $5.5 million, city officials disclosed late Friday. Records show that the company has only scored two previous contracts for city work, worth less than $50,000 combined. In a desperate bid for staff, city officials have also turned to insurance giant UnitedHealthcare Group to provide up to 700 temporary employees, known as “monitors.” They will make between $20 and $22 an hour, officials said, confirming reporting published by news nonprofit The City. The hospital said Friday that 938 tracers will be on the public hospital system’s payroll by June 1, not including the temporary hires from. All told, officials hope to find at least 2,500 tracers — with 1,700 supposed to start by Monday. The coronavirus has killed more than 21,000 people in New York City alone and left the city’s economy crippled by a shutdown meant to slow its spread to the point where efforts to test for infections and trace their source could catch up. But government watchdogs and city lawmakers have raised a slew of questions about City Hall’s rollout and management of the program, which has been mired in bureaucratic infighting since the beginning. During past epidemics, the city’s well-regarded Health Department ran the tracing programs like this one to help battle diseases like HIV/AIDS and Ebola — and had already begun staffing up to run this effort. But Mayor Bill de Blasio ordered the program moved to the city’s public hospital system even though it has never before run a program like this. City Hall sources chalked the decision up to Hizzoner’s longstanding frustration with the Health Department and his toxic relationship with its top boss, Commissioner Oxiris Barbot. He maintains a much better rapport with the head of the hospital system, Mitch Katz. The council held a hearing into the decision and Comptroller Scott Stringer fired off a letter May 8 demanding answers about the program’s transfer — with a deadline to provide answers by May 15. The de Blasio administration has still not responded to Stringer’s queries. It also was not immediately able to comment on this story.

Don’t expect it to be the same free-food free-for-all you were used to, Costco shoppers. After temporarily discontinuing the practice in early March, Costco is planning to once again offer free samples at its warehouses — but only on a “slow rollout basis.” Speaking in a third-quarter earnings call on Thursday, Costco CFO Richard Galanti revealed that he expects store locations to resume sample giveaways next month. “We’re going to start doing some things in mid-June on a slow rollout basis in sampling,” said Galanti. “I can’t tell you anymore, but … needless to say, it’s not going to be where you go and just pick up an open sample with your fingers. But sampling – food and nonfood items – are popular.” Costco first stopped the practice of distributing samples of select items in early March. It was one of the first of the company’s responses to the growing coronavirus outbreak, soon followed by the designation of special hours for older customers and the requirement for all shoppers to wear masks inside the warehouses, among other new policies. At the time, it was also reported that the roughly 30,000 employees in charge of distributing samples at Costco locations worldwide – all of whom were employed by a contracting company called Club Demonstration Services (CDS) – had been reassigned to cleaning roles within the warehouses, Buzzfeed News had reported. By early April, however, sources for the outlet learned that Costco had cut ties with CDS entirely. A representative for Costco was not immediately available to confirm whether Costco would be utilizing CDS’ services when it resumes sample giveaways.

A plainclothes NYPD cop purposely coughed on a man in The Bronx amid the coronavirus pandemic, a shocking new video shows. The short clip, posted to Instagram Thursday night, starts as two officers are starting to walk away from the group of men, saying, “We videotaped the whole thing, all right?” “It’s all right,” the man filming can be heard responding. A third cop then leans in, his face only a few feet from the group, and loudly coughs twice without covering his mouth, the video shows. “Oh my God, you on camera,” a man yells. “We caught that! “Yo, what’s your name, what’s your badge numbers?” the man and others can be heard asking as the man laughs. “You can get fired for that,” another man yells out. The coughing cop responds at one point, but what he says can’t be made out. The three plainclothes cops, none of whom was wearing a mask, then get back in their unmarked car and the video ends. While it was unclear where exactly the incident happened Wednesday night, the man filming said it occurred in the 44th Precinct. The cops approached the group after spotting them drinking and smoking on the sidewalk and the situation escalated when the men starting cursing, police sources said. A second video taken from across the street shows about eight men congregating in front of a car. Only one appears to be wearing a mask. “We are aware of the video and the incident is under internal review,” a spokeswoman for the NYPD said. Coughing is one of the primary ways doctors have said the pandemic coronavirus is spreading throughout the world.

Children are going to be completely bored by July 2 — as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, according to new research. Three in four parents agreed that keeping their child entertained this summer will be quite a challenge, due to the limited number of activities and events. A new survey of 2,000 parents of school-aged children found the average respondent is going to miss out on four planned events. Results revealed the average parent surveyed already spent $125.63 on average for planned events that will likely not happen. And, unfortunately, one in four said that money is nonrefundable. The survey, conducted by OnePoll on behalf of Ally Financial, polled 2,000 parents to gauge the effect COVID-19 is likely to have on our future summer plans and revealed things aren’t looking too good. Eight in 10 parents surveyed feel their summer will be negatively impacted by the pandemic. The survey found the top plan going by the wayside this summer is a fun trip to the beach, as half of those polled said they had a beach plan that is more than likely going to be interrupted. Nearly half also had a vacation spoiled as a result of the pandemic, while nearly four in 10 said they’ll likely have to cancel a birthday party. Another one in six (17 percent) even said they’ve had to delay a big move due to the recent health crisis. One respondent had to cancel a trip to Rome, while another saw two concerts get canceled. One respondent planned to take their daughter on a trip to the mountains for her 14th birthday — which they had to cancel because it’s unsafe. Speaking of which, the results showed that birthdays are quickly becoming a concern for parents looking to do something special for their children. Over half of the panel said they had a child who was celebrating a birthday this summer and, of those, 87 percent are worried about how to go about making that day special for them. Fifty-five percent of those said they plan on having a small get-together with just family for their child’s birthday, with 19 percent hosting some type of virtual party. Sadly, over one in 10 said they plan on doing nothing at all for their child’s birthday as a result of the pandemic. “People are missing out on a lot of milestones right now, including birthdays,” said Andrea Brimmer, chief marketing and public relations officer at Ally. “That’s why we’ve teamed up with CAMP to offer free virtual birthday parties for kids who aren’t able to celebrate in person with their friends and families right now. “CAMP Counselors host the parties, provide entertainment and customize them so that each kid gets a shoutout on their special day. You can even invite your friends and families around the world to join your celebration.” Beyond birthday parties, over half of the parents polled said they had something special planned for their child this summer that they’ve had to cancel, with parents saying they’ve had to cancel an average of three events. And while most parents (64 percent) feel guilty that their children won’t have a typical summer this year, there does appear to be a silver lining. Seven in 10 said they are actually looking forward to having a slower summer in order to spend more time hanging out with their children. “This certainly isn’t going to be the carefree summer we’ve come to expect, but that doesn’t mean you have to miss out on everything,” said Brimmer. “With a little creativity, you can make the most out of this extra time with your kids. Make sure you do some research to see what resources you have available to maximize the fun on these long summer days.” Top 10 summer events canceled due to COVID-19

Families and friends around the country can’t wait to get back outside now that lockdown restrictions are finally being eased. But invasions of dangerous insects could turn out to be the ultimate buzzkill — with stinging hornets and giant wasps set to boom this summer. Scientists have already warned that the lockdown has made the perfect breeding ground for swarms of hyper-aggressive mosquitoes. And bite prevention expert Howard Carter also said repellent might be hard to get hold of after the UK Government announced it had been given to troops to protect against the coronavirus. Every summer, a number of dangerous and sometimes deadly insects threaten to flood the UK as the mercury soars. With lockdown relief finally on the way and temperatures rising, you need to be extremely vigilant when heading outside. Here are the creepy critters to keep a careful eye out for. 
Asian hornets Fears are growing that Britain could be hit by swarms of deadly Asian hornets this summer. If a sting victim is allergic to the venom, they could go into anaphylactic shock and die, often with minutes. A 73-year-old man in Spain was killed by a swarm of the critters earlier this month while walking on the beach with his horrified wife after the country’s lockdown restrictions were lifted. The hornets arrived in large numbers on Jersey last summer, a location that is their staging post for flying to the UK. There were worrying reports of even more deadly “murder hornets” in the British Isles too this month, but thankfully it was a false scare. Our current balmy climate is the perfect breeding ground for hornets. Hot spells could also encourage the insects to move inland as they seek water to survive. Asian hornets are largely found in Japan arrived in France inside Chinese pot plants in 2004. But now they are increasingly common across the Channel. Asian tiger mosquitoes This week’s scorching temperatures has also raised concerns about Asian tiger mosquito swarms. A plague of hungry mosquitoes feared to be carrying the deadly Zika virus reached the UK following a period of scorching weather in June 2019. The insect is native to South East Asia but has been gradually spreading through Europe via the transport of goods. They’ve been present in northern Italy, southern France and the Netherlands in recent years and are moving north around 93 miles a year. In the UK, we’re more used to seeing a species known as Culex pipiens — but there have been more sightings of the Asian tiger mosquito in the past few years. In 2016, eggs were found for the first time in a small village in Kent. Since then, experts say there have been more incidences where the pesky bugs have reached our shores. German ‘super’ wasps If you see a wasp in Britain, it will most likely be either the common wasp or the German wasp. These species are very similar in size and color ⁠— predominantly yellow with black markings. German “super” wasps have invaded Britain before, typically during hot summer weather. They’re supposedly bigger and angrier than the wasps we’re used to in Britain. They have three black spots on their face and can sting repeatedly. Colonies can contain up to 10,000 insects and they can instantly send signals to mobilize the entire nest to attack an intruder. ‘Vampire’ spiders Summer 2019 was overshadowed by fears that the UK could soon be invaded by a vicious species of spider. The green-fanged, eight-legged beasts known as tube web spiders have been known to bite if they are disturbed. Originally from Mediterranean climates, they’ve made their way to the UK through shipping routes. One Brit recently reported receiving a vicious tube web bite on her head at her home in Bristol. A bite is said to feel like a bee sting, but it’s also been compared to a “deep injection” and the pain can last for several hours. It’s feared warmer temperatures may push the spiders out into the open in order to take advantage of the higher numbers of flying insects across Britain. Blandford flies Blandford flies are native to the UK and have a bite that can cause groin swelling and blisters. The fly normally bites ankles and legs as it flies low to the ground and is most common during May and June. Periods of hot weather can encourage the insects to breed. Warnings about the insects came from Public Health experts last year after cases were reported in Herefordshire. The Blandford fly is a tiny 2-3mm bloodsucking black fly which lives near areas of water like rivers and lakes. In the past, victims have reported suffering groin swelling and blisters. Flying ants Flying ants aren’t largely dangerous to humans, but they are a nuisance when they gather in huge swarms. These swarms are typically linked with Flying Ant Day, when male and female ants head out of their nests in a bid to look for other ants to mate with. But recent research showed that the idea all flying ants swarm in a single day is a myth. There is no single day when ants fly all at once. Rather, there is a “flying ant season”, a period of two to four weeks in which any hot spell can cause the insects to swarm. Flying ants are mostly harmless to humans, but they do have a strange effect on seagulls who can appear drunk after eating a few due to formic acid they expel. If you’re unlucky, they can infest and wreak havoc in your home. In 2019, billions of flying ants swarming over the south of England formed clouds so big they showed up as rain showers on weather radars. The swarm of insects hit the counties of Hampshire, West Sussex and Dorset and were captured on the Met Office’s radar systems. It was described as “insect clutter” ⁠— following on from Flying Ant Day on July 17.

The world is seemingly still roped off but golf is back swinging — albeit with social-distancing restrictions in place. All 50 states have given the go-ahead to open golf courses, including New York, which closed them earlier in the quarantine. Although the city courses still remain closed with no opening date in sight, facilities just on the outskirts are open for business. “You look around New York and rims have been removed from backboards and no one is rushing to sit in a dugout together,” Tim Reilly, the head of social media for Golf.com, tells The Post. “Golf is the only sport you can play and abide by social-distancing regulations.” Now is certainly the ideal time to take up the game. And here’s how to get up to speed with online teachers and household objects. The internet has exploded with golf influencers offering everything from fun trick shots to drills and full e-learning lessons. “It’s really hard to sort through the appropriate content online,” says Virginia-based coach Erika Larkin. She suggests picking one whose teaching style and personality is a match. Perhaps one of the most popular online coaches is Texas-based Aussie Mike Bury, who boasts more than 100,000 followers on Instagram. In many of his drills, he uses basic items like the light switch and a wooden spoon. To learn the fundamentals, Tampa, Fla.-based teacher Nathalie Filler, 26, who played golf at the University of Delaware, offers a cheap and thorough tutorial. Her $10 introductory course, called “Back to Basics,” has 17 short videos and covers every aspect of the game from grip to the swing and the functions of each club. She also has a similar, more abridged series, available for free, at golf.com. No clubs? Filler, who has more than 20,000 followers on Instagram, says, “You could even hold a broom to learn how to hold a golf club and become familiar with the motions.” If you’ve mastered the fundamentals, Filler offers a $150-a-month subscription where users can send her videos of their swings for her to analyze in two half-hour sessions. “I’ve done this with people who have backyards and people who do practice swings inside,” she says. Need help perfecting your swing? Larkin’s 2017 book, “A True Swing,” combines old-school methods and cutting-edge science for a step-by-step approach to a natural swing — as does her series of YouTube videos by the same name. On Instagram, Larkin, who has an entertaining teaching style, offers workout tips and uses household items like a swivel chair or a desk to hone proper technique. “I think you can learn basic motions without even hitting a golf ball,” she says. Away from the ball, Larkin also suggests watching old golf tournaments on YouTube to familiarize yourself with the game and practice visualization. “If you can sit and visualize the movement, the neurons are still firing, so theoretically, you can practice mentally without moving your body.” Normally, golfers can rent a set of clubs at a pro shop, but many courses, in accordance with social-distancing guidelines, have stopped rentals. But it’s still feasible to get a bargain on a set of clubs. “Don’t let expensive price tags scare you away. I’ve been playing golf for 20 years, and I still buy used clubs on occasion,” says Reilly, who prefers to visit Unique Golf — in Babylon Village, Long Island (105 West Main St.; 631-422-6431) — which has affordable gear and personalized service for any level. It’s now open for curbside pickup and drop-off. Reilly and Filler both suggest CallawayPreowned.com for gently used equipment at affordable prices. “They are also under warranty. They’re perfect clubs to learn with and play for years,” says Reilly. And if you’re just starting out, there’s no need to buy a full set with every imaginable club. “You really only need four or five clubs to start out,” says Filler, adding that if you have to choose only one club on which to learn, make it a 7 or 8-iron. Other sites like GlobalGolf.com and 3Balls.com are reliable second-hand marketplaces. At the start of the lockdown, Golf.com launched an online movement called #PlayingThrough, which showcased novel ways of playing — even, sometimes, indoors. “Thousands of golfers — including Steph Curry, tennis player Mardy Fish and retired Red Sox [first baseman] Kevin Millar began sharing trick shots, backyard setups, homemade minigolf course. It encouraged golfers to get creative at home,” says Reilly. If you’re going to play at home, experts suggest buying a hitting net. They can be tough to find, but a larger outdoor net like this one from Callaway is currently available. If you can’t find one — or fit one in your home — Filler has an alternative. “You can hang a sheet between two objects, and hit Wiffle or foam balls into that,” says Filler. Hit the balls off a small turf surface or a yoga mat. Chippo is game that’s a cross between golf and the tailgate favorite cornhole and can be played in your backyard, driveway or a park. “It’s great because it’s hitting practice. And it sharpens your skills on the short game,” says Reilly of putting and chipping. Reilly’s colleague, writer Dylan Dethier, made a hole in his backyard by using household objects. Start by putting a large yogurt container face down, and use a butter knife to cut around it. Use a gardening shovel to dig the hole, drop the container face up into the ground and top off with a more shallow, round 16-ounce container, like the ones that bodegas use to sell nuts, so you don’t have to stick your hand too far into the hole. Drive a broomstick into the containers for a flagstick, and voila, a homemade hole. Congrats, you have mastered the basics and are ready to play a round. The city has a lot of wonderful one-hole courses including Dyker Beach Golf Course in Brooklyn and Van Cortlandt Park Golf Course in the Bronx, but they are currently closed. Hopefully that changes soon. A nearby option is Skyway Golf Course in Jersey City (515 Duncan Ave.; 201-763-7520), which offers a 55-acre, 9-hole course with beautiful views of Manhattan. “It’s an urban oasis,” Hudson County Improvement Authority CEO Norman Guerra tells The Post. The municipal course has made changes in keeping with current guidelines, including ditching golf carts and encouraging masks. The pro shop is closed, so golfers can pay for rounds online or with a card at the course. An employee will be manning a table outside of the pro shop. “We have seen, on average, 80 to 86 rounds of golf per day. Tee times are 15 minutes apart, so there is no gathering,” Guerra says. Rates differ for non-Hudson County residents and start at $29 for a round of 9 holes on a weekend.

An American Airlines flight attendant said she was forbidden from wearing a face shield because it didn’t fit with the company’s “image standards” — and would make passengers uncomfortable, according to a report. The woman recently returned to the skies after being grounded for a month due to coronavirus-related cancellations, but found out that someone who tested positive for the illness was aboard one of her flights, the Boston Globe reported. The Boston-based flight attendant, who identified herself by her first name, Marie, 33, bought an $8 face shield to protect herself and others for her May 2 flight to Dallas, according to the newspaper. “Gonna kick some ass!” she wrote on Instagram, where she posted a selfie wearing the plastic shield over an N95 respirator mask. After a few flights wearing the PPE, Marie said her bosses told her the safety gear didn’t fit the carrier’s “image standards” and spooked the passengers, she said, adding that she was told she could take a leave if she felt unsafe. Marie said that even though she felt intimidated, she continued wearing the shield until the airline last week issued a message that shields “could pose a safety hazard, making it more difficult for crew members to respond to an emergency,” the Globe reported. The airline officially banned such shields, but Marie said the risk is actually greater without them. “I think it’s a safety hazard for us to not protect our entire face for every second we’re on a plane,” Marie told the news outlet. “Carriers like mine are going to create another devastating second wave of this deadly virus because we are not being given appropriate PPE to wear. … I can see this virus spreading like wildfire throughout the cabin,” she added. American Airlines and other major US carriers say they are limiting capacity amid the pandemic — but about one out of 12 flights are more than 70 percent full, according to the industry group Airlines for America, the paper reported. Louis Mendes Paiva, a systems engineer who flies often for work and wears a face shield on a doctor’s recommendation, flew with Marie from Boston to Charlotte last week. “They should be encouraged to wear as much safety PPE as possible,” Paiva told the Globe about American Airlines crews. American and other airlines have imposed a variety of safety measures, including requiring masks for flight attendants and passengers — but face shields, which protect the eyes, are not part of the plan. “The FAA has not approved them for regular use onboard our aircraft, and the CDC does not recommend them,” the airline said. “No other US carriers permit flight attendants to wear face shields during regular flight operations.” In a statement, the FAA said it “does not need to preapprove the use of personal protective equipment by flight attendants if the equipment does not impede the ability to perform required safety tasks.” Marie’s union, the Association of Professional Flight Attendants, told the Globe that its safety department “is working with the company now on this issue.” A copy of an email obtained by the paper from the APFA’s safety chairman, Thomas Houdek, said the union was in discussions with American about giving attendants safety glasses. Marie’s “derogatory postings” “predetermined the outcome of this case,” the email added, referring to her statements in social media. “It probably would not have become an issue if she had just worn it in flight and didn’t call attention to herself by postings on social media,” he wrote, according to the Globe. Marie said she believes the company is worried about scaring passengers away — but she’s worried more about people getting sick and dying. “It makes customers feel uncomfortable when I’m wearing it … that was the bottom line of the whole thing,” she told the paper. “To be told that during a pandemic is unreal.” On Thursday, she wore her shield in protest when she flew for the first time since the items were banned. When a supervisor warned her about violating company rules, Marie appealed to the captain, who said shields aren’t prohibited by the FAA, so she kept wearing it. “The number one priority is safety. Safety! That’s what our job is for,” she said. “I want to stop a second big wave of this virus from taking innocent lives if I can.” American Airlines said in a statement to The Post: “The CDC does not recommend using a face shield along with a face covering. We’ll continue to study this issue, but our current standard is for flight crews to wear face coverings and to follow other important procedures such as frequent hand-washing as the most effective ways to stay safe.”

“The Good Fight” is losing one of its most formidable legal pugilists. Cush Jumbo, who originated the role of attorney Luca Quinn on “The Good Wife” before segueing to the CBS All Access spinoff upon its launch in 2017, is departing the series ahead of the recently-ordered Season 5. The current COVID-19 crisis — which forced Season 4 to conclude three episodes early — precluded series creators Robert and Michelle King from wrapping up Jumbo’s storyline. But Jumbo and the Kings are working on a Plan B. In an exclusive statement to TVLine, Jumbo said, “I have had the most amazing time over the last five years working with Robert, Michelle and the crews of both ‘The Good Wife’ and ‘The Good Fight.’ I will miss them all so much, but am so excited to explore pastures new. Due to the pandemic forcing us to shut down early we weren’t able to wrap up Lucca’s story fully and so I hope if schedules allow I can return next season to do that.” In their own statement to TVLine, Robert and Michelle King said, “We’ve loved every moment of working with Cush for the last five years and everyone in “The Good Fight” universe will miss her terribly. Given the pandemic-forced premature ending of Season 4, it’s our hope that Cush will be able to return when we resume filming Season 5 in order to give Lucca a proper send-off.” The news comes less than three months after the announcement that Jumbo’s co-star, Delroy Lindo (who plays Adrian Boseman), would be stepping away from the acclaimed drama following Season 4 to headline the potential ABC series “Harlem’s Kitchen.” The Kings similarly expressed hope that Lindo would be able to return in Season 5 to give Adrian a proper farewell. “We weren’t able to end that story with the kind of elegance we were hoping to had we had [all] 10 episodes,” exec producer Michelle King recently conceded to TVLine regarding Lindo’s onscreen sendoff. “We adore Delroy and we adore [the character of Adrian], so we’re going to have to see what the world looks like when it comes time [to shoot] Season 5.” Added fellow EP Robert King: “Our hope is to get Delroy back to finish that story. We just don’t know where we will all be post-pandemic.” As has been well documented by TVLine, “The Good Fight” has weathered a number of high-profile onscreen exits in its first four seasons. Departed series regulars include Justin Bartha, Erica Tazel and Rose Leslie.

Hundreds of schools in South Korea were forced to close just days after reopening due to an unexpected spike in coronavirus cases, according to a report Friday. The country reported 79 new COVID-19 infections on Thursday — the most in two months — shuttering at least 251 schools near the western city of Bucheon, according to the BBC. Students in the area were forced to resume studies online shortly after 2 million students across the nation headed back to the classroom Wednesday, the outlet reported. The frightening new wave of illness is linked to a major e-commerce distribution center in Bucheon that officials say was not complying with infection prevention, according to the report. Health officials reportedly discovered traces of COVID-19 on workers’ shoes and clothes at the facility, which is owned by the firm Coupang. One student, whose mother worked at the warehouse, was found to have the virus, according to the BBC. At least 117 more schools in nearby Seoul have also postponed their reopening, education officials told the Korea Times. On Friday, 58 new cases were recorded in South Korea, bringing the total number of cases to 11,402.

If you’ve ever wanted a glimpse of what star-studded club culture is like, you probably won’t get it at #ZoomFest. In fact, you may not ever get it again, according to Ronnie Madra, co-founder of the illustrious 1Oak nightclub in New York City, where celebs such as Jay-Z and Beyoncé, Rihanna, the Kardashians, Leonardo DiCaprio, Katy Perry and many, many more are known to hang. “As an operator, as a nightclub person or hospitality person, I don’t see myself going back to business as usual, unless there are major changes being made,” Madra tells The Post after recently founding the fledgling digital music and entertainment festival ZoomFest. When the coronavirus pandemic hit New York, it took out the $35.1 billion hospitality industry and left 300,000 out of work, including nightlife professionals like Madra and his partner, Richie Akiva. Madra, a former DJ and event producer who also invented the Earos In-Ear Protection device ($40) for nightlife and concerts, lost his job on March 16, when Mayor Bill de Blasio set citywide restrictions on bars, restaurants and all gatherings of 10 or more individuals. He lived for his profession, but the lockdown marked an end to his entire way of life — one filled with live music, dancing and high-powered friends. He was about a month into statewide stay-at-home orders when he realized his previously scheduled annual sojourn to Coachella was approaching. He felt a yearning for that camaraderie and, in an effort to lift his and others’ spirits, he brought a virtual festival to laptops. “I woke up and I was like, ‘S - - t, man. I want to see my friends and Coachella is coming up, like, literally this weekend,’ ” says Madra, 48. So he called a musician-friend to “see if she would do a song on Zoom chat” with his friends. Ever the party promoter, he added a few more musicians and asked friend Josh Beckerman — a k a the “Foodie Magician” — to perform. ‘How can we make this more, you know, meaningful?’ The first gathering started with “just … 10 people,” but by the fourth gathering, he had amassed a VIP-worthy guest list of more than 140 people, including Paris Hilton, Robin Thicke, G-Eazy, Shaggy and more. The Zoom sessions are known to last hours, with Madra acting as emcee of programming. But what turned out to be a way to entertain isolated friends became, well, work. “I’m not doing this anymore,” he says he’d told himself after the third gathering, then nicknamed Zoom-chella — which didn’t stick due to copyright issues. “And then I get a phone call from a friend” — jazz pianist Eric Lewis — “saying, ‘I think you’re onto something here. How can I help you organize it some more?’ ” Sucked back into the fold, Madra wants #ZoomFest to become something that isn’t for the exclusive nightclub scene on which he’s built his career. He hopes bringing the party to the digital space will help make the whole scene down-to-earth, so to speak. “How can we make this more, you know, meaningful?” he asks. “[There’s] a rope at the club. Not everyone can get in. There’s nothing inclusive about that. And I’m guilty of it.” For now, #ZoomFest is still an exclusive ticket, with a capacity of just a few hundred. But party voyeurs can experience the somewhat dystopian get-down via the festival streaming site, as well as VASTLIVE on Twitter and TikTok. They will broadcast the most recent ZoomFest gathering — albeit an edited version of the production — today at 5:01 pm. As for what will become of 1Oak, Madra assures they will return, in some capacity. “1Oak is a brand,” he says, “and 1Oak will reinvent itself.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo took charge of New York City’s reopening Friday, announcing that the Big Apple will finally begin to emerge from its months-long coronavirus lockdown in 10 days. “We are on track to open June 8,” Cuomo said from La Penta School of Business in New Rochelle. “Nobody reopened New York City in history. Nobody closed New York City in history,” Cuomo said as Mayor Bill de Blasio’s remote video connection to the joint press conference cut out. “That will be my claim to fame,” Cuomo boasted. Just hours earlier at his own City Hall coronavirus briefing de Blasio said he could not give a specific
date about when the city would reopen, beyond the first two weeks of June. But Cuomo said the city’s restart is a little over a week away, while warning the Big Apple will look much different than it did before the pandemic hit in March. “It is reopening to a new normal. It’s a safer normal. Reopening doesn’t’ mean going back to the past,” Cuomo said. “People will be wearing masks. It’s just a new way of interacting, which we have to do,” he said. On June 8, about 400,000 workers in the city’s construction, wholesale, manufacturing and curbside retail industries will return to their jobs as part of the state’s phase 1 reopening scheme, the governor added.
Cuomo said those workers would have to decide on their own how to get to their jobs. “It’s up to you,” the governor said about transportation choices from mass transit to driving. He added that trains are safe, without explaining how to prevent overcrowding. “I don’t know if you can do strict social distancing on buses or subways…you have to wear a mask,” Cuomo
said. The MTA put out a statement pushing back on guidance from the federal Centers for Disease Control that encouraged workers to drive instead of taking mass transit. “The CDC’s latest guidance marks yet another confounding recommendation from the nation’s top health authority. Encouraging people, especially those without cars and in congested areas like New York, not to take public transit is misguided. “Our transit and bus system is cleaner and safer than it has been in history, as we clean and disinfect around the clock,” MTA Chairman Patrick Foye said in the statement. State budget director Robert Mujica said the trains can easily manage the hundreds of thousands of people returning to work under phase 1. During the few minutes he spoke at Cuomo’s briefing before his video feed short-circuited, de Blasio said the city would hand out 2 million free face coverings to city residents returning to work on June 8.

NEW DELHI – It was barely noon on Thursday when the metal doors of the mortuary at a hospital in south New Delhi swung open and staff in white coveralls rolled out a stretcher. Mourning relatives looked on, as a body bag was loaded into an ambulance and taken away to a cemetery. It was yet another casualty from the coronavirus pandemic that has killed over 4,500 people and infected more than 150,000 across India. While infection rates from the virus have begun to fall in many countries, in India they are still rising sharply and epidemiologists warn peak is yet to come. Concerns are rising about how the country of 1.3 billion, with one of the world’s most overburdened healthcare systems, will handle the surge with roughly 6,000 new infections being detected daily this week. On Thursday, Reuters was given exclusive access inside Max Smart Super Speciality Hospital – currently the largest such private COVID-19 treatment site in New Delhi – where some 200 patients are being treated for the disease caused by the new coronavirus. While India is easing a more than two-month-long nationwide lockdown that was aimed at reining in the spread of the disease, the battle against the virus rages within its strained hospital system. “We are getting more and more people daily both in numbers and in the severity of disease,” said Arun Dewan, the director of the hospital’s critical care section. “We’re not seeing any end.” Around him, the eerie calm within the hospital was broken only by the sound of machines beeping and patients coughing – most of whom were separated only by white curtains. Staff in heavy protective gear move around softly, speaking in murmurs. Until a few months ago the cries of babies would often fill this section of the hospital, which was meant for neonatal care. But with the number of cases surging, Max designated the entire building for COVID-19 patients. Now, posters of Winnie the Pooh and other cartoon characters meant to soothe children, beam down upon patients struggling to beat a deadly virus. It is the first time in his 35-year-career that Dewan is battling a pandemic of this scale, he said and while each day has been as struggle, he fears the worst is yet to come.

Uber on Friday said it would offer rides by the hour in some US cities, a feature aimed at helping Americans with essential trips during the coronavirus pandemic. The option, which is already available in a handful of cities in Australia, Africa, Europe and the Middle East, will cost $50 per hour. Fares for regular Uber rides are generally based on the level of demand and the trip distance. Uber said it decided to expand the hourly feature to the US after riders requested an option for extended trips during the pandemic to avoid exposure to different drivers and vehicles when taking multiple trips in a confined time period. The company said it expected the option to be used for trips to grocery stores, pharmacies and doctor appointments, but would monitor use going forward. Hourly bookings will be available in Atlanta, Chicago, Washington, Dallas, Houston, Miami, Orlando, Tampa Bay, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Tacoma and Seattle beginning June 2, with expansions planned in the following weeks. Ride-hailing trips, which generate the bulk of Uber’s revenue, dropped 80 percent globally in April, but the company earlier this month said demand was slowly recovering. Since May 18, Uber has required riders and drivers around the world to wear face coverings or masks and allows both parties to cancel trips and report users who do not comply with the measure. Repeated failure to comply can lead to account deactivation for both riders and drivers.

A New York judge has ruled in a nurses union lawsuit that he can’t force the state Department of Health to provide personal protective equipment to nurses or make the agency change its sick leave policy amid the coronavirus pandemic. The New York State Nurses Association (NYSNA) filed an emergency lawsuit last month asking a judge to make the DOH enforce Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s directive to provide one N-95 mask per day to medical workers and make the agency bring its coronavirus sick leave policy in line with the state’s. The state law allows for people with COVID-19 to receive two weeks’ paid sick leave, while the DOH issued a directive that nurses and other medical workers who test positive could return to work after only seven days, the lawsuit said. But Manhattan Supreme Court Judge Frank Nervo determined the court couldn’t “substitute its judgement for that of an administrative agency, such as the respondent DOH.” Even so, with regard to medical leave, the DOH “reached a determination on isolation and return to work guidelines for health care workers rationally,” Nervo’s Thursday decision reads. The judge said that rather than sue the DOH, the union could sue “the individual hospitals and healthcare providers it alleges have violated the return to work directive or failed to provide PPE in accordance with applicable standards, guidance, and regulations.” The NYSNA also filed suit against Montefiore Medical Center and Westchester Medical Center for failing to protect nurses’ health and safety during the coronavirus pandemic, including by not providing PPE and safe working conditions. The case against Montefiore has since been dismissed by a judge. The case against Westchester Medical Center is still pending. The NYSNA and the DOH did not immediately return a request for comment.

US consumer spending took a record nosedive last month as Americans hoarded cash during the coronavirus pandemic, new data show. Personal consumption spending tumbled 13.6 percent in April, marking the largest drop since the feds started tracking the figure in 1959, the US Department of Commerce said Friday. The US savings rate, however, soared to record heights as Americans hoarded more money than ever before. The personal savings rate reached a record 33 percent in April, up from just 12.7 percent in March, the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis said Friday. The rate, which tracks how much people save as a percentage of their disposable income, is the highest since the department started tracking savings in the 1960s and nearly double the previous record of about 17 percent, set in 1975. While economists have long urged Americans to save more, it’s coming at a price as reduced spending threatens to crater the economy. Last month’s 13.6 percent drop in spending comes as retailers have been forced to close across the country, whether they want to or not. As The Post has been reporting, retailers large and small have been attempting to open their doors through appointments in states like New York only to get shut down again. The plunge beat economists expectations for a 12.6 percent drop and outpaced March’s 6.9 percent decrease — the previous record. Spending decreased despite a record 10.5 percent jump in personal income, which the feds primarily attributed to expanded government benefits. Those included $1,200 checks distributed to taxpayers under the $2.2 trillion CARES Act and a $600-a-week boost to unemployment benefits. “If the CARES Act spending was supposed to be cushioning the blow to the economy it didn’t show up because April was a complete disaster which will be recorded as the worst month for the American economy in history,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank. Another reason for the spending drop may be rising joblessness. Lockdowns aimed at curbing the coronavirus have spurred job losses on a scale not seen since the Great Depression. The US economy shed more than 20 million jobs in April as many businesses were forced to close and lay off workers, driving the unemployment rate to a record 14.7 percent. Consumer spending — which makes up more than two thirds of the nation’s economic activity — may recover as states ease lockdown measures and businesses reopen. But millions of Americans remain out of work and it’s unclear how quickly those jobs will return. With Post wires

President Trump is trying to help African nations battle the coronavirus in an apparent effort to boost the US’s influence there to combat China’s, according to a new report. The Trump administration has offered ventilators to African countries grappling with the virus and pledged some $270 million in foreign aid to at-risk places including Algeria, Botswana, the Republic of Congo, Ghana and Liberia, Politico reported Friday. The commander-in-chief made phone calls last month to the leaders of Rwanda, South Africa, Kenya, Ethiopia and Nigeria, a notable outreach given his limited emphasis on Africa since he took office, according to the outlet. The administration also reportedly pledged up to 1,000 ventilators to South Africa, home to Africa’s largest number of coronavirus cases. The White House sees Africa as a battleground in its recent spat with China, which has been the continent’s largest trading partner for more than a decade, Politico’s story says. “It’s an important source of support for the Chinese Communist Party and they are working hard to make sure their narrative gains traction over the US message,” Joshua Meservey of the Heritage Foundation, a conservative think tank, told the outlet. “When there is an emergency, whether it is Ebola or Covid, the United States is there,” a senior State Department official told Politico. “Not only did we not set fire to the village but we’re bringing the most buckets of water.”

The Chinese Communist Party has cracked down on and arrested citizen journalists reporting on the coronavirus pandemic in Wuhan and how the government handled the outbreak, according to a report. One of them, Zhang Zhan, 37, a former lawyer, recently posted a report on YouTube from outside a train station describing the conditions in the epicenter city, the Financial Times reported. Wearing a face mask and talking into the camera on her cellphone, she noted how “human rights had suffered” as limits on movement persisted even after the lockdown was finally lifted. A couple of days later, Zhang was detained by authorities at her parents’ home in Shanghai and charged with “provoking quarrels and making trouble,” according to a document seen by the news outlet. Zhang had focused her reporting on the number of COVID-19 cases in Wuhan — expressing doubt on the official numbers and suggesting that the figure should be higher. When the Financial Times spoke to her in mid-April, she was reporting on the economic conditions in Hubei province, saying small businesses were failing as unemployment appeared to be rising faster than officially acknowledged. Zhang was among a bevy of activists, journalists, lawyers and social media personalities arrested after documenting the outbreak of the disease or questioning the Chinese Communist Party’s actions in controlling it. They were rounded up ahead of the National People’s Congress in Beijing, the country’s most important political event of the year. “The government has been trying to control the circulation of information and build a narrative that hides the wrongdoing of the government,” Doriane Lau, a Hong Kong-based researcher for Amnesty International, told the Financial Times. “Curbing freedom of expression and press … only fuels frustration and blocks people’s access to information that can be crucial for fighting COVID-19,” Lau said. Among those swept up in the crackdown was tycoon Ren Zhiqiang, who vanished in March after writing an essay critical of the Communist Party’s handling of the outbreak, the news outlet reported. Citizen journalists Chen Qiushi and Fang Bin also were detained around that time. “It’s not uncommon in recent months for people to get arrested, even for posting things that seem harmless,” Fu King-wa, a professor of media studies at Hong Kong University, told the outlet. “The government is pushing very hard on their narrative about the outbreak internally — but also internationally,” he added. The Chinese Communist Party has vigorously rejected the claim that China was responsible for the pandemic, which has claimed more than 350,000 lives across the globe.

New York’s largest hospital system is conducting a sweeping analysis of its use of ventilators while treating coronavirus patients during the peak of the pandemic. The study comes as experts have raised concerns that an over-reliance on the machines may have actually cost lives. For so many sick COVID-19 patients, getting attached to a mechanical ventilator was a death sentence. More than two-thirds of the patients in Northwell Health facilities hooked to ventilators died in March and early April and the fatality rate was similar at other hospitals. At the beginning of the pandemic, health officials were worried whether there would be a shortage of ventilators to intubate COVID patients with serious breathing and lung problems. But then discussion in the medical community turned to whether the machines were being overused and possibly contributing to a higher death rate. “One theory is if you put some patients on a ventilator, you might irritate the lungs more. That’s a theory we’re looking at,” Dr. Thomas McGinn, Northwell’s senior vice president and deputy physician-in-chief, told The Post. Northwell — which runs Lenox Hill, Long Island Jewish and Staten Island University hospitals, as well as other regional hospitals — is examining a cohort of 12,000 coronavirus patients it treated in March and early April, including about 2,000 who were placed on ventilators. “We’re trying to do a retrospective review. The debate is, should we have tried other non-invasive interventions in the first place? A big question is, can you delay putting patients on a ventilator or never put them on?” McGinn said. McGinn said Northwell medics did experiment with alternative or non-invasive ventilation, such as delivering oxygen to patients through a tight-fitting face or nasal clip, rather than a mechanical ventilator with invasive tube inserted down the throat. But there are no easy answers. The alternative mechanism provides more of a risk of spreading the virus to hospital staffers if a patient’s breath spews the virus into the air, he said. “It puts the nurses and respiratory therapists at risk and provide a questionable benefit to the patients,” said McGinn. McGinn also said the study will look at cases of patients who were on ventilators for just a few days as well as those who were on for an extended period. He said younger COVID patients without other serious underlying problems tended to get well enough to be taken off ventilators in just a few days, while older patients with more serious heart or kidney problems tended to be too sick to be taken off the breathing machines. But McGinn emphasized that ventilators are used as a last resort for people who can’t breath.
“Vents don’t cause deaths. They save lives. If we didn’t put them on a vent they would all die,” he said. “Question we are asking is, `what’s best approach.'”One study found that nearly all of the Northwell COVID patients treated in March and early April had at least one underlying condition in addition to the virus. The average age was 63. Researchers also found that 37 percent of the more than 5,449 patients treated at Northwell hospitals from March 1 to April 5 developed acute kidney injury or kidney failure. Of those with kidney problems, 35 percent died. The goal, McGinn said, is to learn from the findings and try to improve medical practice and techniques for treating COVID patients going forward.

JOHANNESBURG — South Africa says it has a backlog of nearly 100,000 unprocessed tests for the coronavirus, a striking example of the painful shortage of testing kits and reagents across Africa as cases steadily rise. “This challenge is caused by the limited availability of test kits globally,” the health ministry said in a statement overnight, putting the backlog at 96,480 as of Monday. Priority is given to processing tests from patients admitted to hospitals and health workers, it said. South Africa has conducted more tests for the virus than any other country in Africa — more than 655,000 — and has the most confirmed cases with 27,403. One of the latest to die of COVID-19 in South Africa was a National Health Laboratory Services employee. “We understand this tragedy will certainly test you,” the ministry said in a message to her colleagues, adding that the government is committed to providing proper protective gear. That, too, faces shortages across Africa. More than 3,400 health workers on the continent had been infected as of a week ago, according to the World Health Organization. The shortages, especially in testing materials, have jolted African authorities into facing uncomfortable truths: Richer countries are elbowing them out in the race to obtain crucial supplies and the continent relies almost entirely on imports for drugs and other medical items. “We have to have Made in Africa products,” the director of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, John Nkengasong, told reporters Thursday. “We cannot keep importing basic things.” He and others, including the WHO’s Ethiopian director-general, have raised the cry for fair access, including for any vaccine or treatment that emerges. “Dozens of countries have imposed export controls on medical supplies and equipment,” scores of South African and other health and activist groups said in an open letter to Group of 20 leaders last month. Complicating matters are global powers like the United States and China promoting aid to African countries during the pandemic as part of efforts to win support on the continent. But that aid doesn’t always show up. President Donald Trump on May 21 said “we just sent 1,000” ventilators to Nigeria, but the country’s information minister, Lai Mohammed, told reporters Thursday that “to the best of my knowledge they have not arrived. When they do arrive, it will be made public.” But the testing shortages are especially frustrating for African health officials, who have been praised for swiftly expanding testing capability for the virus continent-wide, from just two countries in February. “Low levels of testing might be artificially lowering apparent infection rates,” The Lancet said in a new editorial noting Africa’s quick response but also the challenges that lie ahead. Across Africa slightly under 2 million tests for the virus have been conducted, Nkengasong said, far below the target of testing 13 million people — or 1 percent of the continent’s population of 1.3 billion. In Nigeria, Africa’s most populous country with some 200 million people, just under 50,000 tests for the virus have been conducted, according to the country’s Center for Disease Control. Nearly 9,000 cases have been confirmed while worries grow about undetected spread of the virus in the north. In Ethiopia, Africa’s second-most populous country with some 110 million people, the health ministry says more than 96,000 tests have been conducted. More than 830 cases have been confirmed. As of mid-May, Chad had carried out 105 tests per million people and Mali had tested just 173 per million, compared to some 38,000 tests per million in the United States, the International Rescue Committee said last week. By the end of this week 2.5 million tests will have been distributed to Africa’s 54 countries, the Africa CDC’s Nkengasong said. Despite the shortages, “I’m optimistic that in the next two to three weeks it will be very different,” he said, without giving details. So far African nations have relied on tests donated by the Jack Ma Foundation, sourced via partners including the WHO and procured via a newly created platform that pools African countries’ purchasing efforts on the international market. Meanwhile, efforts at domestic production of testing materials have begun in South Africa, Morocco, Senegal and Kenya, the Africa CDC has said, with plans to have those countries aid each other in evaluating the products. “Africa is a continent that needs its own internal capacity to produce diagnostic kits,” South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize told reporters on Thursday. “We need several millions of these kits.”

Frustrated upstate officials and businesses are demanding that Gov. Andrew Cuomo allow them to immediately begin Phase 2 of their economic reopening following the two-month shutdown triggered by the coronavirus pandemic. Five upstate regions in Phase 1 were expected to start Phase 2 expansion Friday — but the governor provoked a firestorm of criticism Thursday when he delayed making a decision to move forward. The governor issued an executive order Thursday night that did not advance any of the regions from Phase 1 to Phase 2. Phase 2 would allow thousands of retail stores, hair salons and barbershops to reopen their doors to customers. Phase 1 permitted the return of construction jobs and manufacturing. Montgomery County Executive Matt Ossenfort said he was “shocked and frustrated” by the delay because the Mohawk Valley met all of the state’s seven health metrics to move forward. “Many Montgomery County residents have spent time and resources preparing to reopen tomorrow and  many of you have been looking forward to experiencing simple things such as a haircut,” Ossenfort said. Cuomo, when asked on WAMC radio Thursday about when regions could expand to Phase 2, said, “The reopening in the first five regions ends tomorrow. When the reopening of Phase 1 ends, we’ll give the experts all the data. It is posted on the web but let them analyze it. And if they say we should move forward, we’ll move forward. “How many people are getting sick, what the infection rate, what is the transmission rate, what is the hospitalization rate, what is the contact tracing rate, what is the testing rate, all the data points. And we analyze it and then we give it to the international experts. And we are going to ask them to analyze it and if they sign off and say go to Phase 2, andiamo,” the governor said, using the Italian word meaning “Let’s go.” Cuomo will discuss when Phase 2 can begin at his press briefing Friday. New York City, the hardest-hit region by COVID-19, has not yet met the metrics to even qualify for Phase 1. Only businesses deemed essential — such as grocery stores, drugstores and takeout eateries — are open. Spread of the virus is still a concern. Cuomo issued an order allowing businesses to remove any customers not wearing a mask.

Sellers of shoddy protective gear and thieves of stimulus checks, beware: A bipartisan new bill proposes decades in prison for scam artists exploiting the coronavirus pandemic. The legislation, introduced late Thursday, would temporarily boost federal criminal penalties by 15 years for pandemic-related fraud and by 35 years for COVID-19-linked counterfeit goods. The Coronavirus Swindlers, Crooks, and Manipulators (SCAM) Act was introduced by Rep. Tom Suozzi, a Long Island Democrat, and eastern Pennsylvania Rep. Daniel Meuser, a Republican, who say they were outraged by reports of senior citizens being cheated out of their $1,200 stimulus checks via phishing emails and by reports of phony protective masks. “Taking advantage of elderly Americans amid their anxieties regarding the pandemic is deplorable,” Suozzi said in a statement provided to The Post. “We must do everything we can to deter scam-artists from taking advantage of this global crisis. I am proud to introduce this critical, bipartisan legislation alongside Rep. Meuser.” Meuser said, “The SCAM Act warns that these scammers engaging in deceitful activities will pay a steep price.” “Since the coronavirus pandemic began, there has been an unfortunate rise in the number of scams aimed at taking advantage of hardworking Americans and seniors,” Meuser said. “For example, the [Federal Trade Commission] has reported more than 50,000 scams totaling $38.6 million dollars and the IRS has investigated 15,000 false websites since economic impact payments began. These fraudulent schemes are always shameful, but scammers using this time of crisis to take advantage of vulnerable individuals is absolutely reprehensible.” The legislation also increases maximum financial penalties for fraudsters. To qualify for a sentencing hike, the legislation says a crime must occur “in connection with the emergency declared on March 13, 2020, by the President under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act relating to Coronavirus Disease 2019.” The counterfeiting provision specifies that the product be “advertised by the person as having the ability to treat, prevent, or cure COVID-19.” The new maximum penalties for fraud statutes would be 45 years in prison and a $1.5 million fine, while counterfeiting penalties would temporarily increase to 45 years in prison — up from 10 years for a first offense — along with a $2.5 million fine. The legislation may have difficulty passing on its own, but as lawmakers work toward a fifth large coronavirus package, it’s possible there will be a serious effort to incorporate it into a larger deal.

Dear Adults: You are in the room, right? This isn’t all just going to be “take my ball and go home” day, is it? Name calling? Intractability? There is going to be a moment in which a leader or three rises above the familiar roles, the rhetoric, the threats, isn’t there? It should start with you, Commissioner Rob Manfred. A statement can be this simple: If the political and medical worlds give their blessings, we are playing regular season major league baseball beginning July 3, continuing through the Independence Day weekend and — we hope — going without interruptions until there is a World Series. Period. End of statement. Does this mean MLB loses negotiating leverage should Manfred commit publicly to something so resolute? You bet. But the act should be designed to compel union leader Tony Clark to behave similarly. To commit to this. To see that pay for the rest of this season is important. But not more important than all the other seasons that would be so negatively impacted if somehow this one did not take place over dollars and zero common sense. If players want to opt out because of health or financial concerns, that is fine. This will be an opt-in system. But Manfred and Clark should reverse engineer this. Say the game is restarting at the most advantageous time to help the future of the sport and we are going to figure out how to make that happen. Mutual loss of leverage. Or you can keep passing offers back and forth that you know will incite the other. Both sides are expert at this, trained through the years at knowing just what buttons to push. Apparently, here in the kindergarten portion of the program, a pandemic, widespread death and sickness and nationwide financial devastation is not enough to stop the all too familiar behavior. Agree to agree that the sides do not like each other. But boy do you need each other. Owners can play hardball, but they are playing hardball with the engines of the sport. No one grew up wanting to watch an owner. Conversely, players should not get locked in on this single monetary issue. If the owners actually don’t blink, that means every player makes zero the rest of this season and the carryover to future years will be even more financially calamitous. With goodwill, there are mechanisms to defer fuller portions of salaries to the future, raise the minimum wage in coming years, remove luxury tax penalties so if big market clubs want to spend in a tough market they are not penalized for doing so. There are avenues to fairness. By pledging to resolution rather than rhetoric, Manfred and Clark are compelled to better will, if not goodwill. Maybe they won’t lose their jobs — though maybe they should if they can’t reach agreement considering that historic times demand historic leadership — but the loss of reputation would be absolute if they both promise solutions and fail amid familiar bluster. Let’s also add a deadline as a motivator: June 5 so that players could be fully in camp by June 12 and have three weeks of spring training 2.0 before a full slate on July 3. The adults see it, right? Baseball has a chance — rather than continuing to fulfill our lowest expectations — to renew the concept of a national pastime. Think of an Independence Day weekend of not just all-day games, but celebrating first responders and medical personnel. Think of doing it to a captive audience that does not yet have the NBA or NHL. Think of MLB being, gulp, a leader rather than so persistently running down its own product. There is really a chance to help the institution long term — good for all involved — and boost the nation — good for everybody. This will not be easy. It will take boldness to go first. That should be the commissioner of baseball. Clark then needs to follow. It might mean public statements from other veteran agents if they think Scott Boras is being obstructionist. I admire Boras’ fervor to protect player rights. And the players do have rights. Yet, I also believe the March 26 agreement states that if games are played without paying fans then another negotiation about player compensation needs to be had. That doesn’t mean players should have a system forced upon them. It means negotiate. Do what the union historically does best, sacrifice a little of today for the betterment of players in the future — think Curt Flood. There is a solution that begins with putting away what are currently sabres or rattles, and taking the risk of leadership. That has peril, but think of the danger if every other major team sport in the world plays and you don’t. Adults wouldn’t let that happen.

SILVER SPRING, Md. — Requiring patients to visit a hospital, clinic or medical office to get an abortion pill is needlessly risking their health during the COVID-19 pandemic, a group of physicians alleges in a lawsuit that seeks to suspend the federal rule. The federal lawsuit, which the American Civil Liberties Union filed Wednesday in Maryland, questions why patients can’t fill a prescription for mifepristone by mail. The US Food and Drug Administration approved mifepristone to be used in combination with a second drug, misoprostol, to end an early pregnancy or manage a miscarriage. “Of the more than 20,000 drugs regulated by the FDA, mifepristone is the only one that patients must receive in person at a hospital, clinic, or medical office, yet may self-administer, unsupervised, at a location of their choosing,” the lawsuit says. The ACLU sued the FDA and US Department of Health and Human Services on behalf of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and other groups. It marked the latest battle over access to abortions during the pandemic. Elsewhere, federal courts have heard cases involving access to abortion services as the outbreak continues. More than four million people in the US have used mifepristone and misoprostol to end an early pregnancy; the two-drug combination accounted for 39 percent of all US abortions in 2017, the lawsuit says. The lawsuit says the FDA rule has “particularly severe implications for low-income people and people of color, who comprise a disproportionate share of impacted patients and who are already suffering and dying from COVID-19 at substantially higher rates.” “During the COVID-19 pandemic and associated unemployment crisis, low-income patients are particularly likely to struggle to pay for and arrange travel,” the suit says. In 2017, the ACLU filed a lawsuit in Hawaii that challenged the FDA limits on where women can get the abortion pill. In January, a federal judge suspended the Hawaii case until the US Supreme Court rules in a separate abortion-related lawsuit from Louisiana. The Louisiana case could determine whether doctors and clinics have a right to challenge abortion restrictions in federal courts. Julia Kaye, staff attorney at the ACLU Reproductive Freedom Project, said the Trump administration apparently would rather endanger the lives of patients and doctors than lift “an unnecessary barrier to abortion care.” “At every other turn during this pandemic, the federal government is trying to make it easier for patients to get the medical care they need without unnecessary health care visits that jeopardize their safety,” Kaye said. After Texas Republican Gov. Greg Abbott issued an executive order in March that barred non-essential medical procedures during the pandemic, Texas’ Republican attorney general said that providing abortions other than for an immediate medical emergency would violate the order. A federal appeals court ruled last month that Texas can ban medication abortions to fight the spread of COVID-19. Earlier this month, a federal judge rejected a request by Arkansas’ only surgical abortion clinic to prevent the state from enforcing a rule requiring a negative coronavirus test before a woman undergoes the procedure. FDA Commissioner Stephen Hahn and HHS Secretary Alex Azar also are named as defendants in the suit. In March, dozens of anti-abortion advocates signed a letter to Azar in which they called for halting abortion procedures during the pandemic. “Their continued operation depletes sorely needed personal protective equipment and leads to complications that will further overwhelm already overextended emergency rooms,” the letter said.

Bebe Rexha’s parents are recovering after they both contracted COVID-19. “They got sick with the coronavirus and were very ill for three weeks, and I got very nervous,” the 30-year-old singer told Extra. Rexha, who lives in Los Angeles, desperately wanted to drive across the country to be with her New York City-based parents but they refused. “They were so adamant about not having my brother and I there, but finally they got better,” she said. “Finally they can taste food again. I’m really grateful.” She added, “I am happy that New York is getting into a much better spot and the East Coast is starting to see the light.” The “Meant to Be” singer has released a song for the graduates of 2020 called “Here’s to 2020” explaining that, “no other generation has gone through anything like this. It’s a testament to them, like, anything that comes their way, no matter what comes our way, we’ll get through it.” While self-quarantining, Rexha has been keeping busy by cooking up a storm and holding zoom meetings with DJ and producer David Guetta.

FreakNik Fest will go on as planned despite the coronavirus pandemic. The second annual music festival is set to take place at Morris Brown College in Atlanta from Sept. 18-20 with a lineup that includes Jermaine Dupri, Too Short, Juvenile, 2 Live Crew, Paul Wall and Da Brat. FreakNik Fest will be Atlanta’s first major concert since the city reopened at the end of April. Due to the pandemic, the After 9 Partners-produced event is reducing its capacity to 66 percent to maximize social distancing, we’re told. The event is also working with local officials to implement safety protocols,  including mandatory masks, temperature checks, sanitation stations and cashless payments. Tickets are available online.

A new study found that the odds of coronavirus hospital admission were nearly doubled if a patient is black. The study, published on May 27 in the New England Journal of Medicine, set out to find more information about racial and ethnic differences in outcomes from COVID-19. Researchers compared clinical characteristics and hospital course of lab-confirmed cases in black non-Hispanic patients to white non-Hispanic patients. In a large Louisiana cohort of patients at Ochsner Health, researchers found that 76.9 percent of COVID-19 hospitalized patients and 70.6 percent of fatalities, were black, while blacks comprise only 31 percent of the health care system’s population. However, blacks weren’t independently associated with higher mortality than whites after adjustment for differences in sociodemographic and clinical characteristics on admission, researchers say. The study concluded that in multivariable analyses, black race, older age, public insurance, residence in a low-income area and obesity were associated with higher odds of hospital admission. The findings support demographic data on COVID-19 cases released by the New York City Department of Health earlier this month, which shows rates of coronavirus hospilizations among New York City “Black/African-American” patients exceed all other races and ethnicities at 650.3 cases per 100,000 people. Hispanic/Latino patients follow closely behind at 589.06 per 100,000 whereas white patients are reportedly hospitalized at a rate of 290.94 cases per 100,000 people. The NYC data confirmed the direct correlation between poverty and cases, hospitalizations and deaths, with cases ticking higher as financial circumstances worsen. In the Louisiana study, the percentage of black patients with Medicaid insurance was three times as high as the percentage of white non-Hispanic patients and black patients were almost twice as likely to live in low-income areas as white patients. Black patients had higher prevalence of obesity, diabetes, hypertension and chronic kidney disease than white patients. Regardless of race, the most common acute medical conditions observed throughout hospitalization were hypoxic respiratory failure and pneumonia coinfection. Also, the average length of hospital stay was similar across racial groups. Researchers did report a higher percentage of black patients with acute renal failure during hospitalization when compared to white patients (15.3 percent and 10.7 percent, respectively). The vast majority of patients in the intensive care unit were black. In addition, 81.6 percent of 364 patients who received mechanical ventilation were black patients. Despite several noted limitations, the study authors say the research sheds light on otherwise epidemiologic characteristics of black non-Hispanic patients who, they say, are otherwise underrepresented in medical literature.

Tyson Foods plans to temporarily close an Iowa pork plant where nearly a quarter of the workers have caught the novel coronavirus. The meat-processing giant announced the move Thursday after Iowa officials said 555 of the Storm Lake facility’s 2,517 employees had tested positive for the potentially deadly virus. That’s about 22 percent of the plant’s workforce. Tyson partly attributed the shutdown to worker absences and a delay in COVID-19 test results. The plant will restart operations next week after a deep cleaning, the Arkansas-based company said. The closure came in the wake of President Trump’s late April executive order directing meat plants to stay open during the coronavirus crisis. The virus had forced roughly 20 slaughterhouses — including Tyson’s largest pork plant in Waterloo, Iowa — to close last month, raising concerns about meat shortages in the US. The coronavirus has killed at least 44 meatpacking workers and infected more than 3,000, the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union said Thursday. The union joined farmers and ranchers in calling for increased testing and social distancing at plants, better access to protective equipment and other safety measures. “When meatpacking plants struggle to contain this virus, it’s not just the workers inside like me who are at risk, family farmers and ranchers are too,” John Massalley, a Smithfield Foods worker in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, said in a statement. Tyson said it has required employees to wear masks as part of the safety measures it has implemented. Its Storm Lake plant can kill some 17,250 pigs a day at full capacity, which made up about 3.5 percent of the nation’s production before the coronavirus pandemic. With Post wires

The Empire State’s $10 million coronavirus tracing program — which is being spearheaded by billionaire ex-mayor Mike Bloomberg — failed to meet their minimum hiring target one month after launching. Gov. Andrew Cuomo last month tapped Bloomberg as his coronavirus-tracing czar — announcing the failed Democratic presidential candidate would mastermind the program that would ultimately hire between 6,400 and 17,000 people. At an April 22 press briefing in Albany, Cuomo announced Bloomberg would “coordinate the entire effort” and told reporters he wanted it up and running within weeks. “You don’t have a month to plan and do this,” he said. But by May 22, the joint initiative between Cuomo’s office and Bloomberg Philanthropies had successfully trained and hired just 2,164 tracers, a DOH spokeswoman confirmed last week. After repeated emails from The Post, the health department and Cuomo’s office on Friday updated that figure to 6,100 — barely hitting the minimum of the sweeping targets they announced. Top Cuomo aide Melissa DeRosa said Bloomberg’s public health program at John Hopkins University would create the online curriculum and, with the governor’s office, train, recruit, interview and perform background checks on the tracers. But Joshua Sharfstein, the vice dean for public health practice and community engagement at John Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, told The Post they were responsible for only training people — not hiring or screening which he said was up to state governments. “We play a pretty narrow role. We just wanted to create a basic course for people to understand the basics of COVID-19,” Sharfstein said. When asked if the school was feeding graduates to state governments, he responded: “We don’t do that. We just do the course.” A Cuomo spokesman said any allegations they were lagging behind their targets were “patently false.” “When we launched the joint initiative with Bloomberg Philanthropies, we said we would need a range from 6,400 up to 17,000 tracers statewide,” spokesman Jason Conwall said. “We already have more than 6,100 tracers on the streets and another 4,000 that have completed the training and are in the final interview process,” he said Friday. Another Cuomo spokesman insisted they were on target because New York City hadn’t reopened and said they might not need 17,000 tracers at all. The Health Department confirmed the local and state tracers had been assigned to the seven Empire State regions which have reopened as COVID-19 cases in the hard-hit state continue to drop. New York City has its own tracing program — Mayor Bill de Blasio announcing on Wednesday that 1,700 contact tracers would be ready for work next week. A vital part of reopening, contact tracers act as disease detectives by tracking down people who have crossed paths with confirmed coronavirus patients to let them know that they may need to take isolation precautions. The state health department has fielded more than 50,000 applicants and said more people were being hired each day in the roles which pay $27 per hour. Sharfstein also said more than 200,000 people had enrolled in the John Hopkins coronavirus tracing course, which is free and available to anyone. Last week, The Post revealed how SUNY students applied for what they thought were paid positions with the state Health Department as coronavirus tracers, only to be told after the fact that the gigs are unpaid.

Health officials warn that the mass protests roiling Minneapolis in the aftermath of George Floyd’s death could have the unintended consequence of a spike in coronavirus cases in Minnesota, according to a report. State Health Commissioner Jan Malcolm said that it was understandable that people want to protest Floyd’s death while in police custody, but warned about their exposure risks during the pandemic, the Star Tribune reported. Minnesota reported a single-day record of 35 deaths on Thursday from the illness, raising the death toll to 967, according to the news outlet. “People are moved to want to speak and to want to gather in solidarity and in protest, and we certainly honor and respect that right,” Malcolm said. “As we know, large gatherings do pose a risk in any epidemic, but certainly where we stand today with the state of COVID-19 spread in our community. Knowing that we have community spread, we just want to again encourage folks who gather to be mindful of the risk,” she added. The state is among 20 that are listed on the COVID Exit Strategy website as “trending poorly” due to increasing case counts and hospitalizations, the Star Tribune reported. Blacks have contracted at least 29 percent of the known cases with listed racial information in Minnesota, despite making up a little more than 6 percent of the state’s population. The state had been scaling back restrictions, with churches being able to offer services for up to 250 people or 25 percent of their capacities, and restaurants and bars being allowed to provide outdoor service beginning Monday.

Swiss drugmaker Novartis will start producing a genetic coronavirus vaccine this month under a deal with Massachusetts researchers. AveXis, Novartis’ gene-therapy arm, agreed to manufacture the vaccine being developed by Massachusetts Eye and Ear and Massachusetts General Hospital. Production will start in time for clinical trials that are scheduled to begin in the second half of this year, according to a Thursday announcement. Researchers cast AveXis as a strong partner because it already has more than 1 million square feet of manufacturing capacity as the producer of the gene therapy Zolgensma, one of just two drugs of its kind available in the US. “We are uniquely poised to help the team move quickly toward this accelerated effort,” AveXis president Dave Lennon said in a statement. The agreement puts Novartis into the global race for a COVID-19 vaccine that has already attracted pharmaceutical and biotech firms such as AstraZeneca, Moderna, Merck and Novavax. Clinical evaluations have started for 10 potential vaccines and more than 100 others are in pre-clinical stages, according to the World Health Organization. The Massachusetts vaccine uses a vector of an adeno-associated virus, or AAV — a kind of virus that does not cause disease — to deliver genetic code to produce “protein fragments” of the new coronavirus and trigger an immune response, according to researchers. The AveXis drug Zolgensma — which made headlines as the world’s most expensive drug with its $2.1 million price tag — also uses an AAV vector. “By partnering with an industry leader in AveXis that already produces AAV gene therapy products at large scales, we are more on track than ever to reaching our goal of developing a vaccine capable for wide distribution to prevent infection at population levels,” said Luk H. Vandenberghe, director of Massachusetts Eye and Ear’s Grousbeck Gene Therapy Center.

HONOLULU — Hawaii Gov. David Ige on Thursday said he would extend the state’s 14-day quarantine requirement for travelers arriving in the state beyond June 30. The state mandated the quarantine beginning on March 26 to control the spread of the coronavirus. The governor told a joint online press conference held with the state’s four county mayors that an official announcement on the extension would be made later. Ige said he’s been working with the mayors on lifting a separate 14-day quarantine requirement for people traveling between Hawaii’s islands. He said a decision would be coming within the next few days. Maui Mayor Mike Victorino said he wants to make sure steps are taken to control the virus. “I’m willing to open up with necessary safeguards to prevent spread between islands,” Victorino said. The pandemic has bludgeoned Hawaii’s economy, triggering what University of Hawaii economists called “the sharpest and deepest economic downturn in the state’s modern history.” Hawaii instituted a stay-at-home order and closed dine-in restaurants, shopping malls and other businesses in March to slow the spread of the virus. The state then followed with the traveler quarantine, which effectively shut off the flow of visitors who fuel the state’s biggest industry, tourism. Unemployment hit 22.3% in April, among the highest rates in the country. The number of travelers arriving in Hawaii fell to 4,564 last month compared to 856,250 in April 2019, the Hawaii Tourism Authority said. That’s a 99.5% decline. The University of Hawaii Economic Research Organization predicted in a new report the state’s gross domestic product will shrink 11.1% this calendar year as spending by travelers plunges 65%. This estimate is based on a calculation that tourists will begin to return to the islands in late July. A more pessimistic forecast, based on tourists not returning until late September, predicts a 12.9% decline in GDP this year and a 73.5% drop in visitor spending. The state is also facing a sharp decline in tax revenue. The Council on Revenues, which forecasts tax revenue for the governor and Legislature, on Thursday forecast general fund tax revenue would drop 7% during the fiscal year ending June 30. It expects that to be followed by a 12% drop the subsequent fiscal year. Council member Jack Suyderhoud, a University of Hawaii professor emeritus, said there was a great deal of uncertainty in the estimate. One unknown is when the state’s leaders would move to lift the quarantine requirement, he said. “The problem is that we’re now in the business of forecasting what the viral science is going to be doing and then we also have to forecast what the politicians are doing. And so it’s getting pretty crazy,” Suyderhoud said during an online broadcast of the meeting. The council last issued its forecast on March 11 before the state’s stay-at-home order and traveler quarantine took effect. At that point, the council estimated general fund tax revenues would increase 3.8% during the current fiscal year and be flat in the next fiscal year. Hawaii law requires policymakers to consider the council’s estimates when drafting state budgets and appropriating funds. Its seven members are appointed by the governor, House speaker and Senate president.

The NFL is about to take one small step toward restoring normalcy. Commissioner Roger Goodell announced Thursday following a virtual owners meeting that coaching staffs are expected to be allowed back in team facilities next week for the first time since the March 24 shutdown under coronavirus restrictions. Non-injured players remain prohibited from returning. Facilities in states where it is permitted by the government, including New Jersey and New York, already are open to some team employees. The league still hopes to bring back coaches for all 32 teams simultaneously to maintain “competitive equity” and is in contact with state and local government authorities to confirm a plan for reopening in closed states. “This offseason has looked a lot different than it has in the past,” Goodell told reporters, “but we’re proud that key activities … have demonstrated we can operate in new and innovative ways so we are prepared for the 2020 season.” Virtual meetings and workouts were extended by two weeks into mid-June, rendering it unlikely mandatory June minicamps will be held in person. “We will continue to work with the NFLPA and our medical experts to ensure we are doing everything to ensure a safe return for our players,” Goodell said, “not only to the facilities but to training camps, for preseason games and, of course, the start of the regular season. That’s the highest priority we have.”

George Weisz, a tinkerer-turned-mechanical engineer who designed a popular ventilator being used to treat the coronavirus, has died in the UK at the age of 90, according to a report. Weisz, who was born in Hungary in 1929, fled Budapest for London with his mother and two sisters in 1939, two weeks before the outbreak of World War II, The Times reported. His father had paved their way after moving to England the year before amid a rising wave of anti-Semitism. His uncle and cousin both perished during the Holocaust. The family settled in north London, where his mother inculcated him with her love of art and he lived by his father’s philosophical words: “Where is it written that life should be easy? Life is hard,” the newspaper reported. Weisz’s path to engineering began when he was a mere 6-year-old, when he disassembled his dad’s pocket watch. “I managed to put it back together again,” he said. “From that point onwards, everybody said I was going to be an engineer.” In 1950, he graduated from Birmingham University with a degree in engineering and joined the English Electric Co., an industrial manufacturer based in London. Weisz was the youngest works manager the company — whose aircraft designs became landmarks of British aeronautics — had employed, The Times reported. In 1960, he bought a small factory that supplied components to several car manufacturers, then signed a contract with the Ministry of Defence to provide it with parachute release actuators used by RAF pilots. Six years later, he launched Kay Pneumatics, which specialized in automation using compressed air — technology that was used on train and bus doors across Britain. In 1972, he invented an artificial ventilator pneumatically powered by its own oxygen tank. Today, thousands of his Pneupac machines are helping hospitals across the UK to manage the coronavirus pandemic, according to the news outlet. In 1986, Weisz’s marriage to Edith Teich ended in divorce. He married Judith Szekacz, a fellow Hungarian who is a psychoanalyst, in 1994. Weisz received a Queen’s Award for Technological Achievement in 1993. At age 84, he produced a documentary, set in Nazi Germany, about the little-known story of Regina Jonas, who became the first woman to be ordained as a rabbi. She later died at Auschwitz. “I feel very emotional about the Holocaust. It is something that casts a shadow and should not be forgotten — and that is one of the reasons I wanted to do this film,” Weisz said when the film was released. In addition to his wife, Weisz is survived by his children, Rachel, the Oscar-winning actress; Minnie, a photographer and visual artist; and a stepson, Mark, a literary translator and writer.

The World Health Organization is recommending healthy people, including those who don’t exhibit COVID-19 symptoms, only wear masks when taking care of someone infected with the contagion, a sharp contrast from the advice given by American public health officials who recommend everyone wear a mask in public. “If you do not have any [respiratory] symptoms such as fever, cough or runny nose, you do not need to wear a mask,” Dr. April Baller, a public health specialist for the WHO, says in a video on the world health body’s website. “Masks should only be used by health care workers, caretakers or by people who are sick with symptoms of fever and cough.” The recommendation differs from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), which urges individuals to wear a mask or face covering in public settings, regardless of infection, to limit the spread of the virus. “We now know from recent studies that a significant portion of individuals with coronavirus lack symptoms (‘asymptomatic’) and that even those who eventually develop symptoms (‘pre-symptomatic’) can transmit the virus to others before showing symptoms,” the CDC mask guidance says. “In light of this new evidence, CDC recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.” Baller noted that masks can give people a “false feeling of protection” and noted that sick individuals should wear one to prevent transmitting the virus to others. Messages to the WHO from Fox News were not immediately returned. The CDC recommended last month that people wear nonsurgical face coverings when out in public after previously advising only health care workers and people exhibiting symptoms to do so. A new study suggests that wearing masks could cut COVID-19 cases by 80 percent if people heeded the advice. “Universal masking at 80 [percent] adoption flattens the curve significantly more than maintaining a strict lockdown,” a group of international researchers wrote in the study, which has not yet been peer-reviewed. The authors noted that countries and regions — Macau, Beijing, Taiwan, Singapore and Japan — with histories of wearing masks have seen huge reductions in the number of coronavirus cases after reaching their peak. A separate study released earlier this month divided scientists on the effectiveness of wearing masks. Fox News’ Chris Ciaccia contributed to this report. 

MLB players’ unhappiness with the latest salary proposal from the game’s owners, and how they have handled themselves in the process, are now pitting pitchers of different eras against each other — and it’s getting personal. Vocal Reds righty Trevor Bauer and former Cardinals, Twins and Brewers pitcher Kyle Lohse had a heated Twitter exchange on Thursday that included Bauer calling Lohse “sexist.” Their spat was over the roles of Scott Boras and Bauer’s agent Rachel Luba, and the battle between MLB and the union over how much players will be paid if baseball return to games without fans in the stands. The players have been vocal on social media — mostly voicing their displeasure — over the owners’ proposal to put them on a sliding scale with more salary cuts after the two sides agreed to a prorated pay system in March. Lohse, who last pitched in the majors for the Rangers in 2016, tweeted at Bauer a day after Bauer said on social media that Boras should: “Keep your damn personal agenda out of union business.” The 41-year-old Lohse believes the players are doing themselves a disservice by making their feelings public on social media. “Who do you think has helped put a system in place where you can throw balls and never have to really work a day in your life while making unreal amounts of money?,” Lohse wrote. “Take your comments to the MLBPA if you have concerns, not twitter. Let the union do the talking. Best of luck” Bauer, who seems to never shy away from a Twitter fight, fired back: “Sorry for upsetting you Kyle but if I wanted Scott boras to represent my interests and the interests of my family and many employees etc, I would ask Scott boras to do that, I don’t want him to,” Bauer wrote. “I want the player group through the union to do so.” Ok @KyleLohse26 2 things. You disrespected me first by judging me and making accusations. Second, it’s extremely sexist to assume that @AgentRachelLuba and I are dating. Would you assume any other player is dating their agent or are you just doing that because of her gender? pic.twitter.com/6Ms2ksTygo — Trevor Bauer (@BauerOutage) May 29, 2020  Lohse, who got into a back-and-forth with Luba on Twitter, wanted to leave it there, tweeting he had more to say but was letting it go. Bauer continued by taking a shot at the 2011 World Series winner. “Kyle, your time as a player has come and gone,” Bauer tweeted. “You’re no longer part of the player group negotiating. Everyone appreciates your time and your service, but you don’t speak on behalf of the players anymore. That time has come and gone for you. You’re not privy to everything that’s going on…that inherently means you’re out of touch…it’s not an insult.” Lohse, who said he’s on the players’ side, didn’t let that go answered. “Trevor, I’m just gonna chalk this one up to immaturity,” he wrote. “While your generation is talking mlb business while playing video games and complaining publicly how the union is doing, us out of touch ex players aren’t happy standing by, watching you wreck what was built.” Bauer, who was 11-13 with a 4.48 ERA with the Indians and Reds in 2019, gave him an “Ok Boomer” in response before the two exchanged a few more barbs. The war of words later picked up and got personal after Lohse brought into question Baur’s relationship with Luba, who became a certified agent in November and claimed Bauer as her first client. Luba, 27, is one of the youngest women ever certified as an agent by MLB. “Trevor, isn’t the real reason you’re so against Scott having a say in negotiations, if true, is because you and your girlfriend/agent (real thing not an accusation) agenda?” Lohse wrote. “Conflict of interest much? Are you mad because she hasn’t had a say with all her “experiences” negotiating things like this? If you’re so sure of someone else’s agenda, why don’t you lay yours out there.” This prompted an angry response from Bauer. “Ok @KyleLohse26 2 things, You disrespected me first by judging me and making accusations. Second it’ extremely sexist to assume that @agentRachelLuba and I are dating,” Bauer tweeted. “Would you assume any other player is dating their agent or are you just doing it because of her gender?” Lohse did let that go unchecked, asking Bauer to skate around the issues he raised. “That’s what you’re gonna go with? Calling me sexist? Am I wrong?Answer the questions I pasted for you truthfully.” Loshe wrote. “Oh, I’m sorry, forgot you don’t really “date”.” Luba also responded to Loshe’s comments. “Imagine a world where a law degree, experiences as an MLBPA attorney, having worked at other mlb agencies, and successfully becoming a certified MLB Player Agent with a client in the majors isn’t enough to avoid comments like this (mind-blown emoji),” she tweeted. “so disappointing.”

The nation’s biggest mattress maker is in danger of becoming a coronavirus casualty this summer — and it’s the company’s private-equity owners that have made it vulnerable. Serta Simmons Bedding — a 150-year-old manufacturer that controls nearly 40 percent of the US mattress market — is facing a liquidity crunch as its retailers struggle with state-ordered lockdowns that have shuttered stores nationwide, sources told The Post. In turn, at least two so-called vulture firms are now circling the company, betting that it could run out of cash as soon as July and get forced into a fire sale to creditors, sources close to the situation said. At least one such fund is buying up portions of the company’s senior unsecured debt, which was recently trading at a mere 42 cents on the dollar, indicating that Wall Street believes a default is likely. “I am hearing they are going to need to restructure in the next quarter or two,” an industry executive said. Insiders say Serta Simmons got into the mess partly because the company — like the recently bankrupted Neiman Marcus and J. Crew chains — has been saddled with debt by a private-equity firm that left it little wiggle room to navigate a crisis. Advent International — a Boston-based buyout firm whose other consumer investments have included Lululemon and the Five Below tween chain — led a $3 billion leveraged buyout in 2012 that has left the company with $2.3 billion in debt. Part of the load came from a $670 million, debt-fueled dividend that Advent took for itself in 2016. In March before the coronavirus hit the US, the company — which in addition to Serta and Simmons owns the Beautyrest and Tuft & Needle brands — had $100 million on its balance sheet, and was generating more than $200 million in Ebitda, or earnings before interest, taxes depreciation and amortization, according to Moody’s Investor Service. That, according to Moody’s, amounted to a “very highly leveraged” capital structure that was “unsustainable.” That’s despite Advent’s moves to aggressively slash costs more than a year ago. Early last year, Serta Simmons Chairman David Swift, a longtime Advent executive, overruled the company’s Chief Executive Michael Traub and hired restructuring firm Alvarez & Marsal to find $40 million in cost savings, an industry executive said. The company fired 160 employees, including much of its senior and higher-paid staff, according to the source. About a month later, Swift replaced Traub as CEO, but things just got rockier. Mattress Firm, the biggest mattress retailer in the US, ended its exclusive relationship with Serta Simmons and started selling Tempur Sealy beds, two industry executives said. Serta Simmons also lost a distribution deal with Big Lots, a major closeout chain. “Together, that’s north of $300 million lost on an annualized basis,” one of the executives said, or about 15 percent of its total $2.3 billion in revenue. That’s also down from $2.8 billion in revenue in 2017, according to Moody’s. With the arrival of the coronavirus, mattress sales have gotten slammed further. Tempur Sealy, a smaller, publicly traded rival that controls more than 25 percent of the market, saw its sales plunge more than 50 percent in April. Tempur Sealy said Thursday it expects sales for the current quarter to be down 30 percent and that it will be “at least” breakeven for the quarter on an Ebitda basis. Meanwhile, Serta Simmons’ massive debt load has crimped its ability to offer mattresses at low prices, analysts say. The company “likely underperformed” versus Tempur Sealy and other brands during Memorial Day weekend sales events and is “struggling versus its peers,” Raymond James said in a Wednesday note. “Serta Simmons (private equity owned) is highly levered and recently elected not to renew its Las Vegas showroom lease, which we believe will put it at a further disadvantage with the smaller mom-and-pop customers,” the brokerage told clients in a Wednesday research note. Advent International declined to comment. Reps for Serta Simmons didn’t respond to requests for comment.

She’s a lucky sew-and-sew! An Oregon woman won a $126,784 jackpot in the lottery — after buying the winning ticket with the money she made sewing coronavirus face masks. “I don’t play a lot,” said winner Lorna Hewitt, who bought her winning Keno-8 ticket at a grocery store in the town of Sisters. “But I thought — I was doing something to help. Maybe I would win,” she said in a press release from the Oregon Lottery. Hewett, who was laid off from a restaurant job due to the pandemic, found part-time work at a local grocery store. It was there she decided to earn a bit of extra pocket money by sewing face masks for her coworkers. “I was making the masks with fabric I already had,” she said. She claimed her prize money on Thursday — and her first stop after the Oregon Lottery offices was the Joann Fabrics store, so she could continue to help people. “My masks are popular,” she explained. “And I want to keep making them.”

New Yorkers Matt Robertson, 31, and Khani Le, 29, matched on the dating app Hinge in February, and by date No. 3 they had booked a trip to Costa Rica. But they’ve wound up stranded in Central America during the pandemic. On Day 71, they spoke to Page Six. “Our first two dates went really well … We were feeling adventurous. It started out as a joke and then I escalated it and bought round-trip tickets to Costa Rica,” Robertson said. They took off March 17 as nonessential services closed. Le told us the airline said they’d “be fine,” and, “I didn’t even tell anyone. I told my mom when I was boarding the flight and my dad still doesn’t even know about Matt.” The vacation began with zip-lining and feeling, “badass for going on a third date together in another country,” Robertson said. But the week vacation turned into a nightmare. “Flights kept getting canceled and we just drove around the country … finding affordable hotels and different Airbnbs,” Robertson said. “Most don’t have A/Cs … There’s been lots of bugs and cockroaches, snakes and raccoons and we’ve been freaking out.” But, “in hindsight, I’m really lucky to be stuck with someone like her … Everything happens for a reason. I guess I needed a global pandemic to push me into a relationship.”

Mark Teixeira said he was “cautiously optimistic” Major League Baseball and the Players Association would come to an agreement in the coming weeks to allow for there to be an abbreviated season. But the retired Yankee added if the two sides don’t come together, there could be dire consequences for the sport. “I would hate for owners to use this opportunity to break the union,’’ Teixeira said. “This is our lives.” Speaking on Baseball Tonight Podcast, the ESPN analyst called the owners’ proposal to the union this week, which included a sliding pay scale that would cost highly paid veterans a huge chunk of their salaries “worse than the offer floated a few weeks ago with the 50-50 revenue split.” “What I see, this sliding pay scale deal is basically the owners saying, ‘I’m gonna pit the young players against the veterans and I’m gonna bet that the young players want to play,’ ’’ Teixeira said. “’And I’m gonna bet the veterans are gonna say no way this is ridiculous and I’m gonna let you fight amongst each other ’til you come back to the table.’’ ’ It’s already drawn strong criticism from veteran players like Washington’s Max Scherzer, who wrote on Twitter Wednesday night “After discussing the latest developments with the rest of the players there’s no reason to engage with MLB in any further compensation reductions.” Another member of MLBPA’s Executive Subcommittee, former Yankee Andrew Miller, had a more positive tone speaking with The Post’s Ken Davidoff Thursday. “I think we’ll figure it out,” said Miller, now with the Cardinals. “I know the rhetoric out there is not in the greatest place in the last couple of days. The reality is it’s in the best interest for everyone to play.’’ It won’t be easy. The players and owners agreed to a pact in March that protected both sides against the worst-case scenario of no season at all. It said the players would get a prorated portion of their pay, but the reality of playing games without fans has muddied the water. Teixeira, who drew criticism earlier this month when he said he “would rather make pennies on the dollar and give hope to people and play baseball than not make anything and lose an entire year off their career”, said Thursday the players should ask the owners to open their books. “I’m not gonna trust you when you just tell me ‘This is what we’re making,’ ” Teixeira said. “Open your books. It’s not that hard to figure out what the revenues are gonna be. The TV contracts are set. We pretty much understand what each game means from a playoff standpoint and the revenue that’s created, but if there are no fans in the stands, you just take that line item out of the revenues budget.” There’s clearly a significant gap between the two sides, but Teixeira believes it will close. “I think, eventually, players and owners will understand there are ways to move forward,’’ he said. “And as bad as it looks [Thursday], I am cautiously optimistic for some agreement in the next few weeks.” And that’s in part because the players know how much is at stake, especially for the players, who can ill-afford having no season lead to another work stoppage heading into the next CBA. “[The union] sticking together may mean we don’t have a season this year and that’s what frightens me the most,’’ Teixeira said. “If the players don’t in-fight, if they don’t take the bait the owners have thrown out there, they’ve got to come back to the owners with some sort of proposal that makes financial sense so MLB has some sort of incentive to actually play baseball this year — because they are going to lose a boatload of money, no matter what.”

The coronavirus is moving from older to younger residents in Washington state. Half of the confirmed cases in Washington by early May are under the age of 40, marking a significant shift from the early outbreak of the virus when that age group accounted for just 33 percent of sick residents, according to a new study. The researchers behind the work are urging health officials to increase awareness and safety efforts targeted toward younger Americans as states continue to reopen. Even though young people are less likely to be hospitalized with COVID-19, they can still become seriously ill and their lifestyles put them at a greater risk of spreading the disease to others, Seattle epidemiologist Judith Malmgren, who led the study, told the Seattle Times. “Younger people are the most likely to be socially active, they are the most likely to work in essential professions and have more contact with the public,” Malmgren said. The report, posted on the reprint server medRxiv, uses the state’s publicly available health data to track the ages of cases between March 1 and May 3, showing the share of cases shifting to younger populations after the total number of infections peaked in late March. The analysis doesn’t delve into why cases have shifted toward younger patients. But Malmgren said anecdotally she’s observed more younger people in her city out and about without facemasks. Health officials in the state told the Seattle Times that the trends were the results of early awareness targeting older, vulnerable populations — as younger residents stayed home less often. “The pattern in who’s getting infected over time reflects people’s behavior,” Dr. Jeff Duchin, a health officer for Seattle & King County, told the paper.

Welcome to Michigan — not. Two electronic billboards at the Indiana border are urging travelers to think again before driving into the Wolverine State so long as coronavirus lockdowns are in place. “NOW ENTERING MICHIGAN,” they read. “REALLY? YOU’RE SURE ABOUT THIS?” Drivers leaving Michigan are treated to an equally snarky message. “The Great State of Indiana Welcomes Michiganders To A Free-To-Roam State. We Thank You for the Revenue!” The billboards were put up by businessman Steve Swick, who insisted to CNN that despite the sour-on-Michigan messages, “It’s not politically motivated at all.” “I did it just to do it,” said Swick, who is president of the Swick Broadcasting Company. “We hear and see all the frustrations of Michiganders that are going through,” he said. “There was nothing political about it.” Gov. Gretchen Whitmer — whose husband recently dropped her name to get favorable treatment at a marina — has extended the state’s stay-at-home order until at least June 12; the mandate has inspired personal threats, rowdy rallies and individual acts of defiance.

An extended “lockdown cure” may kill far more Americans than COVID-19. That sobering reality underpins the Trump administration’s strategy to work with America’s 50 states to get the nation back to work as quickly and safely as possible. When little was known about the virus in March, the prudent course was to lock down all nonessential parts of the economy, slow the spread and “flatten the curve.” Patriotic Americans fought this war against the China virus not by grabbing a rifle, but simply staying home. President Trump’s actions, ably orchestrated by Vice President Mike Pence’s task force, likely succeeded in saving hundreds of thousands of American lives. While New York and New Jersey suffered unusually high rates of infection and saw their hospital systems stretched to the limit, the rest of the country weathered the attack. This flattening of the curve came at great cost. Some 44 million Americans have filed for unemployment insurance. In the first three months of 2020, we shed roughly $75 bill­­ion from what was a robustly growing economy just 90 days ago — and are facing a further loss of $750 billion in the second quarter. The federal government and the Federal Reserve have collectively committed close to $10 trillion in stimulus, and there may be much more debt financing to come. The left has sought to portray the president’s aggressive reopening gambit as a heartless trade-off between “saving lives” versus “saving jobs.” That’s a false dichotomy. It’s about health versus health. Yes, the China virus directly kills American citizens. But the virus’ economic shocks also kill indirectly through two lethal vectors. First: High unemployment boosts rates of depression, suicide, drug overdoses and comorbidities associated with illnesses such as cancer, diabetes and heart disease. We already know this from the impact of China’s dismantling of the American Midwest in the 2000s. A 2000 study in the Quarterly Journal of Economics found that a ­1 point increase in unemployment is associated with a 1 percent increase in suicides. A 2017 Centre for Economic Policy Research study found that China’s joining the World Trade Organization, and the resulting job losses, were associated with rising drug and alcohol poisoning, crime and childhood poverty — and a fall in total fertility. A second vector has do with Americans foregoing a wide range of elective procedures as a result of lockdowns, from mammograms, pap smears and breast-cancer surgeries to arthroplasties, colonoscopies and bone-marrow and lung biopsies. Tens of thousands received these procedures in early January; there were essentially none performed as of early April. This is deadly. A two-month delay in receiving breast-cancer surgery is associated with a 10 percent mortality increase; a delay of a month or more in receiving heart surgery is associated with a 60 percent mortality increase. The White House Council of Economic Advisers estimates that decreased health-care utilization for non-COVID illnesses during the lockdown has resulted in 1.8 million to 2.7 million total years of American life lost by the end of May. The council also estimates that unless we resume economic activity by the second quarter of 2021, this may result in an additional 7,100 drug overdose deaths, an additional 2,800 suicides, a 10 percent increase in spousal abuse and 15 million years of life lost. If recovery were delayed for another year, we may lose 16.8 million to 17.7 million years of American life, equivalent to a 0.05 year reduction in life expectancy per American. This, then, is the far more complex calculus that the Trump White House has tried to manage. We can’t follow some of the pied pipers of the medical profession who would have us hide in our homes until the virus either burns itself out, we develop herd immunity or a successful and widely available vaccine comes to market. We must balance health versus health: lives saved by a lockdown against many more lives lost or damaged by a bleak economy. The president has made the courageous decision to move boldly forward to reopen. That’s real leadership. And if there is any leader who can help us quickly rebuild, it will be the president who, over the last 3 ¹/₂ years, built the strongest economy in modern history. He can, and will, certainly do that again — and American lives will be longer and healthier for it. Tyler Goodspeed is a member of the White House Council of Economic Advisers. Peter Navarro is assistant to the president for trade and manufacturing policy. 

It’s supremely obnoxious in this time of COVID-19 craziness: a fight over big dollars to play a game — while millions of people now go unemployed. That’s the back-and-forth between Major League Baseball’s owners and the Players Association. MLB wants to start play by July 4, meaning that in order to get in three weeks of “spring” training, players need to be ready by mid-June. Earlier this month MLB leaders pitched to players an 80-odd-game season in which teams would play against others in their regions and the players would get prorated salaries based on the number of games played — as the players agreed in March. But the money fight persists, because, as The Post’s Joel Sherman notes, “MLB’s first offer was so punch-in-the-face not conciliatory that it galvanized the players.” It looked like a divide-and-conquer bid: Players making the minimum salary ($563,500) would earn roughly 93 percent of their pay, while those on the top of the pay scale would take a cut of more than 50 percent. So now the players’ union reportedly plans to counter the league’s offer with: players receiving their full prorated salaries . . . and a schedule longer than 82 games. Sherman fears that “the longer the fight, the greater the risk to not just reputations, but bodies. The sooner players can get to camps and the longer they can stay there, the better.” To management and the union: Get yourselves together and give us poor folk stuck in quarantine some baseball, for goodness’ sake.

Furniture peddler Raymour & Flanigan has halted efforts to reopen its stores in New York after The Post wrote about the controversial practice, staffers said. “We were told that we are on ‘pause’ and will get an update later today or tomorrow,” one Empire State store manager said of the orders she was given after The Post’s story ran. “We were told to ‘stand by’ while they ‘get their lawyers on it’ ” a Raymour & Flanigan sales associate on Long Island said. The staffer said he got the call moments after he arrived for work on Thursday for the first time since late March, when the pandemic led to nationwide quarantines. As The Post reported on Wednesday, legions of Raymour & Flanigan employees have been called back to work in recent weeks to reopen their doors to customers, who book one-hour appointments on the company’s Web site. But the reopenings are taking place at a time when furniture sellers, including Raymour & Flanigan, have been declared non-essential businesses in New York, which means they are only allowed to open for curbside pickup or in-store pickup of previously purchased items, as of May 15. Businesses in violation of the rules face stiff fines of up to $10,000 in New York and revocation of their licenses. Staffers, meanwhile, have complained that the reopenings put their lives at risk. Raymour & Flanigan, which also appears to have removed its Web site bookings function, didn’t respond to requests for comment. Ethan Allen, a publicly traded company that has also been allowing customers to book appointments to shop in its New York stores, also didn’t respond to requests for comment. Big retail chains aren’t the only businesses seeking to defy lockdowns that are extending into their third month with no obvious end in sight. Mom-and-pop retailers are also testing the limits amid growing frustrations over stay-at-home orders that threaten to put them out of business. As The Post reported on Thursday, Staten Island tanning salon owner Bobby Catone defiantly reopened on Thursday as demonstrators cheered. He was quickly shut down by cops and slapped with a $1,000 ticket.

The other day I was talking to the woman who owns the fitness center where my kids take a variety of classes: sports skills, gymnastics, a baby-movement class. I asked her a simple question: “How many kids signed up for classes next year during your pre-enrollment period?” Usually, May is her most profitable month, as hundreds of families lock in the lowest prices of the season to take classes the following year. Her answer shocked me: We were the only family out of hundreds who usually take classes to sign up. All around us, we are hearing about closures. A local gymnastics studio that has been in business for more than 20 years closed its doors. Another indoor play space announced its decision to close the week before. My daughter’s dance-studio company just sent an e-mail asking if parents would even be willing to return their kids to classes in the fall; I’m not hopeful. And then there are preschools. In the last week, I’ve heard from three different friends working at preschools who have decided to quit. Some schools aren’t coming back, some schools are still deciding. They aren’t sure if they’ll even have enough students ­enrolled to open, and if they do, they don’t know how to possibly run a classroom full of young children with all the social distancing we’ve come to expect; 3-year-olds won’t keep a mask on all day, sorry. The closures are tragic for the owners and employees. And they’re devastating for parents: What will be left of our kids’ childhoods? Though at minimal to no risk from the novel coronavirus, our kids aren’t going to come out of this situation unscathed. Not remotely. The academic impact will be significant: The fallout of one interrupted school year and the probability of a late start to another will be noticeable for years to come and widen the gulf between the haves and the have-nots. Children without parents prioritizing education at home will fall further behind. But that doesn’t mean kids on the other end of the privilege spectrum will emerge unscathed. Children of all ages and across economic classes are facing long-lasting emotional damage from having their lives abruptly ­interrupted in this way. They need outlets. Will museums, aquariums and zoos survive to provide them with weekend ­activities? As I write this, I get the final e-mail from my kids’ camp for the summer. The operators may still be able to run it this season, but with a long list of protocols in place: “Counselors will maintain a distance of at least six feet from campers, and all activities will take place outdoors.” Instead of holding camp on site, they will be hosting it at families’ homes in “pods” with a maximum of seven kids per pod. How fun. We had signed up our kids for the full camp experience: Spending the summer in a stranger’s backyard, having their temperatures taken daily and not going near their counselors — that isn’t what we wanted for our kids’ summers, and as such, we asked for a refund (minus a $200 per child donation to the camp). But that decision came with some guilt: How many kids are going to participate in this pod version of camp? Will the operators make enough money to justify holding it at all? Most important: Will the camp risk running next year, the operators knowing they may have to eat the administrative costs if there’s another mass cancellation? I’m a planner; I am the kind of person who buys a planner for the next year in May. I love to imagine what our next school year will look like at the close of the last. And as I consider what our lives are going to look like, I’m overcome with sadness. As of now, it doesn’t appear like anything we loved in previous years will survive to serve my kids in the future. That’s not just a loss for business owners, but a profound loss for my kids’ childhood as well. Every new closure or cancellation announcement is another piece of the tapestry of their lives disappearing. Twitter: @BethanyShondark 

A coronavirus-positive Bronx man who tried to commit suicide-by-cop with an antique revolver and a ketchup-covered knife was shot by police — only to die in the hospital five days later from the bug, a shocking new video shows. “Please kill me… please kill me… please kill me… shoot me here, shoot me here please,” Ricardo Cardona begged of Officer Xaiver Marcus as the troubled man laid on the street — writhing in pain from gunshot wounds around 4 a.m on April 1, according to body-worn camera footage released by police Thursday. “No,” Marcus snapped back as he ordered him to drop the gun near Zerega and Westchester avenues, according to the body-worn camera videos released by the NYPD Thursday. Cardona had tested positive for the pandemic coronavirus and was fearful due to his underlying disease of diabetes and his weight the virus would prove fatal. Armed with an antique revolved and 12-inch tactical knife covered in ketchup,  appearing to be blood — Cardona called the cops on himself reporting a gunman in the lobby of his building, according to the NYPD. “There’s a guy, he’s got a knife in his hand and he’s got blood on it… I think he also has a gun… He’s talking to himself and everything,” Cardona calmly says to the 911 operator, surveillance video and audio recordings show. Officers Marus and Cindy Nieves fired 11 shots at Cardona — striking him seven times to his lower body, cops said. Shocking video from both of the officers’ body-worn cameras shows the officer fire on Cardona and take him into custody. Cops rushed Cardona Jacobi Hospital to treat his injuries — but the sick man died only five days later as another victim of the virus, according to the NYPD. The city’s Medical Examiner ruled he died from the coronavirus “complicated by underlying health conditions and gunshot wounds.” Police would later find out the antique gun — a black-powder cap-and-ball Navy revolver —  was inoperable, according to the NYPD. The criminal case against Cardona has been closed following his death, a spokesperson for the NYPD said.

President Trump said Thursday that US officials are forecasting a “slightly enhanced” hurricane season in coming months, creating new challenges during the coronavirus pandemic. “So you think we can have a slightly enhanced hurricane season? That’s just what we want, that’s just what we want,” Trump said to officials gathered in the Oval Office. “Are we ready?” Trump asked Pete Gaynor, administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. “FEMA is always ready, sir,” Gaynor replied. Officials arrayed alongside Trump vouched for federal preparedness, which often is questioned in the aftermath of devastating storms — though Vice President Mike Pence acknowledged changes would be needed amid COVID-19. Fleeing coastal residents “often know and are used to congregating at a local school,” Pence said. “There will be different challenges now.” Gaynor said, however, that FEMA is preparing for the hurricane season with $40 billion allocated in recent coronavirus legislation. “We’re in a really great place when it comes to funding, personnel and supplies,” he said. Chad Wolf, acting secretary of homeland security, offered a sports analogy. “It’s almost like opening day for baseball, right? You are much more crisp and sharp halfway through the season than you are on opening day. So that’s where FEMA’s at now, they are in the middle of their season,” Wolf said. Commerce Secretary Wlibur Ross said that federal meteorologists have been technologies compared to past years. “We should be able to have three-day forecasts be much more precise than they have been, and that will help a lot with mitigating the disasters,” Ross said.

Now Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s trying to blame the messenger — that is, The Post — for New York’s nursing-home disaster. His health commissioner, Howard Zucker, ordered homes to accept coronavirus-positive patients — indeed, to admit them without testing. Thousands are dead, and the order is now effectively rescinded, yet the gov still pretends it’s a non-story. Wednesday, in Washington, he lashed out at Post reporter Ebony Bowden for asking if he’d discussed the home crisis with President Trump: “There are columnists who made this point at The Post who are 100 percent supportive of Donald Trump, and that’s fine — but then believe, you know, we have to kill all Democrats.” And: “There are Republicans who are trying to make political hay out of this.” At least two of the columnists who’ve hit hardest on the issue — Michael Goodwin and Bob McManus — were enrolled Democrats, last we checked. And while Goodwin is a Trump fan, you’ll search long to find McManus cheering the president. Cuomo’s plainly talking motive because he doesn’t want to discuss the facts. It’s the same with his earlier effort to blame the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — then accusing the White House of playing politics simply for noting that Zucker was not, in fact, just following CDC advice. Anyway, other governors acted differently: Florida’s Ron DeSantis quickly moved to order nursing homes not to take in COVID-positive patients. Then again, the gov won’t even admit to blaming Team Trump: “I never did that,” he told Bowden. Huh? “The state followed President Trump’s CDC guidance,” Cuomo told reporters just over a week ago. Meanwhile, Democrats across New York have called for an independent probe of Team Cuomo’s handling of the homes. Worst of all, the gov still claims he sees nothing wrong with putting virus-positive patients into a place where he himself said the disease would spread “like wildfire.” Pathetic.

The Windy City is set to blow past New York with its post-coronavirus lockdown restaurant reopenings, as Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot announced Thursday that eateries can resume outdoor service on June 3. “We’ll also see the partial reopening of restaurants and coffee shops with a focus on outdoor space,” said Lightfoot in a press briefing, according to Eater. The move was announced days after Chicago released a 13-page pamphlet of detailed guidelines for how restaurants can safely reopen, including limited party sizes and tables spaced six-feet apart to maintain social distancing, or Plexiglass sheets in between when spacing isn’t possible. “Let’s just be smart: Let’s follow the guidance. Let’s follow the social distancing, wearing a face covering in public,” Lightfoot urged Chicagoans, reported Eater. “All the things you have done because you know this saves lives and reduces the spread of the virus.” Illinois had recorded 115,855 confirmed diagnoses of the bug as of Thursday evening, according to Johns Hopkins University, making it the third hardest-hit state behind New York, with 366,733, and New Jersey, with 157,185. But despite hardly being untouched by the pandemic, Chicago remains bounds ahead of New York, where Mayor Bill de Blasio has been tight-lipped on plans for the city’s own reopening, even while saying that it could begin as early as June 1, to the ire of both business owners and politicians. Fed-up with waiting, the City Council on Thursday rolled out legislation to expand outdoor dining in New York, similar to Chicago. The first phase of New York’s opening would include such low-risk industries as construction, manufacturing and curbside pick-up retail. Still, city bar and restaurant owners have been clamoring for concrete answers, and widely panned what few likely realities of reopening de Blasio has teased.

This? This is different. We of a certain age still bear the scars of past labor wars, all sports. The World Series was called off in 1994. The entire NHL season of 2004-05 was canceled, every inch of it, as if the calendar were simply wiped clean. The official NFL record book is littered with names of scabs who crossed picket lines and played in actual games during the 1987 season. Those were awful times to be a sports fan, angry times, helpless times. Strikes and lockouts are always ugly, no matter where they happen. Subway strikes have sent commuters walking across bridges. Sanitation strikes have ransacked city sidewalks. Newspaper strikes have helped dwindle the number of papers in New York from 10 to three. They cause damage. They cause hard feelings. Somehow, when they’re over, we move on. This is different, and not only because baseball’s owners and its players are conducting this staredown in the midst of a pandemic, with 40 million people out of work, with 100,000 dead, with people desperate to reclaim their lives and their livelihoods. That makes it bad enough, yes. People have little patience for millionaires fighting billionaires anyway; now it has simply changed to zero tolerance. But this is beyond that. By its own admission, baseball has been flailing. Its own commissioner, Rob Manfred, has scrambled to come up with ideas — some interesting, some idiotic, a lot of others in between — to make baseball more appealing, even before all of this. He declared war on the minor leagues, even before all of this. He recognized the aging and graying of the game, and its fans, even before all of this. So this is different than 1994, when it truly felt like baseball had finally gone and poured gasoline all over itself, gone and done irreparable harm. And look: The game still pays for that. Some fans never did come back. Many simply didn’t feel the same after, even if the pull of the game couldn’t allow a full amputation. Bad as 1994 was, baseball wasn’t yet considered damaged. It is different now. Baseball was still a national game in 1994; it is hyper-local now, important to the cities it calls home, little more than a curiosity elsewhere. Football had already surpassed baseball long before 1994, but pro basketball has passed it since. Hockey actually lent baseball a hand by enjoying its own extended shutdown in 1994-95, and is just as locally powered as baseball. Now, hockey is primed to feed a hungry nation its product again, no matter how weird and complicated the playoff system it has devised is. The NBA isn’t far behind, fueled by “The Last Dance” and the knowledge that the sport’s best are eager to return. Thursday we learned that the Premier League will return in mid-June; that wasn’t even a blip on baseball’s radar in 1994. It is a gale-force hurricane now. For baseball has already forfeited the participatory advantage it used to have for decades. Kids find soccer more fun to play, and lacrosse, and basketball. For decades, baseball could safely rely on those kids to switch to baseball once they stopped playing because there were few spectating options. Not now. Baseball isn’t a birthright any longer. Baseball is like any other struggling business: trying to adjust to an eternally shifting world, trying to craft whatever market it can. All of that was true before COVID-19, and all of that was true before the owners and the players started playing fiscal chicken with each other. It is ever more true now. This is a new time, a new day, a new sporting order. In 1994 — and in ’85, and in ’81, and in ’72 — the world waited on baseball because that’s how the world was. That was 26 years ago. Baseball was already leaking oil. It was already hemorrhaging eyeballs, and hearts, and souls, and imaginations. The world has moved on. These last few months, if we’ve learned to do anything it is this: We’ve figured out how to fill idle hours. We’ve found new habits, new hobbies, new interests, new distractions. If baseball thinks it can take a year off and then simply slip easily back into people’s lives, it will be in for a rude awakening. This is different

MTV is currently working with numerous government and health agencies in hopes of mounting its annual Video Music Awards live from New York this August, Variety can report exclusively. The show is eyeing an Aug. 30 broadcast date from Brooklyn’s Barclays Center for its 36th edition of the VMAs, where MTV honors the best in the music video medium and features performances from top-charting artists. The plans come as New York City attempts to rebound from the impact of the coronavirus pandemic, amid ongoing lockdowns and social-distance orders. “We’re exploring with government officials, the medical community and key stakeholders on how to safely hold the 2020 VMAs at Barclays Center on August 30th,” an MTV spokesperson tells Variety. “The health of everyone involved is our number one priority. Additionally, we are working on several contingency plans to bring music’s biggest night to audiences everywhere.” It would mark a return to the Barclays Center for the VMAs, which were held at the venue in 2013 shortly after its opening. Notable winners from 2019 included video of the year for Taylor Swift’s “You Need to Calm Down” and artist of the year to Ariana Grande. While a traditional physical production is the goal, according to one source familiar with the plans, the network is keeping safety top of mind and exploring virtual performances and an audience-free show, among other contingency plans. MTV sent out save the date notices to top agents and talent reps this week, indicating the program would move forward in its traditional format. As the industry waits and watches for decisions from top awards franchises like the Academy Awards and the Emmys, MTV owner Viacom has been tinkering with its branded live events. Sister property BET, for instance, will move forward with a virtual edition of its eponymous awards on June 28. Celebrating the network’s 40th anniversary, and the show’s 20 years on the air, top stars in black entertainment, sports and philanthropy will appear via “innovative techniques and artist-generated content,” Variety reported last week. The three-day BET Experience, an ecosystem of events in Los Angeles that serve as a lead-up to the big night, was called off due to the COVID-19 pandemic and is set to return in 2021. As the domestic epicenter of COVID-19, New York City is grappling with closures in every sector of public life, including entertainment staples like concert venues, sporting events, restaurants, Broadway and annual gatherings like June’s pride parade.

George Floyd had moved to Minneapolis to turn his life around. The 46-year-old father — who died Monday after a cop kneeled on his neck for several minutes during an arrest — left his Texas hometown in 2014. “He was looking to start over fresh, a new beginning,” said Christopher Harris, Floyd’s lifelong friend. “He was happy with the change he was making.” Growing up in Houston’s Third Ward, one of the city’s predominantly black neighborhoods, Floyd emerged as a talented athlete. Standing at 6 feet 6, he was a star tight end for Jack Yates High School, where he earned the nickname “Gentle Giant” from classmates. He played basketball at South Florida Community College before returning to Houston to make music with local hip hop group Screwed Up Click, Roxie Washington, the mother of Floyd’s 6-year-old daughter, Gianna Floyd, told the Houston Chronicle. In 2007, Floyd was charged with armed robbery in a home invasion in Houston, in which another man posed as a water department worker in an attempt to gain access to a woman’s residence, according to court documents. When the woman realized he wasn’t actually a water department worker, she tried to close the door. That’s when five other men got out of a car that had just pulled up and forced their way inside. According to charging documents, the largest man in the group, whom the victim identified as Floyd, “forced his way inside the residence, placed a pistol against the complainant’s abdomen, and forced her into the living room area of the residence.” Floyd in 2009 was sentenced to five years in prison as part of a plea deal in the case. Shortly after getting out, he made the move to Minneapolis in hopes of a better life, and landed a gig working security at a Salvation Army store. He later started working two jobs, one driving trucks and another as a bouncer at the restaurant Conga Latin Bistro, where he was known as “Big Floyd.” In a recent video, Floyd had pleaded with younger generations to make good life choices and stop gun violence. Floyd was laid off amid Minnesota’s coronavirus stay-at-home order, which shuttered bars and restaurants. “He was doing whatever it takes to maintain going forward with his life,” Harris said. On Monday night, an employee at a Minneapolis grocery store called cops after Floyd allegedly tried to pass a counterfeit $20 bill. But Harris said he couldn’t believe that his old friend would resort to forgery, saying, “I’ve never known him to do anything like that.” “The way he died was senseless,” Harris continued. “He begged for his life. He pleaded for his life.” “When you try so hard to put faith in this system, a system that you know isn’t designed for you, when you constantly seek justice by lawful means and you can’t get it, you begin to take the law into your own hands.” With Post wires

They’re gonna flatten a whole lotta curves. In an effort to give their neighbors a laugh during the coronavirus pandemic, a couple recently posted 30 flyers advertising an Avengers-themed “Post Pandemic Pan-Philadelphia Orgy” around their South Philly neighborhood. While the event started as a joke, the pair have received so many inquiries that they now intend to actually host it. “The orgy is on,” the couple — a lighting engineer named Bob and a sex therapist named Alyssa, who withheld their last names — tell The Post. Neither have ever attended an orgy, but both now feel they’re obligated to hold one as soon as it’s safe to do so. “This would be new territory for us, but it’s something that we’ve been open to,” says Alyssa, 29, who identifies as bisexual. “I identify as heterosexual but open to new experiences,” says Bob, 25, adding he has had “small group experiences,” but nothing he’d call an orgy. The pair only began dating in December, after meeting in a local bar, but decided to quarantine when the pandemic hit and have found themselves quite compatible, and grateful to not be among the sexless masses. “Humanity is currently in the middle of the largest dry spell in all of history, that’s what inspired the flyers,” Bob says. (Philadelphia’s 2019 Furnace Party was also an inspiration, they say.) “It may seem strange to advertise an orgy in such a public way, but yes, we wanted to bring a smile to our neighbors’ faces,” he says. And based on the feedback they’ve gotten, they’ve spread amusement — and genuine interest — much farther than their Philly nabe. “It really took us by surprise,” Alyssa says of the widespread response they’ve received, from as far away as Nevada. “The demand is overwhelming,” says Bob, estimating they’ve gotten emails from some 80 people so far, maybe half of them serious potential participants, in addition to countless internet comments. “A lot of messages are just, ‘Is this real?’ ” he says. “I think we turned down some people at the beginning because we didn’t realize we were for real.” As for the Avengers theme, “We just like spandex, bodysuits and tights,” says Alyssa. “It seemed like a sexy, easy theme, and since this is new for us, it felt good to have some direction.” Plus, they agree, it’ll naturally incorporate masks. One eager participant tells The Post via email they claimed “dibs on Dr. Strange,” and they’re “83% sure I have the antibodies” — presumably giving them free range to sow their wild oats. While Bob and Alyssa planned on hosting the orgy in their apartment, they think they may need to rent a bigger venue. “No matter how big this gets, we’ll put something together,” Bob says. The pair had hoped to host the event in June, but the pandemic has lasted longer than they anticipated. “I would say an orgy sounds like a thorough phase green activity,” says Bob, referring to Pennsylvania’s three-color reopening plan, but “we’re willing to be patient,” adds Alyssa. Not being able to set a date isn’t a major issue, they agree. What’s most important is that the orgy interest gives them the promise of eventual group fun. “We don’t know what the future holds for us,” Bob says. “We just want something to look forward to.”

Legal desk: Russia Probe Had No Justification A newly released FBI document used to kick off the Russia collusion “fiasco” will likely be “Exhibit A” in court, predicts bureau veteran Kevin R. Brock at The Hill, because it’s a legal “train wreck.” A single person, ex-division chief Peter Strzok, created, approved and sent the order, a violation of “all FBI protocols,” which makes it “invalid on its face.” Strzok opened Crossfire Hurricane to investigate possible violations of the Foreign Agent Registration Act, such as a “failure to register with the US government after being engaged by a foreign country,” and was required to list legitimate justifications for it. Yet he didn’t even try to cite any — because “there are none.” The document “establishes that Crossfire Hurricane was an illicit, made-up investigation” to take down President Trump. “Let’s pray we see some” accountability. From the right: Trump Triggered the Twitter Mess For President Trump, Twitter is “an irresistible invitation to say things unworthy of his office,” sigh the editors of National Review — a habit that “hit its nadir” with his “ongoing series of disgraceful tweets insinuating” that MSNBC host Joe Scarborough committed murder. In response, Twitter announced it would “publicly ‘fact-check’” Trump’s statements, an “attempt to mollify its critics” that “it may come eventually to regret” — with Trump, for starters, vowing to “close down” the platform. Both sides are wrong: Twitter shouldn’t “inject itself into the middle of America’s political debates,” and Trump “cannot ‘close down’ social media” and shouldn’t threaten to. Anti-Semitism watch: Omar’s Stripes Haven’t Changed In a recent interview, Rep. Ilhan Omar (D-Minn.) admits her anti-Semitic tweet last year, “It’s all about the Benjamins baby” (about the influence of Jewish money), “was hurtful” and claims she’s “past” it — but “not so fast, “ warns Meira Svirsky at the Clarion Project. In that very interview, Omar “invokes the same anti-Semitic trope” as she did in her tweet. “Money and influence,” Omar contends, explain the Saudis’ “destructive” behavior, and it’s “no different” with Israel. “I talk about Saudi blood money and them being bloodsuckers, and no one says, ‘This is Islamophobic.’ But I know if I use those terms for [Israel], that could be [a problem].” Uh, yes, snarks Svirsky: Given how blood libels have led to fatal incitement against Jews, “calling the Jewish state ‘bloodsuckers’ would definitely be a problem.” Fiscal beat: Don’t Encourage States To Waste The National Governors Association wants $500 billion in federal aid for states, and the Democrats’ stimulus plan sets aside about $1 trillion for them and local governments, observes City Journal’s Steven Malanga. Yet what officials seek “is likely well beyond” what the current recession will cost states and municipalities. Beside, “analysts have warned for years that another recession was coming” and “states were unprepared.” Clearly, governors are “angling to be held harmless.” Plugging their holes now would only “encourage them to overspend in the future. They’d have less reason to control their budgets, to cut inefficient programs and to try to save money.” Fiscal experts, notes Malanga, warn that “pouring money” into these states without demanding reforms in exchange will only “forestall their financial crises.” Libertarian: COVID-19 Proves We’re Over-Regulated “If there’s one thing the coronavirus pandemic has shown,” argues Reason’s Peter Suderman, “it’s that regulation gets in the way.” Americans for Tax Reform lists a “growing” number, now up to 561, of federal and state rules relaxed or suspended because of the COVID pandemic. The rollbacks show these regulations, largely created by a “handful” of unelected federal agencies, are onerous, unnecessary and easy to live without. Meanwhile, the Competitive Enterprise Institute puts their yearly cost at $1.9 trillion. Yes, some rule rollbacks will probably be made permanent. Alas, laments Suderman, “the various governmental pipelines that produced them are likely to remain in place.” — Compiled by Karl Salzmann & Adam Brodsky

A deaf mother in England who designed her own face masks with clear mouth coverings has found herself inundated with requests to purchase her product. Manchester mom Justine Bate, 42, originally created masks to make lip-reading possible for herself and her daughter, Teona, 10, who also is deaf. Since designing the clear but colorful coverings — a necessity in many places worldwide during the coronavirus pandemic — she has received hundreds of orders for her homemade creations. On Wednesday alone, she sold 42 masks. Her husband, Carl Bate, 50, also wears one and can verify that the response has been huge. “We can’t make them quickly enough for what people need,” Carl tells SWNS, adding that they have shared the masks on social media, further boosting their visibility. “The amount of people who have come up to her and asked for these masks is quite overwhelming.” Justine, a graphic designer who has been deaf since birth, creates the masks using a sewing machine at home, with help from Carl. The final designs came to fruition after about four days of experimenting, which included finding the right thickness of plastic to be able to stitch it to the fabric. A too-thick plastic also could have obscured lips with blurriness. It also meant a lot of give-and-take for the couple, who had some creative disagreements about production, which they’re still trying to improve. “It wasn’t easy,” Carl says. “I had my ways of doing it and she’s got her way — but her way was the best way.” Justine sells the masks — comprised of a clear shield, cloth frame and elasticized bands for securing around the wearer’s ears — for about $7.39 (£5.99 UK). But running a business wasn’t the goal, says her husband. “It was not to do with making money,” says Carl. “It was to do with doing something for our daughter for making her life easier.” Hearing-impaired individuals aren’t the only ones who can benefit from this type of product either, Carl says. “We are getting a lot of people from care homes — people who have got dementia and children who have got certain types of autism where they are actually scared of people with this full face mask on,” he explains. “It is easier, as they do not get scared.” And while the masks are “not PPE quality, as there is no filter,” he adds, “even people from the care homes said they are not bothered because of the ability to communicate with disabled people in an easier way. “They look a bit different but it is the interests of the patient that is important,” he continues. “You can look stupid but as long as your patient is feeling calm it is a benefit for that person.” Face masks can be a big problem for those who are deaf or hard of hearing, so others stateside also have jumped into the effort to help those who rely on lip-reading to communicate. “It is triggering stress, anxiety, aggravation, frustration and fear because now they’re entering situations they used to manage well, and now their communication strategies are not working,” Carolyn Stern, assistant director of outreach and strategic initiatives for the Center for Hearing and Communication, told The Post about the need for special masks. “They’re no longer in control and are cut off.” Carl, meanwhile, says his wife is just happy to be making her own contribution to the greater good. “It’s quite overwhelming but she’s loving it,” Carl says. “The deaf community can be quite a hard place to socialize. It does bring a lot of deaf people together. “She’s loving the fact that she’s helping others make a better quality of life in this situation,” he says.

Most people would assume that financial planners only manage money. But advisers often see themselves as having a responsibility to help people manage their emotions. Financial planners are particularly active in this role lately, and not just because clients express fear and uncertainty about their stock portfolios. Some advisers are losing clients to COVID-19. The death of a client hits hard. The aftermath is equally challenging. Aside from handling a series of transactions, such as transferring assets to designated beneficiaries, advisers often provide emotional support to grieving loved ones. Advisers possess many skills, but consoling relatives of the recently deceased is a specialty of its own. Even the most emotionally intelligent wealth manager can say something that backfires, driving away family members at a time when they’re particularly fragile. Avani Ramnani, a New York City-based certified financial planner, completed training program offered by the Grief Recovery Institute. The sessions teach participants to help grieving people find relief from their emotional pain. “The big takeaways from the training were to use sensitive, empathetic language and not to compare your grief to theirs,” Ramnani said. “You don’t want to say, ‘I know what you’re going through.’” Ramnani applied what she learned after a client in her early 70s passed away from COVID-19 not long ago. She learned of the death from the client’s son, whom she already knew because she managed a small account for him. Soon the son stopped returning Ramnani’s calls and emails. While concerned, she didn’t press him too much. “He was in a huge shock,” she says. “We emailed him to say we didn’t want to be a bother and we’re here to help whenever he’s ready,” as he was the sole beneficiary. Once the son resumed contact, Ramnani worked with him to obtain documents, such as the death certificate, to facilitate an asset transfer. Ramnani also sent him cash from his account to cover expenses including estate-planning fees and a cleaning service for his mother’s home. When clients’ families struggle with a loss of a loved one, Ramnani may suggest grief counseling for them. “Grief is so personal,” she says. “There’s no roadmap. It’s unpredictable and advisers need to be patient because it takes time.” For Bryan Bibbo, a financial adviser in Avon, Ohio, the loss of a client in his 70s to COVID-19 proved even weightier because their friendship predated their professional relationship. “It came out of nowhere,” Bibbo said. “For the first two weeks [after he died], his widow was shocked.” She has since slowly regained her spirits. “Her personality is coming back where she’s smiling and laughing more,” Bibbo says. He urges advisers who’ve lost a client to maintain communication with family members. Use telephone calls, emails and hand-written letters not only to convey condolences but also to reinforce your willingness to help and provide service. In addition to holding a few virtual meetings with his friend’s widow, Bibbo sent her occasional emails. For example, he wrote: “Just to let you know I’m thinking of you. If there’s anything I can do for you during this difficult time, even if it’s just someone to talk to, I’m here for you.” Bibbo adds that simply reminiscing with her about her late husband proved cathartic. She appreciated Bibbo’s lighthearted stories about him. “When someone has suffered a loss,” he says, “they need to see and hear your smile.”

AUSTIN, Texas — Texas will soon allow outdoor pro sports events to have spectators, but the numbers will be strictly limited, under a new order Thursday from Republican Gov. Greg Abbott. Abbott revised a decision to let pro sports leagues host events without fans starting in June as part of the state’s move to reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic. Abbott’s new order allows outdoor stadiums to host fans up to 25 percent of their normal capacity. Leagues will have to apply to state health officials to be allowed to have fans. Indoor events will still be without spectators. IndyCar is set to open its season at Texas Motor Speedway in Fort Worth on June 6, but track president Eddie Gossage said that even under the new rule, the Genesys 300 race will still not include fans. “Nobody wants to have the stands filled with fans more than me but we’re just not in a position to do that yet,” Gossage said, noting the race will be broadcast live on NBC. “While the state will permit us to operate at 25 percent of capacity, there are still too many unanswered questions for an event that is just one week away.” PGA Tour has previously said it plans to restart its season at Colonial in Texas on June 11-14 without fans attending. State health officials did not immediately respond to questions on whether any leagues or event organizer have asked to be allowed to have spectators. The state has set up several guidelines for leagues to follow, including a recommendation that spectators and employees keep at least 6 feet apart from anyone not from their household. If that is not feasible, other measures such as face coverings and sanitation protocols should be followed. Athletes will not be required to wear masks, but the guidelines encourage them to be worn on the sidelines. The order does not address college sports events. For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia, and death. However, most patients recover.

A married couple was executed by firing squad in North Korea after being caught trying to flee with their 14-year-old nephew, according to a report. The husband and wife, from Ryanggang province near China, were trying to escape earlier this month despite the country’s strict coronavirus quarantine, sources told Radio Free Asia. It is believed the couple, thought to be in their 50s, were trying to bring their teen nephew back to his parents in South Korea, according to the report. “The boy’s father, who escaped to South Korea, had asked his sister to bring his son to him,” a resident of Ryanggang, who requested to stay anonymous, told the outlet. But the source said border security has been tightened due to the country’s quarantine measures, making the attempted escape an “extremely dangerous and risky act.” The couple was tortured into confessing their escape plans and executed by a firing squad, while their nephew was spared due to his age, according to the report. “The supreme leadership has ordered that those who attempt to flee the country during the emergency period must be sternly punished. There’s no way they could have avoided the firing squad because they attempted to defect to South Korea,” the source said. Another resident of Ryanggang confirmed that the story has been spreading by word of mouth around the region, the report said. “As people hear this shocking news, they are expressing their anger at the authorities, saying there’s nothing wrong with trying to escape from North Korea, especially when it is so hard to make ends meet due to the coronavirus crisis,” the second source said. North Korean reports have suggested that the coronavirus crisis has been under control, but experts have raised doubts and speculated that Kim Jong Un has been hiding from public life to prevent himself from being infected by the virus.

A new study has revealed that more than 80 percent of passengers and crew members on a cruise ship that contracted COVID-19 were asymptomatic. The research, published in the scientific journal Thorax, notes that 128 of 217 passengers and crew members tested positive for the disease caused by SARS-CoV-2. Of those, 81 percent did not show symptoms, leading researchers to conclude “the prevalence of COVID-19 on affected cruise ships is likely to be significantly underestimated.” “It is difficult to find a reliable estimate of the number of COVID positive patients who have no symptoms,” Alan Smyth, the editor-in-chief of Thorax and professor at the University of Nottingham said in a statement. Smyth added the findings have implications for easing lockdown restrictions around the globe, given the possibility more people may have been infected with COVID-19 than previously believed. “As countries progress out of lockdown, a high proportion of infected, but asymptomatic, individuals may mean that a much higher percentage of the population than expected may have been infected with COVID,” he explained. The cruise involved in the study was a 21-day voyage around the Antarctic, similar to the journey that explorer Ernest Shackleton went on prior to his death. The first fever was on the eighth day of the trip and isolation protocols started immediately, with all passengers confined to their cabins and everyone was issued surgical masks. Personal protective equipment was also worn by anyone who came in contact with passengers. “Further fevers were detected in three crew on day 10, two passengers and one crew on day 11, and three passengers on day 12,” the researchers added. It’s unclear what a higher rate of infection in the general population means. A recent analysis from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimated that more than one-third of COVID-19 patients may not show any symptoms. A study out of Singapore suggests that COVID-19 patients are not infectious 11 days after getting sick. The researchers noted that a separate study out of Germany found “the degree of viral shedding was very high in the first week of symptoms,” supporting their findings. A separate study from the Korean CDC appears to suggest that patients who test positive for COVID-19 after having previously recovered are not capable of transmitting the infection. fsAs of Thursday morning, more than 5.7 million coronavirus cases have been diagnosed worldwide, more than 1.69 million of which are in the U.S., the most impacted country on the planet.

The New York Times Magazine published an eyebrow raising correction this week, reversing its claim that a 26-year-old emergency room doctor who contracted the coronavirus had died from the disease. Turns out, the doctor is very much alive. Oops! The paper of record first made the claim in a riveting first-person account in the April 19 issue of the magazine, which focused on the “epicenter / inside New York City’s hospitals as they face the coronavirus.” The lead story was “I’m an E.R. Doctor in New York. None of Us Will Ever Be the Same” — a “Covid diary” written by Helen Ouyang, a physician and assistant professor at Columbia University who has written for the magazine before. It’s unclear what exactly Ouyang said about the 26-year-old ER doctor, who very well may have learned about his death in The Times, because all mention of him has since been scrubbed from the publication’s web site. But in an editor’s note published on May 26, the mag acknowledges the uncomfortable mistake. “An earlier version of this article described an account that circulated among doctors in April about a 26-year-old medical resident training in New York who was said to have died of Covid-19 in a New York City hospital. This account was verified with sources involved in the patient’s care, but further reporting after publication revealed that it was apparently a case of mistaken identity.” The publication then blames the medical team who cared for the deceased. “Health workers involved in the patient’s treatment mistakenly believed that he was a medical resident, but ACEP [the American College of Emergency Physicians] said it had subsequently confirmed that it was not the same man, and that the medical resident with that name was healthy.” In addition to deleting any virtual record of the error, the correction fails to name either the deceased or the unlucky ER doctor mistaken for the deceased — a departure from The Times’ usual practice of spelling out its mistakes, including typos. For instance, Thursday’s corrections names a person the paper erroneously mentioned in its eye-catching cover listing the names of people whose lives have been lost due to the coronavirus. Helyn Dawson, it said, was “erroneously included … because of a misreading of a local obituary.”

Last month Zagg Inc, a Utah-based company that makes mobile device accessories, received more than $9.4 million in cash from a US government program that has provided emergency loans to millions of businesses hit by the coronavirus. The money was part of the $660 billion Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) — a linchpin of President Trump’s economic rescue package, meant to save small firms convulsed by the pandemic and help them to keep workers on the payroll. Claimants certified the loans were necessary to support their business and received an average of $115,000 as of May 26, according to the Small Business Administration, which administers the program. Nasdaq-listed Zagg’s loan was more than 80 times that amount. That wasn’t the only help Zagg had from the government lately. Last year, the company received a $3.3 million tax refund and racked up US tax credits worth $7 million, its public filings show. It made $6 million in profit for 2019, but paid no tax in the US. Zagg has booked much of its profit through small companies in far-off Ireland and the Cayman Islands, its filings show. The company’s situation is one of several that reveal a previously unreported aspect of the government relief program: The fund is giving millions of dollars in American taxpayer money to a number of firms that have avoided paying US tax, a Reuters examination found. In all, Reuters’ analysis of public data found around 110 publicly traded companies have each received $4 million or more in emergency aid from the program. Of those subject to taxes, 12 of the companies recently used offshore havens to cut their tax bills, the analysis found. All together, these 12 received more than $104 million in loans from US taxpayers. Seven of them paid no US tax at all for the past year. The program, which provides low-interest loans that are forgivable if companies use most of the money to pay employees, has been widely criticized for problems ranging from early bottlenecks that prevented small businesses from receiving money to confusion that led millions of dollars to be handed out to relatively affluent firms. Zagg, which sells its accessories in stores, online and via TV, declined to comment on its tax affairs but said separately it needed the cash from the program to keep its team together. It said in its annual report that its 2019 tax credits were “primarily attributable to a change in our global tax structure with respect to intangible intellectual property.” The Treasury Department declined to comment. Of the almost 110 recipients of $4 million or more, Reuters found some 46 paid no US corporate tax for the last year. There are many reasons for this, not all to do with tax avoidance. There is no suggestion that loan recipients which channeled profits offshore have broken tax rules or the law, or that firms which have not paid US tax may not be eligible for aid. As Erik Gordon, professor at the University of Michigan’s Ross School of Business told Reuters, “nobody has a duty to pay more taxes than the law itself requires.” Still, the fact that some recipients haven’t been paying taxes may add a new dimension to the controversy around the program. Some 39 million Americans — one in five in the workforce — have lost their jobs since the pandemic began. When Americans are scrambling for resources to fight the pandemic, “it’s a mistake to let companies not paying their fair share of taxes reap further gains from the American taxpayer,” said Zoe Reiter, director of civic engagement at Washington DC-based watchdog group Project on Government Oversight. The small business loan program does not explicitly address tax avoidance. Companies applying for loans must certify they need the cash, commit to buying American where possible, and promise to use the money to pay employees who live in America. But when it comes to corporate taxes paid to the US government, the 11-page application form contains no conditions. For US Senate Democrat Sheldon Whitehouse, of Rhode Island, the fact that firms that channeled profits offshore could receive taxpayer bailouts highlights a need for reform. Whitehouse, who sits on the Senate’s subcommittee on taxation and IRS oversight, introduced legislation last year to close loopholes that allow companies to use tax havens. With the anti-tax Republican Party controlling the Senate and a Republican president in office, such change is unlikely for now. “This pandemic has laid bare a corporate culture in large companies to avoid paying taxes in profitable years but come to the government for handouts in a crisis,” Whitehouse said in response to Reuters’ reporting. The Reuters analysis covers only a fraction of the program: Officials haven’t yet detailed who received loans. Private companies have gotten most of them so far. They seldom reveal such information, unlike publicly traded firms. Reuters used the latest available financial information for around 420 publicly traded companies that have applied for the forgivable loans, which was collated by data provider FactSquared. It shows publicly traded companies have collectively received less than $2 billion of the total. After some companies claimed loans running into tens of millions of dollars, the US Treasury Department said last month that “big public companies with access to capital” would have a hard time proving they really needed the funds. As public scrutiny intensified, more than 60 publicly listed recipients went on to repay the loans. Zagg wasn’t among them. The company, whose brands include a phone screen protector called InvisibleShield, employs 628 people, including 479 in the US. It said in a statement to investors in mid-April it had temporarily cut executive pay and furloughed or laid off staff. Explaining to Reuters on April 24 why it was keeping the cash, a Zagg spokesman said in an e-mailed statement the funds would play “a critical role in ensuring we have our team in place as the economy reopens.” At the core of Zagg’s tax arrangement is a subsidiary registered in Ireland: Patriot Corporation, registered at Rineanna House, a small office block outside Limerick. Patriot Corp owns intellectual property for Zagg, such as brands and patents. According to the latest available filings, which cover 2018, it licensed rights to these to another Ireland-based Zagg subsidiary, Zagg International Distribution Ltd. That company sold Zagg’s products outside the US, according to company accounts and websites. The distribution company was subject to Irish tax rates of 12.5 percent. A quirk of Irish law helped the parent Zagg make an even bigger tax saving: Companies registered in Ireland can pick another place as their tax domicile. Ireland-based Patriot is tax-resident in the Cayman Islands, according to the Irish registry. The Caymans do not charge corporate income tax. For 2018, Zagg International Distribution paid around 4 million euros ($4.4 million) in royalties to Patriot Corp. That left the distribution firm with a profit of just 110,000 euros. And Cayman-resident Patriot Corp’s millions of dollars were liable for zero tax. The maneuver is a long-standing tax avoidance method, and an example of what tax planning experts call “the Double Irish.” “It’s purely a device to shift income to a zero-tax jurisdiction located in the sunny Caribbean,” said J. Clifton Fleming, a professor of tax law at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. Irish tax officials declined to comment. In all, the Reuters analysis found more than 20 companies that applied for emergency help had used offshore subsidiaries to reduce their tax. Twelve — including Zagg — reported their tax affairs had triggered a US government levy designed to stop tax avoidance. The measure, enacted by Congress in 2017, is called Global Intangible Low-Tax Income (GILTI) — pronounced ‘guilty’ by tax experts. Six tax experts told Reuters that the fact a company has been hit with a GILTI charge is a clear indication of tax avoidance. “They shouldn’t have a GILTI charge unless they are shifting income to a low tax jurisdiction,” said Eric Zolt, a professor at the UCLA School of Law who served as a consultant to the US Treasury Department. Under GILTI, if a company records profits in a territory where it would pay much less tax than the US standard rate of 21 percent, it must pay an extra charge. The sum typically only goes a small way to make up the tax shortfall, tax experts say. Companies are not obliged to disclose they paid a GILTI levy — many don’t, say academics who study the issue. So Reuters’ analysis gives only a partial picture of the public companies that may have channeled profits offshore before they got COVID-19 relief. Culp Inc., a North Carolina-based manufacturer of mattresses and upholstery fabrics, was another firm that paid GILTI fees before it applied for taxpayer-backed loans. It received $7.6 million in taxpayer support last month. Since 2011, the company has repeatedly told investors in quarterly calls that it pays no or “minimal” US income tax. Its overseas operations include a Caymans-registered company. Culp, contacted by Reuters on May 13, declined to comment on its tax arrangements. Two days later, a Culp representative told Reuters it had already voluntarily repaid the relief loan on May 13 “out of an abundance of caution” after the Treasury revised its guidelines on eligibility. A third beneficiary of the loans program that also disclosed a GILTI charge was Delaware-registered Spanish Broadcasting System, which operates Spanish-language radio and TV stations under names including Mega, La Raza and Amor across America and Puerto Rico. Four of its 14 radio stations are on the island. Over the four years from 2016 to 2019, SBS reported cumulative losses of $20 million in the US and profits of $15 million in the US territory of Puerto Rico. In 2018, SBS said it received a tax benefit in the US after writing off intercompany debt with its Puerto Rico subsidiary. It declined to explain to Reuters why it was profitable in Puerto Rico but made losses in the US, or to discuss its tax arrangements more broadly. “Spanish Broadcasting System is a US taxpayer that fully complies with all US tax laws,” it said in a statement. Combined, Zagg, Culp and SBS received about $24 million from the US taxpayer-funded loan program, the Reuters analysis found.

Sen. Tim Kaine and his wife Anne have tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, he announced Thursday. In a statement released by the senator’s office, Kaine (D-Va.) said that he had the flu earlier this year, but the symptoms lingered after he was prescribed standard medication to treat it. “At the end of March, I experienced new symptoms that I initially thought were flu remnants and a reaction to an unusually high spring pollen count. Then Anne experienced a short bout of fever and chills, followed by congestion and eventually a cough,” the 2016 vice presidential candidate said. After Kaine’s wife, Anne, got sick, the senator said they spoke to their doctors in early April and were told it was possible that they both had contracted mild cases of coronavirus. “We were both at home in Richmond [after getting the news], working remotely and isolated from others. Due to the national testing shortage, we were not tested for the virus but continued isolating and watched for any worsening of symptoms. By mid-April we were symptom free,” he continued. Kaine went on to say that the two of them tested positive for the antibodies this month, but did not specify when. Despite the positive test, the Kaines plan to take the necessary safety precautions to prevent spreading the virus further. “While those antibodies could make us less likely to be re-infected or infect others, there is still too much uncertainty over what protection antibodies may actually provide. So we will keep following CDC guidelines—hand-washing, mask wearing, social distancing. We encourage others to do so as well. It shows those around you that you care about them.” Kaine is the second known senator to have contracted the virus, which has killed over 100,000 people. In late March, Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) announced he had tested positive for COVID-19. At the time, Paul was lambasted by his Senate colleagues for spending the week he was awaiting his coronavirus results interacting with other lawmakers and aides and using Capitol Hill facilities, such as the Senate gym. Paul defended himself in response to the backlash, saying, “For those who want to criticize me for lack of quarantine, realize that if the rules on testing had been followed to a tee, I would never have been tested and would still be walking around the halls of the Capitol. The current guidelines would not have called for me to get tested nor quarantined. It was my extra precaution, out of concern for my damaged lung, that led me to get tested.” He announced in April that he had recovered from the virus.

The number of “secret” coronavirus carriers — people displaying no symptoms — could be much higher than previously thought, according to new research. Researchers in two new studies published Wednesday found that as many as 80% of patients had asymptomatic cases of the virus, NBC News reported. The first study, which was published in Thorax, found that 81% of cases on a cruise to Antarctica were people with no symptoms. On the unidentified ship, which set sail in mid-March, some passengers and crew members began to develop symptoms, prompting eight to be evacuated, according to the report. But out of the 217 people remaining on board, there were 128 who tested positive for the virus, but only 24 of those who showed symptoms, researchers said. The other 104 people were symptom-free before they were tested for the virus. Meanwhile, researchers in the second study, which was published in JAMA Network Open, found a lower, but still significant number of patients were asymptomatic carriers of the virus in Wuhan, China. Of 78 patients who tested positive for the virus, there were 33 people — or about 42 percent — who had no symptoms of the illness, researchers said. These patients skewed younger, in their 20s, 30s and early 40s, and were more likely to be women, NBC News reported. Experts say that the findings are a reminder to take health precautions even around those who do not appear to be ill. “Many people still haven’t grasped the notion that asymptomatic people can be so common, and they wonder why it is they have to wear the mask when they’re feeling well, or why they have to keep doing this social distancing stuff,” Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University Medical Center who was not involved in either study, told the outlet. “Simply exhaling can send out viral particles.”

With absolutely nothing to pop the bubbly over during the coronavirus pandemic, Champagne sales are fizzling out. The widespread closure of restaurants and bars — not to mention cancelled events such as weddings, bar mitzvahs and sporting occasions — are causing the bottom to fall out of the market. Despite other types of booze seeing a potentially dangerous amount of popularity during lockdown, global Champagne sales are forecast to fall by a third — the equivalent of 100 million bottles — in 2020, Champagne producers group CIVC told Reuters. Lost revenue could total more than 1.7 billion euros ($1.9 billion) this year, and the slump shows no sign of reversing. “When someone loses a job or someone dies in his family, they don’t want to celebrate, so we’ll certainly see that risk hitting us for several years,” CIVC co-chairman Maxime Toubart said. The estimates are based on a staggering 75 % drop in April and May. CIVC predicted sales would remain below average until the end of the year, the festive holidays making little difference. Toubart’s co-chairman Jean-Marie Bariellère said the organization hopes the situation will improve when “hotels, cafes and restaurants reopen and people return to a more normal and more optimistic life.” But, he added, “It’s hard to say how fast that happens. We are preparing for difficult times ahead.” The depressing downturn follows a record-breaking year in 2019 when Champagne producers sold nearly 300 million bottles for 5 billion euros. Toubart said a rebound in sales to key export markets like the US would not be instant, especially in a country where a sharp rise in unemployment makes people less inclined to raise their flutes. The knock-on effect is that the price of some Champagne could fall later this year if vineyards seek to sell their surplus bottles in bargain sales. In an effort to cut stocks, CIVC decided Thursday that some of this year’s grape harvest would not be allowed to be bottled until 2022. It’s not just France that is affected. Spain’s cava makers also expect to be hit by the fallout from COVID-19. But Italian prosecco producers have seen sales edge higher. This is in keeping with figures showing that people are generally drinking more at home to ease their sense of isolation during lockdown. Off-premises sales of spirits in the US rocketed by more than a third (34.1 %) from last year for the nine-week period ending May 2, according to market research company Nielson. Wine sales went up 30.1 % while beer sales rose by 12.6 %. Meanwhile, spare a thought for the people of South Africa, where alcohol sales have been completely banned since social-distancing began. The rule has been enforced in an effort to reduce problems including traffic accidents and domestic violence.

China’s legislature proposed drafting a sovereign immunity law that would allow Chinese citizens to pursue legal actions against the United States over the coronavirus pandemic, according to a report. The proposal in China’s National People’s Congress would be in retaliation for lawsuits brought against China and the ruling Communist Party by several US states and a number of countries around the world, Breitbart News reported on Wednesday. The suits accuse China of silencing doctors who were raising alarms that the coronavirus was a contagious respiratory disease in the early days of the outbreak and of pressuring foreign countries not to impose travel restrictions on Chinese nationals. They also claim China used its influence with the World Health Organization to downplay the severity of the outbreak. Missouri and Mississippi have sued the Communist Party, while Texas, New York and Florida have taken legal action against China, the report said. Citing China’s state-run media, the report said the Communist Party is seeking to amend an existing law that would allow legal action against “other countries.” Ma Yide, the Chinese lawmaker leading the efforts, told the Global Times that the law would “ensure Chinese citizens’ and companies’ rights to sue the US over its blame game and cover-up of information during the pandemic.” Ma said one of the things Chinese citizens should be able to sue over is the unfounded claim from the Chinese Foreign Ministry that the US military brought the coronavirus to China. “Many believe that U.S. soldiers brought the epidemic to Wuhan. Others believe that the U.S. has hidden key information, which led to the global health crisis. Why can’t Chinese citizens and companies sue the U.S. government?” Ma told Chinese media. If the proposal should pass, Chinese residents could move ahead with lawsuits that are beginning to surface. Liang Xuguang, a lawyer from Wuhan, where the first cases were reported in late December, has sued the US government, accusing it of spreading misinformation, the report said. Liang wants the US to come clean on the number of “influenza deaths” caused by the coronavirus.

Don’t let history repeat itself. Last year’s measles outbreak in New York City was significantly impacted by parents who refused to vaccinate their children and those who made their kids participate in ill-advised “measles parties,” a new study has found. The parties involved healthy children deliberately playing with a sick child to get the measles in the hopes of “getting it over with” and gaining future immunity. The findings could serve as a dire warning for those hosting “COVID-19 parties” with comparable intentions — and similarly devastating consequences. The study, published Wednesday in the journal Science Advances, helps explain why NYC experienced the US’s largest measles outbreak in three decades in 2018-19. It also speaks to the implications of current declining vaccination rates during the coronavirus pandemic, says Wan Yang, Ph.D., the study’s author. “These findings demonstrate the rippling effects of vaccine hesitancy to all susceptible age groups, particularly to infants too young to receive their first dose of MMR [measles, mumps and rubella] vaccine,” Yang said, in a statement. For her research, Yang — an assistant professor of epidemiology at Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health — simulated transmissions in an Orthodox Jewish community using city measles case data and a computer model. She found that, although about a quarter of 1- to 4-year-olds were vulnerable to the disease at the onset of the outbreak in October 2018, the high number of infections couldn’t have been achieved without increased contact for the children — likely through “measles parties.” During the 2018-2019 measles outbreak, some families took the opposite approach and quarantined themselves — a somewhat more foreign concept at the time. Mandatory vaccination orders and vaccination campaigns by the city’s Department of Health were largely to thank for ending the outbreak: Over 32,000 children and teenagers, under 19, were vaccinated as a result of the mandate and campaign, Yang found. If many New Yorkers continue to not get vaccinated, says Yang, children should begin being vaccinated even earlier. “Administration of the first dose of the routine MMR vaccine earlier than the current guideline of 1 year may be needed to protect infants, if high levels of vaccine hesitancy persist,” says Yang in a press release. Concerns of another measles outbreak are currently unlikely, but Yang warns that a recent drop in vaccinations makes the city vulnerable to one when social distancing measures are lifted. “At the moment, chances of an immediate measles outbreak in the city remain low, thanks to the recent vaccination campaigns and current social distancing practice. But as the number of unvaccinated children increases and contact resumes, there would be a much greater risk of disease spread,” Yang says. “It’s crucial that parents work with their doctors to make sure their children are vaccinated timely.”

Add the Boston Marathon to the list of sporting events canceled because of the COVID-19 pandemic. After being postponed from April 20 and moved to Sept. 14, the race was called off on Thursday by Boston mayor Marty Walsh, who said it wouldn’t be safe to run it in the fall. Walsh added the city and Boston Athletic Association will work to hold the event virtually in September. According to the BAA, guidelines surrounding the virtual marathon will be communicated via email “in the near future.” The race had never been canceled or rescheduled in its 124-year history until this year. “Economically, it’s a big hit there’s no question about it,” Walsh said. “This entire three months has been a big hit for most sectors economically. Certainly we’re feeling it in our budget, our restaurants are feeling it [and] our small businesses are feeling it. Many of our offices are feeling it. We’ll survive. It might be a different reality for a lot of people.” Roughly 30,000 people run the Boston Marathon each year with about a million spectators along the course.  When the marathon was rescheduled, Walsh said the decision was made with the hope that coronavirus “would no longer be a significant public health risk.” That changed Thursday. All large events in Boston, including parades and festivals, have already been canceled through Labor Day. The New York City Marathon is still scheduled for Nov. 1. Mayor Bill de Blasio said in a press conference last week that it was still too early to consider canceling the New York City Marathon. De Blasio added he is working with the New York Road Runners to discuss potential alternative scenarios to hosting the race.

The chief executive of AstraZeneca, which is developing a leading coronavirus vaccine with Oxford University, said it is too early to deliberately expose trial participants to the pathogen, but it may become an option if ongoing tests hit a snag. The British drugmaker last week started phase 2 and 3 trials of the vaccine, looking to recruit around 10,000 adults and children in Britain. A certain number of participants will have to become infected in the course of their normal lives to achieve a reliable reading from the study over the next few months. So-called human challenge trials have been discussed as an alternative option by scientists, whereby vaccinated volunteers are infected intentionally. “We are running against time. We are seeing already in Europe the disease is declining,” CEO Pascal Soriot told an online press briefing. “Very soon the disease intensity will be low, and it will become difficult, so we have to move very quickly.” “If the disease gets to a very low level, maybe challenge studies will have to be considered. But we felt it’s too early today to do that,” he added. Companies and research institutions are working on more than 100 vaccines, about 10 of which are being tested on humans, in a bid to stop the respiratory illness that at present has no treatment and has killed about 350,000 people worldwide. Soriot said some of the Oxford University team that started early-stage human trials of the vaccine in April to test for safety and signs of an immune response were already privy to initial results, and that publication was imminent. “We should see the results very soon,” Soriot said. Oxford University has said the readout of the wider trials may take two to six months, depending on how many participants still catch the virus in the face of public health efforts to quell its spread.

With the coronavirus putting a damper on social gatherings — from international travel to dining out —  there’s never been a better time to save. Simple steps from rethinking subscriptions to negotiating bills can help consumers shore up their finances even as the pandemic ravages the economy, personal finance guru Nicole Lapin tells The Post. “We cannot control the global economy, we can only control ourselves and our own little economies,” Lapin said. One key step: Start saving some of the money you’d normally spend on little luxuries. In normal times, Lapin recommends putting 70 percent of your budget toward essentials like food and housing, saving or investing 15 percent, and using 15 percent for “extras.” But she now says that model should be tweaked by cutting the essentials to 65 percent and the extras to just 5 percent, “because you can’t buy the latte or get the mani-pedi anyway.” The rest should be saved, she said. “It is a rainy day — in fact, it’s pouring,” Lapin told The Post. “If you’re using your rainy day fund, that’s OK, don’t feel guilty about it. But now it’s time to replenish it.” If you’re struggling to cover an expense, Lapin says, it doesn’t hurt to ask for help. All major bills are negotiable if you call and ask for a discount, she said. “The worst thing they can say is no,” Lapin said. “They will likely throw you a bone versus losing you as a customer.” It’s also a good idea to automate bill payments to avoid nasty late fees, she added. Now is also a good time to rethink subscriptions you no longer need while you’re hunkered down at home, Lapin says. For instance, she said, consider canceling your cable if you’re watching more Netflix anyway, or use WiFi on your cellphone to cut back on wireless data usage. The same goes for credit cards. Hotel or airline rewards cards were “awesome in pre-corona times,” but they may not make sense now that no one’s traveling, according to Lapin. You can also negotiate credit card interest rates just like bills, she said. “Right now you’re probably going to want to look for something that’s more geared toward your spending habits and useful for stuff like groceries,” she said.

The Philippines’ Manila region will soon start to emerge from one of the world’s toughest and longest lockdowns — even as the country saw a record spike in daily infections Thursday. President Rodrigo Duterte announced that the eased restrictions will be in effect from June 1 to 15 — allowing gatherings of up to 10 people, and reopening workplaces, shops and some public transportation. Movement in and out of the capital city will be permitted, provided that people wear masks and observe social distancing. Meanwhile, the Philippines reported 539 new infections on Thursday, the country’s highest daily tally since its first reported case in January — bringing the total infection count to 15,588, of which 921 have resulted in deaths. But Duterte insisted in a late-night televised address that “for me, this does not look bad,” citing what he described as a low mortality rate in the country. Duterte’s health minister, Francisco Duque, said that 90 percent of the country’s COVID-19 cases are “mild,” and a minority of cases — less than 2 percent — are “severe and critical.” By this weekend, the duration of Manila’s lockdown will surpass the 76-day quarantine imposed in Wuhan — the original coronavirus epicenter — from late January through the beginning of April. Easing the lockdown could boost the economy in the capital, which is facing its deepest contraction in 34 years. However, tourist destinations, schools and universities will not yet open in Manila — and the elderly and children must remain at home. Local officials can still place high-risk communities under lockdown. Across the country, health authorities have conducted nearly 290,000 COVID-19 tests since January, equivalent to about 0.26 percent of the 107 million population. With Post wires

BLANTYRE, Malawi — Manhunts have begun after hundreds of people, some with the coronavirus, fled quarantine centers in Zimbabwe and Malawi while authorities worry they will spread COVID-19 in countries whose health systems can be rapidly overwhelmed. In Malawi, more than 400 people recently repatriated from South Africa and elsewhere fled a center at a stadium in Blantyre, jumping over a fence or strolling out the gate while police and health workers watched. Police and health workers told reporters they were unable to stop them as they lacked adequate protective gear. At least 46 escapees had tested positive for the virus. Some of those who fled told reporters they had bribed police. And in Zimbabwe, police spokesman Paul Nyathi said officers were “hunting down” more than 100 people who escaped from centers where a 21-day quarantine is mandatory for those returning from abroad. “They escape and sneak into the villages … We are warning people to stop sheltering them. These escapees are becoming a serious danger to communities,” Nyathi said. Nearly all of Zimbabwe’s 75 new cases this week came from the centers that hold hundreds of people who have returned, sometimes involuntarily, from neighboring South Africa and Botswana. The quarantine centers have become “our source of danger,” Health Minister Obadiah Moyo told a special parliamentary committee this week. Both Zimbabwe and Malawi have fewer than 200 confirmed cases but regional power South Africa, where many in both countries go to seek work, has more than 25,000. South Africa has the most cases in Africa, where the continent-wide total is nearly 125,000. Zimbabwe’s information minister, Monica Mutsvangwa, on Wednesday told reporters that the government is increasing security at the schools, colleges and hotels used as quarantine centers. Government spokesman Nick Mangwana suggested that security officers guarding centers with high walls and razor wire might be receiving bribes to allow people to leave early. Zimbabwe’s government is also worried about people crossing porous borders and failing to report at quarantine centers. The information ministry has begun sharing a hotline number and asking people to stop harboring “border jumpers” and those who “abscond” from quarantine. Malawi saw another mass escape earlier this week when 26 people left the Mwanza border post while waiting for test results. People arriving in the country face a mandatory 14-day quarantine. The Blantyre district director of health and social services, Gift Kawalazira, said they were overwhelmed when more than 2,000 people turned up at the border post in Mwanza over the weekend. Holding some in the stadium was a last-minute resort after plans to use education facilities failed for lack of funds, he said. “They will be moving around while trying to elude authorities,” he said of the escapees, including a smaller group that slipped away from a Blantyre center on Monday. Eight had tested positive for the virus. “People need to understand that it is not punishment but we are only doing this to protect the general public,” Kawalazira said. Few prevention measures could be seen at the stadium, with people leaving freely to buy food from nearby vendors. They told reporters they had received no food from authorities since Monday. Relatives of some of the returnees entered the stadium to visit, giving loved ones hugs.

No shirt, no shoes, no mask, no service. New York businesses will have the right to deny entrance to those who refuse to wear a mask or other face covering under an executive order Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Thursday. “We’re giving the store owners the right to say, ‘If you’re not wearing a mask, you can’t come in,’ ” said Cuomo in a press briefing at the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club in Flatbush, Brooklyn. “That store owner has a right to protect the other patrons in that store. “You don’t want to wear a mask? Fine. But you don’t have a right to then go into that store if that store owner doesn’t want you to.” Though it took him a while to come around, Cuomo last month signed another executive order mandating that New Yorkers must cover up when heading into areas outside their own homes in which social distancing would prove difficult. He also championed masks earlier this week as “cool,” and Thursday announced that Chris Rock and Rosie Perez would be partnering with the state to promote masks along with testing and social distancing, with Rock saying that Brooklyn in particular could use a reminder. Getty Images Christopher Sadowski Paul Martinka View Slideshow Perez theorized that the order could also have the effect of putting shoppers at ease and defusing tense situations at a time when everyone is on edge. “It’s going to lessen also the anxiety of going into a store,” said Perez, whose star turn in “Do The Right Thing” is among her acting credits. “It’s going to lessen, hopefully, the fights that are breaking out in stores when someone sees someone without a mask. “There’s enough fear that’s going around.” Cuomo agreed with the point. “I think this will reduce conflicts,” he said. “You don’t wear a mask and you walk into a small retail store and now you’re exposing people to you without a mask … that is a conflict waiting to erupt.” Cuomo announced the new executive order as the state’s statistics on hospital admissions and intubations continued to trend in the right direction. The number of deaths in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Thursday, however, sat stubbornly at 74, equaling the period prior, and up one from the 73 fatalities in the day before that, raising the overall confirmed state death toll to 23,722. “This is always painful,” said Cuomo. “We’re going to be watching this number to see how far down it actually goes. “The COVID virus … will remain a cause of death for the foreseeable future, I’m afraid to say.”

The novel coronavirus is so scary because of the way it spreads inside a community. Anywhere from a few minutes to a few hours may be enough for COVID-19 to spread from a carrier, and then it can take up to 14 days for the symptoms to appear. When they do, they’re not always specific and many people who experienced it a few months ago could have mistaken it for the flu or a common cold. The virus’s mortality rate is higher than the flu’s, but low enough that it doesn’t hinder its ability to spread to others. The faster the virus kills the host, the less likely for that host to transmit the disease to their contacts. That’s why “flattening the curve” is so important, and why some forms of social distancing are still required to avoid a second wave. The longer the virus is contained, the easier it’ll be to treat, thanks to the emergence of new protocols, new drugs, and the arrival of the first vaccines. However, the virus is a living organism that can adapt to the environment through mutations. Scientists are already keeping tabs on the various genetic changes that have occurred in the COVID-19 strains that have been observed since December, and they have good news. These mutations do not increase the pathogen’s ability to spread to other people. Researchers from The University College London (UCL) published a new study last week that’s available in pre-print format on bioRxiv. The study builds on peer-reviewed research that was published in Infection, Genetics, and Evolution earlier this month, detailing the “patterns of diversity in the genome of SARS-CoV-2.” The UCL geneticists analyzed virus genomes from more than 15,000 COVID-19 patients from 75 countries and tried to determine whether the strains that feature a new mutation are actually transmitted more easily than previous strains. The researchers found 6,822 mutations across the globe, including 273 mutations that have occurred “repeatedly and independently.” Of those, they focused on 31 mutations that occurred at least 10 times during the pandemic. They modeled the evolutionary tree of these predominant mutations to see whether their descendants would be more likely to outperform versions of the virus that don’t have the same mutation. The study found no evidence that the common mutations are increasing the virus’s ability to spread. As we’ve explained before, the virus does a great job of infecting the population already. And while it does adapt to whatever conditions it finds inside the host, the mutations don’t necessarily help the virus. The scientists said that some of the common gene variations are neutral, but most of them are “mildly detrimental.” Many mutations were induced by the human immune system rather than the virus’s need to adapt to the human host. The researchers also looked at a particular mutation affecting the coronavirus’s spike protein. Called D614G, the mutation appeared in other studies, with one of them saying that it may increase the transmissibility of the virus. The UCL researchers say that’s not the case, and D614G isn’t associated with the spread of COVID-19. These findings are definitely good news for health officials setting up strategies of containment, but also for researchers who are creating drugs and vaccines to neutralize the virus. That said, we’re not out of the woods yet. All we can do is hope a dangerous doesn’t happen before the drugs and vaccines are ready.

A Texas tavern said this week it will not serve customers who wear coronavirus protective face masks, according to a report. The Liberty Tree Tavern, located in Elgin — about 25 miles east of Austin — posted a sign that read: “Due to our concern for customers, if they FEEL (not think), that they need to wear a mask, they should stay home until they FEEL that it’s safe to be in public without one. Sorry, No Mask Allowed.” The city has a population of around 10,000 residents, according to the 2018 census. Only 52 residents have tested positive for COVID-19 since the start of the outbreak, Austin’s KXAN reported. Kevin Smith, the tavern’s co-owner, told the station the ban was “more of a pushback” against snitches and contact tracers. “This is still a rural county,” Smith said. Public reaction has been mixed. Resident Ross Owens told KXAN he thought Liberty Tree’s policy was “foolish” and risky. “They’re taking changes they don’t need to take, especially if they’re in public service,” he said. Another resident, Charles Chamberlain, who survived stage 4 cancer, said the policy doesn’t bother him. “It’s just a choice. He just put that up there to let people know if they aren’t feeling good, then they maybe shouldn’t come,” Chamberlain said. “Everybody is keeping safe distances, they aren’t bunching up.” Liberty Tree Tavern still requires its patrons to maintain 6 feet of social distancing and abide by a requirement to maintain no more than 25 percent of the facility’s occupancy.

The House overwhelmingly voted Thursday to relax rules for how businesses use Paycheck Protection Program funds during the coronavirus pandemic. The reforms passed 417-1 and now go to the Senate for consideration. The Paycheck Protection Program Flexibility Act allows businesses to spend money over 24 weeks rather than just eight to qualify for loan forgiveness. Companies taking part in the $670 billion program also would be allowed to defer payroll taxes, and the percentage they must spend on payroll would drop from 75 to 60 percent. Business leaders lobbied hard for the changes, and a group of restaurant owners implored President Trump to join the effort during a White House roundtable event this month. Republicans almost unanimously supported the legislation — as they did a China human rights bill on Wednesday. That could signal support for its passage in the Republican-led Senate. But that support comes despite warning that a new House policy allowing for proxy votes may result in legislation being declared null and void by courts. House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) is leading Republicans in a federal lawsuit arguing that proxy voting is unconstitutional. The first proxy votes in House floor history were cast Wednesday after 71 Democrats asked colleagues to vote for them. On Wednesday, McCarthy denounced Democrats for transferring credit for the PPP reform bill from GOP Rep. Chip Roy of Texas to Democratic co-sponsor Rep. Dean Phillips of Minnesota. “Once we found out that everybody loved the bill, lo and behold we can’t let a Republican have their name on the bill,” McCarthy said. “[Roy] is no longer the main author on the bill even though it was his idea, something you can be very proud of on the other side … I look forward to the member who took his name and try to campaign on it.” The Paycheck Protection Program is open to businesses with up to 500 employees, and in certain cases more. The House on Thursday rejected a measure to require the Small Business Administration to disclose information about loan recipients, with most Republicans opposing the change. A two-thirds majority was needed. The SBA said in a recent statement its immediate focus was on administering the loans, but that greater transparency could come “in the near future.” Congress approved PPP funds in two tranches amid widespread government-ordered business closures. An initial $350 billion ran out within two weeks, but additional funds approved in late April haven’t yet run dry.

NEW DELHI — As if the coronavirus wasn’t enough, India grappled with scorching temperatures and the worst locust invasion in decades as authorities prepared for the end of a monthslong lockdown despite recording thousands of new infections every day. This triple disaster drew biblical comparisons and forced officials to try to balance the competing demands of simultaneous public health crises: protection from eviscerating heat but also social distancing in newly reopened parks and markets. The heat wave threatens to compound challenges of containing the virus, which has started spreading more quickly and broadly since the government began easing restrictions of one of the world’s most stringent lockdowns earlier this month. “The world will not get a chance to breathe anymore. The ferocity of crises are increasing and they’re not going to be spaced out,” said Sunita Narain of New Delhi’s Center for Science and Environment. When her 6-year-old son woke up with a parched throat and a fever, housekeeper Kalista Ekka wanted to bring him to the hospital. But facing a deluge of COVID-19 patients, the doctor advised Ekka to keep him at home despite boiling temperatures in the family’s two-room apartment in a low-income neighborhood in South Delhi. “The fan only makes it hotter but we can’t open the window because it has no screen,” and thus no defense against malaria and dengue-carrying mosquitoes, Ekka said. In a nearby upmarket enclave crowded with walkers and joggers every morning and at dusk — some with face coverings, some without — neighbors debated the merits of masks in an online forum. In the heat, “it is very dangerous to work out with a mask. So a Catch-22 situation,” said Asmita Singh. Temperatures soared to 118 degrees Fahrenheit (47.6 degrees Celsius) in the capital New Delhi this week, marking the warmest May day in 18 years and 122 F (50 C) in the desert state of Rajasthan, after the world’s hottest April on record. India suffers from severe water shortages and tens of millions lack running water and air conditioning, leaving many to seek relief under shady trees in public parks and stepwells, the ancient structures used to harvest rainwater. Though many people continued wearing masks properly, others pushed them onto chins or had foregone them altogether. Cyclone Amphan, a massive super storm that crossed the unusually warm Bay of Bengal last week, sucked up huge amounts of moisture, leaving dry, hot winds to form a heatwave over parts of central and northern India. At the same time, swarms of desert locusts have devastated crops in India’s heartland, threatening an already vulnerable region that is struggling with the economic cost of the lockdown. Exasperated farmers have been banging plates, whistling or throwing stones to try to drive the locusts away and sometimes even lighting fires to smoke them out. The swarms appeared poised to head from Rajasthan north to Delhi, but on Wednesday a change in wind direction sent them southward toward the state of Madhya Pradesh instead. K.L. Gurjar, a top official of India’s Locust Warning Organization, said his 50-person team was scrambling to stop the swarms before breeding can take place during India’s monsoons, which begin in July. Otherwise, he said, the locusts could destroy India’s summer crops. Meanwhile, India reported another record single-day jump of more than 6,500 coronavirus cases on Thursday, pushing up the total to 158,333 confirmed cases and 4,531 deaths. Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government is preparing a new set of guidelines to be issued this weekend, possibly extending the lockdown in worst-hit areas while promoting economic activity elsewhere, with unemployment surging to 25 percent. The sudden halt to the Indian economy when the lockdown began March 25 has been devastating for daily laborers and migrant workers, who fled cities on foot for their family homes in the countryside. The government started running special trains for the migrants, but deaths on the rails because of starvation or dehydration have been reported. Others immediately put into quarantine centers upon their arrival in home districts have tested positive for COVID-19, adding to the burden of severely strained rural health systems. To jump start the economy, Modi’s environment ministry has moved to lower liabilities for industrial polluters and given private players the right to explore for coal and mine it. Cheap oil will fuel recovery efforts worldwide. Indian environmental journalist Joydeep Gupta said that the perfect storm of pandemic, heat and locusts show India must go green. He said the government should implement policies to safeguard biodiversity and offer incentives for green energy to reduce greenhouse gases that cause climate change. Instead, “the government is promoting the same sectors of the industry that have caused the multiple crises in the first place,” he said. But Narain said other government initiatives that expand federal agriculture employment, cash transfer and food ration programs help India deal more effectively with its threats. “It’s building coping abilities of the very poor to be able to deal with stress after stress after stress,” she said.

Thousands of New Yorkers tune into Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s afternoon coronavirus briefings each day for vital updates on how to go on with their lives. When will my kids go back to school? What month can my store reopen? Is it safe to take the subway to my job? We generally end the hour with no more answers than when we started. That pitiful trend continued Thursday, when Cuomo added Chris Rock and Rosie Perez to his task force. Not Dr. Chris Rock of Mt. Sinai and famed epidemiologist Rosie Perez. The experts Cuomo has chosen are the stars of “Down to Earth” and “White Men Can’t Jump.” During a condescending, borderline-satirical introduction, Cuomo claimed that the entire borough of Brooklyn, from Williamsburg to Brighton Beach, just won’t listen to the poor guy about wearing masks and maintaining social distancing. “I’m not cool enough,” he said, two days after declaring face masks cool. “They want a full-fledged Brooklyn voice.” That’s when he brought up Rock and Perez, who took the seats usually occupied by, you know, public officials of real consequence. Entertainers, not community outreach, have been tasked with convincing a hesitant public to slap on some PPE and stay six feet apart. When we’ve already been doing that for months. How on earth will Perez manage that when she couldn’t even convince audiences to watch “Birds of Prey”? The pair slobbered over Cuomo like there was a gun under the table. “I just want to say that our governor is a rock star and he makes me proud to be from New York,” Perez said. “Aw! Thank you very much. You guys are the rock stars!” Cuomo replied. Rock the star then talked about how much he misses performing onstage. “Hi, microphone. I’ve missed you. I know it’s been hard,” he said. Wait, when can kids go back to school? Later on, a reporter pressed the guv once more on exactly why two movie stars were lecturing us about the coronavirus pandemic. Cuomo said, “They are going to use their voice, their skill, their talent to communicate better than I have.” All right then. So, Mr. Rock and Ms. Perez, what is your detailed reopening plan for New York City? We need one.

France’s movie theaters will be allowed to re-open from June 22, Prime Minister Edouard Philippe announced this evening. This is earlier than expected, as French Culture Minister Franck Riester said this week that cinemas were eyeing a July 1 re-start. The decision was made in concert with the industry, Philippe said today, in order to allow exhibitors and distributors to organize concerted national campaigns. Social distancing measures will be in place, though Philippe did not elaborate. Riester had noted earlier this week, “Cinemas absolutely must open at the same time in all regions in order to amortize distribution costs and so that the French people know which films are playing.” There is expected to be reduced capacity at screenings, without necessarily a physical separation in the strict sense. Movie theaters have been closed since mid-March throughout the country. There won’t be any new studio product until July in the avid European major, but a soft June opening should allow for cinema staff and moviegoers to get up to speed with new protocols. In zones of France which have been identified as “Green,” live theaters will be allowed to open from June 2 with social distancing and masks required. The Ile de France region, which includes Paris, has moved from being a “Red” zone to “Orange,” and particular vigilance will be maintained there, although parks and gardens will be allowed to open from this weekend. Restaurants, bars and cafés will be allowed to open as of June 2 with social distancing protocols in place across the country, though in Paris only outside seating will be possible before a re-evaluation later this month. France is now entering the second phase of easing coronavirus lockdown measures. This will last from June 2 to 21. “We are better than where we hoped to be,” said Philippe as he addressed the nation this evening. “This good news is not the fruit of a miracle, it’s the result of hard work… your vigor and civic-mindedness.” However, “it’s not good enough that everything returns to normal.” Contact sports will still be banned the time being. Museums and monuments can open, but night clubs are to remain closed. Beaches, fitness centers and pools have a green light from June 2.

The golden arches were their beacon of hope. Two 23-year-old Brits, who had a hankering for those all-beef patties with special sauce, broke free from their eight-week coronavirus lockdown to take a day trip last Saturday to the nearest McDonald’s drive-thru. Friends Ryan Hall and Paisley Hamilton drove 250 miles round trip from the city of Hull down south to Peterborough, where they spent around $25 on a large Big Mac meal, a large nugget meal, two double cheeseburgers, one McChicken sandwich, a cheeseburger and a Filet-O-Fish, the Sun reports. Extra costs included spending about $33 on gas and waiting on a 30-car line at the drive-thru when they arrived. The reward? Eating the entire order cooped up in their car in the parking lot before driving home — and they tell The Sun they regret nothing. “It was definitely a ‘f – – k it’ moment which actually ended up costing me a lot of money,” Hall said. “But I’d do it all again. It was so worth it.” While fast-food chains in the US have remained open for drive through and takeout, McDonald’s just began reopening 39 UK locations last week following weeks of coronavirus-related lockdowns. But the one closest to Hall and Hamilton in Hull had not yet reached that point. The two found the one closest to them was in Peterborough, and they followed their stomachs. “We both are mega fans,” says Hall. “It had been eight weeks since we last had our McNuggs, and we just thought ‘Why not?’ ” An extra expense for the king-size feast also included time. The entire trip for a 15-minute gorge in the parking lot ended up running the pair nearly seven hours total, from 2 p.m. to almost 9 p.m. But Hall says the two drove a scenic route along the eastern coastline under sunny skies. And, she adds, waiting in the drive-thru line was even a blast. “I had my car soft-top down, blasting out ‘Rain on Me’ by Lady Gaga,” says Hall. “Everyone else was there joining in with the mini rave.” Some things are indeed worth waiting for, but when it came to getting their food, they couldn’t wait for the most important part of the meal. “We were [mesmerized] by the food and wolfed it down, so we didn’t even take a selfie with it,” says Hall.

The clock is ticking. But toward what? And when? A veteran agent who has been through many negotiations said, “Everything in baseball gets done on a deadline.” But what is the deadline that MLB and the Players Association are working against in trying to among, other items, reach an agreement on how players will be paid? Whose deadline is it? Because without a firm deadline does either side — currently locked into entrenched opposing positions on finance — truly know when it has to show its last and best offer or blink in a game of chicken? Most optimistically, MLB wants to be playing regular season games on the July 4 weekend. The symbolism would be great. This would be an opportunity to make a statement that baseball is the national pastime, especially if it were the first North American team sport to get back on the field. That is obviously very good for the owners, but if the sport improves its reputation and fan base there will be residual benefits to the players as well. So even if you make that the mutual goal, there is no clear drop dead date to make games happen in the first days of July. I have talked to agents and teams that say players can be ready with two weeks of training because: 1) This isn’t the 1990s anymore, players are constantly staying in shape even during a pandemic. 2) Club officials have reached out to most players in recent weeks to urge them to ramp up workouts as optimism rose that there would be a mid-June start to spring training. 3) There will be expanded rosters to limit the strain, especially on pitchers, at the outset. But there are those worried about routines being disrupted and bodies being more susceptible to injuries with less spring training. They mostly see three weeks as the minimum spring training preparation needed. A new variable was thrown in this week with players reacting in a unified, aggravated way with MLB’s plan to drastically cut particularly stars’ prorated pay. One agent cautioned, “I suspect some players will now put down their gloves in protest.” If that occurs, that stoppage in pre-camp workouts would necessitate a longer period in camps, at least for that class of players. This accentuates the moving target of a negotiating deadline, and that is assuming all are in simpatico that a season must start by Independence Day weekend. But that is not the case. There are differences between best scenario and only scenario. There are those that believe the 82-game season proposed by MLB has some wiggle room to be pushed back and still end by early October for the postseason. And there are those that see no reason that a three-month regular season can’t be had from August-October, with the playoffs in November. MLB has balked at this because of concerns that the virus may renew in a stronger way with cooler weather in the fall, imperiling the postseason, which is when the clubs receive their greatest piece of national TV revenue. Also, MLB is worried about sports clutter in November with other events being pushed on the calendar, notably they fret about taking on the more popular NFL for a longer period. Plus, TV partners have cleared an October schedule for postseason games and it could be tougher to find slots in November. But that doesn’t mean it is impossible to start the season in August. Which just adds to the uncertainty about the kind of negotiating deadline that traditionally creates a ticking clock that compels compromise and ultimately agreement.

GENEVA/ZURICH – The World Health Organization announced on Wednesday the creation of a foundation to tap new sources of funding that could help ease a potential cash shortage as it leads the global fight against the coronavirus pandemic. Announcing the creation of the WHO Foundation at a virtual briefing, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus denied the move was related to “recent funding issues,” saying it had been in the works for years. President Donald Trump has threatened to halt funding from the United States, the WHO’s biggest donor, after criticizing its handling of the pandemic and accusing it of being China-centric. In a letter to Tedros last week, Trump called on the UN agency to initiate reforms within 30 days. Tedros told a news conference the body had warned “many times” about a pandemic in recent years. Countries had identified gaps in their preparedness for fighting pandemics, but financing had not materialized, he said. “Finance these plans and make sure that countries are prepared to fight – to finish the current one, but to prepare for the next epidemic, which may happen because we are still vulnerable,” he added. Tedros said this month that the WHO’s annual budget of around $2.3 billion was “very, very small” for a global agency, around that of a medium-sized hospital in the developed world. He also said that the funding sources were too uncertain. The WHO Foundation is being created as an independent grant-making entity that will support the UN agency’s efforts to address the most pressing global health challenges by raising new funding from “non-traditional sources.” Its founder Thomas Zeltner, Switzerland’s former health secretary, told Reuters he hoped for donations from high net-worth individuals as well as corporations and the general public. At the same briefing on Wednesday, the WHO head of emergencies program Mike Ryan reiterated that the body advised against using hydroxychloroquine to treat COVID-19 – a drug Trump has said he takes.

Sonic Automotive, which operates 95 US car dealerships, started laying off and furloughing about a third of its workforce as the coronavirus pandemic crushed its sales. Then, it changed its executives’ pay packages — handing them a multimillion-dollar windfall. On April 10, Sonic’s board gave its top executives stock options to replace performance-based share awards, regulatory filings show. The options it gave Chief Executive David Smith, whose family controls the company, are now worth about $5.16 million — more than four times the value of the performance-based stock awards he got last year. Some of Sonic’s terminated employees, meanwhile, face hard times. After a decade of buying and selling cars, Allan Nadohl, 74, said he was laid off in March and now relies on US government retirement payments that don’t fully cover his bills in Los Angeles. “Be a mensch,” Nadohl said, referring to Sonic executives with a Yiddish word meaning honorable person. “Take a 50 percent cut for six months.” Sonic said in one of the filings that the changes were made in response to the pandemic, without elaborating. Neither the company nor Smith responded to requests for comment from Reuters. Sonic is one of six US companies identified in a Reuters review of regulatory filings that have moved to shield their executives’ compensation from the pandemic’s economic fallout as they laid off or furloughed workers. The others include plush toy seller Build-A-Bear Workshop, restaurant operator Red Robin Gourmet Burgers, retailer Signet Jewelers, fashion brand DKNY owner G-III Apparel Group and fracking sand producer Covia Holdings. Reuters found 75 other companies that disclosed they are considering changes to executive pay plans in light of the pandemic’s impact on their businesses. Among them are ride-sharing giant Uber Technologies, hotel operator Hilton Worldwide Holdings, carrier Delta Air Lines, satellite radio company Sirius XM Holdings and Thomson Reuters, the parent company of Reuters News. In an April 21 filing, for example, Sirius XM said it “may be prudent” to change executive pay terms to ensure it can attract and retain “senior management talent.” Delta said in a filing that its performance measures no longer suited the “current reality” and that the value of executives’ incentive pay had declined by more than half in the pandemic. Sirius XM did not comment in response to requests from Reuters, and Delta declined to comment. G-III and Signet said the changes were needed to retain management talent, while Build-A-Bear said the moves aligned the interests of executives with shareholders. Covia, Red Robin, Uber and Hilton said in filings that uncertainty arising from the pandemic caused them to revisit performance pay. Thomson Reuters said in a filing that it had approved executive performance targets in February and early March without the benefit of being able to consider the pandemic’s impact on its business, which it said it would continue to monitor and assess. David Crundwell, a vice president for corporate affairs, referred to the filing and declined to comment further. Reuters identified the companies by searching filings submitted to the US Securities and Exchange Commission this year and finding those that mentioned the pandemic in the context of executive compensation. The findings are a sampling and do not include companies that may have changed executive pay without explicitly tying the moves to the pandemic. Critics say protecting executives’ pay in downturns undermines practices intended to tie compensation to shareholder returns. Nell Minow, vice chair of corporate governance consultant ValueEdge Advisors, said such plans need both an upside and a downside. “Otherwise, there is no point,” she said. Others counter that the moves to protect executive pay might serve investors as well as executives. “It’s critical to motivate the team and get through the crisis,” said Yonat Assayag, partner at pay consultant ClearBridge Compensation Group. “Through that lens, a lot of these decisions are very much aligned with shareholder interests.” To be sure, many top executives will likely see their pay go down this year because of dwindling profits and lower share prices, and some companies’ compensation changes may not fully make up for the pandemic’s impact on executive pay. More than 500 companies in the Russell 3000 index have announced cuts to the base salaries of their chief executives, to save money or show they are sharing workers’ pain, according to compensation consultant Semler Brossy. Base salaries, however, account for only a tenth of the median pay of chief executives at the largest 500 US companies, according to research firm Equilar. They earn the bulk of their compensation through stock awards. Build-A-Bear, which sells customized stuffed animals, announced a 20 percent executive salary reduction in March as it furloughed more than 90 percent of its 4,300 workers. That translated to a cut of $142,800 from the $714,000 salary of CEO Sharon John. Two weeks later, however, the company granted its top brass stock grants of roughly equivalent value to the salary cuts. Build-A-Bear did not respond to requests for comment. In a securities filing on May 1, the company said the stock awards were made “to further align the interests” of executives and shareholders. Many companies have not made decisions on whether and how to adjust executive pay amid the pandemic. Investors and corporate governance experts said they are watching closely. “We will look very hard at the outcomes of 2020 awards,” said Hans-Christoph Hirt, head of the stewardship and engagement arm of asset manager Federated Hermes, which has $606 billion in assets under management. “We wouldn’t want to see targets lowered on the fly.” Vanguard, the world’s largest mutual fund firm, said on its Web site earlier this month that it was not appropriate for boards to create “easier” executive performance targets, despite the challenging environment. Sonic moved to protect executive pay on April 10, a few weeks after it started layoffs and furloughs of what would eventually total about 3,000 employees, company filings show. The previous pay plan would have awarded stock to executives based on earnings. Sonic replaced it with options that gave executives the right to buy company stock, starting in 2021, at the beaten-down price the shares hit on April 9 of this year — at the height of the pandemic, when their value had been halved from their most recent peak. Sonic’s shares have risen 67 percent since April 10, as much of the stock market has recovered on the Federal Reserve’s intervention and massive government stimulus spending. Smith said on the company’s first-quarter earnings call on April 30 that sales had dropped about 40 percent year-on-year since the start of the pandemic. Sonic’s pay changes are “pretty egregious,” said Aaron Bertinetti, head of research and engagement at proxy advisor Glass, Lewis & Co. Covia, a materials supplier to the energy industry, has cut at least 7 percent of its workforce of about 2,662 employees in the crisis. The company said that the pandemic and volatile oil markets had “rendered obsolete” its performance-based incentive program for executives, including CEO Richard Navarre. Instead, the company’s board approved payments to the top executives equaling what they would have earned if they had achieved their 2020 performance targets. For Navarre, this amounted to a $4.36 million immediate payout. A Covia spokesman declined to comment on behalf of the company and Navarre. Other firms made more modest changes that cushioned the blow for executives without making them whole for any pandemic-related loss of pay. DKNY parent G-III Apparel switched from performance-based to time-based share awards, assuring pay for executives who remain with the company for three years. The company said in a regulatory filing that the “significant retention benefit” outweighs any concerns over removing performance requirements from the grants. G-III CEO Morris Goldfarb, who owns about 8 percent of the company, had earlier given up a $1 million annual cash salary as part of steps the firm said it took to increase “financial flexibility.” The company also said that cash incentive payments to Goldfarb — which accounted for about 70 percent of his $16.6 million total pay last year — could be reduced this year because of the pandemic’s impact on company performance. Removing the performance requirement from Goldfarb’s stock awards will protect a substantial portion of his pay. Last year, he earned $4 million in performance-based shares; this year, the changes give him $3.7 million in time-based shares. G-III furloughed and laid off 60 percent and 80 percent of employees, depending on the segment of its wholesale and retail operations. A G-III spokesman said the new arrangement was made “in recognition of record-breaking results” in the 12 months ending in January and to assure stability in management. Signet Jewelers is also giving executives more shares based on time, and less on performance, which could help blunt the impact of the economic crisis on their pay. Time-vesting shares made up 35 percent of executives’ long-term incentive plan before the pandemic, with the balance of the stock awards linked to profitability measures. The new structure gives time-vesting and performance shares equal weighting. The changes mean Signet CEO Virginia Drosos would get $900,000 more in time-based stock awards for this year if Signet maintains compensation targets it used for the previous fiscal year, ended Feb. 1. The jeweler also cut top executives’ base cash salaries by half, including that of Drosos, who last year received $1.5 million in base salary. But the firm said in a filing that it will also award executives additional shares worth about a quarter of their cash salary. More than half of Signet Jewelers’ 23,000 employees in North America have been furloughed, according to a company spokesman. Nancy Reardon, who chairs Signet’s compensation committee, said the changes were meant to retain management talent and give executives “fair and realistic” goals in light of the pandemic. Company spokeswoman Colleen Rooney said the company had business reasons beyond the pandemic for changing executive compensation and that the adjustments could translate to lower pay if the company performs well. Red Robin said on April 14 that it would eliminate 50 restaurant support positions and cut pay by 20 percent for support and supervision workers in response to the pandemic, matching an earlier 20 percent cut to executive base salaries. It also closed 35 of the 454 restaurants it operates and furloughed or reassigned an undisclosed number of workers. Red Robin said in an April 8 regulatory filing that it replaced targets based on company earnings with metrics that compare performance to corporate peers, which faced similar challenges in the pandemic. The change likely will reduce the pandemic’s impact for CEO Paul Murphy, who negotiated a cash-and-stock package estimated at $7 million annually when he joined the company in October. In a filing, the company called the changes appropriate given the economic uncertainty and the difficulty in crafting new metrics. A company spokesman declined further comment.

Less than half of Brooklynites are wearing masks to stop the spread of the coronavirus, comedian Chris Rock estimated Thursday in his guest appearance at Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s press briefing, saying it’s seen by some as a “status symbol” to go bare-faced. “In Brooklyn, I’m seeing probably 40 percent of people wearing masks,” said Rock. “It’s the kids who really aren’t wearing a mask, and you know, it’s sad. “It’s sad that our health has become, you know, a sort of political issue. … It’s a status symbol, almost, to not wear a mask.” The former “Saturday Night Live” star, who was raised in Bedford-Stuyvesant, and Brooklyn native Rosie Perez joined Cuomo for his daily coronavirus briefing at the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club in hard-hit Flatbush, where it was announced that they would partner with the state to promote wearing masks, getting tested, social distancing and other precautions. “We’re soldiers for New York,” said Cuomo. “It’s 100,000 dead Americans.” Rock, 55, who actually lives in Alpine, NJ, now but still has family in Brooklyn, said that while most people “try to mind their business” when they see someone not wearing a mask, he’ll occasionally shoot them “a nice side-eye.” Perez, who lives in Clinton Hill, said she tries a different approach, trying to win over those who flout the rules. “I try to bring some levity into the equation. I say, ‘Hey, do the right thing,'” said the actress, in a nod to the title of the Brooklyn-set 1989 Spike Lee film that launched her career. Angela Weiss/AFP via Getty Images Paul Martinka View Slideshow Perez, 55, said that while the coronavirus has particularly ravaged low-income communities of color, what “really boggles my mind” is the lack of compliance in more well-off neighborhoods. “When you step into the communities that are affluent, when you see hipsters and yuppies walking around without a mask, I go, ‘What is it? Is it arrogance? … Do you think that you are not going to be affected?'” she said. “OK, fine, that’s your thing. But you’re affecting me, too.”

Tom Hanks donated blood plasma for a second time to lend a hand in the battle against the coronavirus — months after he recovered from his own bout with the illness, the actor said on Instagram. The Oscar winner, 63, posted a shot Wednesday of two bags of plasma, along with two other images documenting the process. “Plasmatic on 3! 1,2,3 PLASMATIC! Hanx,” he wrote. Just a month ago, Hanks posted about his first plasma donation, calling it “as easy as taking a nap.” Hanks and wife, singer Rita Wilson, also 63, vowed after recovering from coronavirus that they would both donate. “We have not only been approached, we have said, ‘Do you want our blood? Can we give plasma?’ And, in fact, we will be giving it now to the places that hope to work on what I would like to call the Hank-ccine,” Hanks said on NPR’s podcast “Wait Wait…Don’t Tell Me!” Hanks said the couple learned that they had antibodies after their bout with COVID-19, which they were diagnosed with in March in Australia while Hanks was working on Baz Luhrmann’s now-delayed Elvis Presley biopic. They were briefly hospitalized before being released into isolation at an undisclosed Australian residence, where they stayed for weeks before returning to the US. Instagram Instagram View Slideshow Hanks has said that Wilson had a much “tougher time” battling the illness than himself. “She had a much higher fever and she had some other symptoms,” he said. “She lost her sense of taste and smell. She got absolutely no joy from food for a better part of three weeks.”

Parents in several states nationwide are “shocked” to find they can’t withdraw their children from public school, the largest U.S. legal organization for homeschool families told Fox News. Coronavirus restrictions hit public schools especially hard and, with no clear end in sight, the loss of students only adds to the already vulnerable loss in funds. A RealClear Opinion Research survey shows that 40 percent of families are more likely to homeschool when lockdown restrictions lift, a significant increase from the 2.5 million children who were educating their kids at home before stay-at-home orders were put in place. T.J. Schmidt, a lawyer for the Home School Legal Defense Association (HSLDA), which provides legal services to help parents meet requirements for transitioning children from public school to homeschool, said he’s noticed an uptick in the number of parents trying to pull their kids from public school. And public schools, he said, are pushing back. “We see this across the country,” Schmidt said. “I’ve had school officials attempt to prevent or dissuade parents from pulling their kids out.” He said schools have been unable to process the paperwork to withdraw students from the public school system. “There’s two main reasons … school officials are fearful of losing too many students to homeschooling, and the second reason is perhaps a staffing issue, just a lacking staffing issue to process these withdrawals. Not always an issue of trying to stop parents from homeschooling but there is a significant part of that involved.” Schmidt, a father of seven who homeschools his children — ages 3 to 16 — in Northern Virginia, said he’s had other cases in Oregon, Oklahoma, and New York. His colleagues have had cases in Pennsylvania, North Carolina, and California. “The most egregious situations I’ve had have been in Florida,” he said, adding it is normally a great state to homeschool. “But I’ve had numerous parents in a couple of different counties told ‘we’re not allowed to withdraw students right now’ … They’re trying to hold onto these students.” Public school districts receive funding based on the number of students enrolled in their system and thus lose funding when parents opt to homeschool their children. Many school districts are asking for more money after being forced to go virtual. The School District of Philadelphia is facing a $38 million shortfall for the next academic year, which it fears could grow to $1 billion over the next five years due to the coronavirus, The Philadelphia Tribune reports. This comes as 215 school advocates sent an open letter to Joe Biden describing a “national teacher shortage and reduced educational opportunities for many of our students” and adding “the COVID-19 pandemic…only made public education more vulnerable. It is no exaggeration to say that the future of public education itself is at stake.” There are a variety of reasons parents are choosing homeschooling now. “Some of these families were already contemplating homeschooling and COVID-19 pushed them over the edge. Other families are concerned about how the districts have addressed the situation,” Schmidt said. “Whether it’s a basic miscommunication or something more nefarious where they’re actively working to prohibit parents from educating their children at home, HSLDA steps in making sure we’re defending the family, providing assistance and support,” he added. “Our goal is to make sure they understand the legal requirements, the responsibilities, and even the joys of homeschooling.” Harvard law professor Elizabeth Bartholet came under fire for her comments in Harvard Magazine’s May-June article calling for a “presumptive ban” on homeschooling as she describes the “risks” of homeschooling, even calling it “dangerous.”

Tensions between the US and Iran appear to be ratcheting up again after the international community paused typical foreign affairs to battle the coronavirus pandemic. Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced on Wednesday the United States would begin reimposing sanctions on foreign companies doing business with Iran on its nuclear sites, giving countries 60 days to wind down their operations. In a statement, the nation’s top diplomat accused the Iranian regime of continuing what he called “its nuclear brinkmanship by expanding proliferation sensitive activities,” arguing that he could not justify renewing a sanctions waiver that had been in place beyond the 60-day wind-down period. The move will impact companies from Russia, China, France, Germany and Italy, which will have two months to convert these nuclear facilities for peaceful purposes, Chris Ford, assistant secretary for international security and nonproliferation, told reporters after the department’s decision was announced. For its part, Iran called on the White House to lift sanctions in an effort to help stop the spread of coronavirus back in April. In response, the State Department asserted that all sanctions on the Middle Eastern country were unrelated to coronavirus response efforts. “We have repeatedly said that US sanctions do not impede the Iranian regime’s response to the Covid-19 crisis,” State Department spokesman Morgan Ortagus said at the time. The department also accused Iran’s Supreme Leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei of flatly rejecting an offer from the US for humanitarian assistance at the time. Iranian President Hassan Rouhani denied this claim, saying, “American leaders are lying … If they want to help Iran, all they need to do is to lift sanctions … Then we can deal with the coronavirus outbreak.” The same day as Pompeo’s latest sanctions announcement, Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps unveiled over 100 missile-launching speedboats that it said would boost the country’s naval power and allow it to challenge US naval power in the Gulf. “Today we announce that wherever the Americans are, we’re right there beside you, and in the near future you will sense us even more,” Iranian naval commander Admiral Alireza Tangsiri said at the unveiling ceremony, according to the Xinhua news agency. “Defense is our logic in war but not in the sense of passivity against the enemy,” IRGC Chief Commander Hossein Salami added during his remarks. Tensions between Tehran and Washington have spiked since President Trump withdrew the US from the 2015 nuclear deal with world powers.

It’s a dull world after all. Disneyland and other amusement parks are reopening in Japan — but with some bizarre new coronavirus-friendly rules, including no screaming or hugging on exciting rides, according to a report Thursday. A major theme park association, which represents the operators of Tokyo Disneyland and Universal Studios Japan, unveiled new “guidelines” for thrill-seekers such as temperature checks at entrances, required face masks and increased sanitation measures, according to CNN. But some of the rules may be ill-suited for the happiest place on Earth, the outlet reports. “On roller coasters and other conveyance-style attractions … Have guests wear masks, and urge them to refrain from shouting/screaming,” states one of the guidelines, released by the East Japan and West Japan Theme Park Associations, which are made up of more than 30 amusement park operators across the country. Other regulations require guests to refrain from touching or embracing and ask staffers to keep conversations with visitors short. “As a new style of customer service, even when you’re wearing a mask, you can use a combination of smiley eyes, hand gestures, etc., to communicate with visitors,” one of the rules states, according to the outlet. Major theme parks in Japan have been closed since February to help prevent the spread of COVID-19. To gear up for reopening, the associations released their “Guidelines to Prevent the Spread of Infection of the Novel Coronavirus” this week.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo recruited a pair of Brooklyn superstars Thursday to promote coronavirus testing, social distancing and the use of common-sense precautions, including wearing a mask: Rosie Perez and Chris Rock. Perez and Rock — both masked and gloved as they took the podium, taking them off to speak — joined Cuomo at his press briefing at the Madison Square Boys and Girls Club in hard-hit Flatbush, to speak directly to their fellow New Yorkers. “Spreading love the Brooklyn way means respecting your neighbors, respecting your communities, and the way you can do that is by getting tested, wearing a mask,” said Perez, the Brooklyn-born star of quintessential borough flick “Do The Right Thing.” “Get tested, wear a mask,” stressed Perez. “Brooklyn, stand up, New York, stand up!” Added Brooklyn-raised funnyman Rock, “If you love your grandmother, you love your elderly mother, elderly anybody, you should get tested.” The comedian, who rose to fame on “Saturday Night Live,” admitted missing the stage amid the lockdown, and cracked that he barely passed his own COVID-19 test taken before the briefing. “I just got tested to come out here,” he said with a playful grin. “I got a 65.” The pair will partner with the state in a series of new ads promoting the efforts, Cuomo said.

From “kindness armor” to COVID armor. On Wednesday, Lady Gaga stayed safe and stylish while hand-delivering copies of her new album “Chromatica” to retailers, outfitted in a one-of-a-kind pink spiked face mask by Michael Ngo. The 34-year-old “Sour Candy” singer’s custom facial covering features the title and logo of her upcoming LP, and is adorned with dozens of silver studs that reflect her new era’s punk-pop sound. And while Gaga’s version isn’t available for purchase, fans of the look can scoop up a near-identical spiked fuchsia mask ($150) from the designer’s website, with 100 percent of net proceeds benefiting the Los Angeles Food Bank. A post shared by Lady Gaga (@ladygaga) on May 27, 2020 at 12:20pm PDT “My heart is dancing around the galaxy!,” Ngo wrote on Instagram upon seeing Gaga in his creation. This marks his first custom work for the pop star, whom he told Page Six Style actually had a hand in jump-starting his own career. “I would recreate her outfits and go to her concerts. And that’s what kind of like gathered me attention from other fans and, you know, some supporters,” he said. “I got her attention, too. And one time during one of her concerts, she actually pointed me out in the middle of the audience and said, ‘Your outfit is amazing. You’re f—king talented.'” It seems the “stupid love” is mutual. “Chromatica” is out at midnight Friday. Additional reporting by Chelsea Hirsch

Mayor Bill de Blasio sounded less than enthusiastic about telling New Yorkers to get back on the city’s subways and buses when New York starts reopening from its coronavirus lockdown. “For the next few months people are going to make their own choices,” de Blasio said when asked how people would actually get back to work Thursday at his coronavirus briefing from City Hall. “Some people are going to come to mass transit, some are not, we just have to be honest and real about that. You may see people use their cars more in the short term if they have a car or use for-hire vehicles,” he said. “I’m not telling people, ‘Let’s go rushing ahead with something,’ if we don’t have all the facts yet,” he said. City officials have a meeting with MTA Chairman Pat Foye Thursday to work out a plan for safe use of mass transit during the pandemic. “We need something that will limit the number of people that get into each subway car and each bus,” de Blasio said, but refused to answer a question about capacity targets. London’s public transit system is only carrying 15 percent of its usual ridership. De Blasio has said the city’s manufacturing, construction, wholesale and limited retail sectors will be online by June 15, bringing between 200,000 and 400,000 people back to work. Gov. Andrew Cuomo promised the MTA would have a “full reopening plan” while acknowledging “socially distancing on buses, subways is not really that possible.” “That’s why the reopening is gauged to metrics on the drop in the virus — because you can’t really say to people, ‘The virus is still raging, get back on the subway, get back on the buses,'” the governor added at a separate press conference Thursday. MTA spokeswoman Abbey Collins said the agency plans to announce more details on “phased restorations of service in the coming days.” She said there has been a small uptick in ridership ahead of the city entering phase one. “The MTA has planned for reopening and continues to lay out an aggressive, best-in-class program to protect customer and employee health and safety, including undertaking the largest disinfecting program in MTA history, exploring innovative solutions to reduce density and requiring all customers and employees to wear masks,” she said. City Council Speaker Corey Johnson (D-Manhattan) said earlier this week that rules should already be in place. “We should have spent the last two months planning for this,” Johnson told The Post Tuesday. “Now we’re a few weeks away from hundreds of thousands — if not millions — of New Yorkers restarting their commutes and not knowing how to get to work safely,” he said. On Thursday, de Blasio suggested some straphangers may be wary about returning to the rails because of all the homeless people sleeping underground during the coronavirus outbreak and instances of packed cars. Paul Martinka Matthew McDermott View Slideshow “We’ve heard from the essential workers even before this that they wanted to see improvements in mass transit. They wanted to see it cleaner, they wanted to see more social distancing, they had seen some instances of overcrowding,” de Blasio said. Those same concerns could help control capacity as the city continues to battle the pandemic. “That’s one of the things that will keep the ridership a little lower in the short term,” de Blasio said. Additional reporting by David Meyer

Finland has seen “no evidence” to suggest the coronavirus began spreading more rapidly since schools reopened, a top health official said Thursday. The Nordic country began reopening schools and daycare centers on May 14, following a nearly two-month shutdown. “The time has been short, but so far we have seen no evidence,” Mika Salminen, director of health security at the Finnish Institute of Health and Welfare, told Reuters. Salminen previously backed the decision for schools to reopen, saying kids played a limited role in spreading the virus. “Children don’t generally infect adults,” Salminen said, noting there was little evidence of such cases. The country has recorded 6,743 virus infections and 312 deaths as of Thursday afternoon, according to the latest figures from Johns Hopkins University. With Post wires

SINGAPORE – Singapore jailed a taxi driver for four months on Wednesday over a Facebook post in which he falsely claimed food outlets would close and urged people to stock up due to impending COVID-19 restrictions. Kenneth Lai Yong Hui, 40, deleted the message sent to a private Facebook group with around 7,500 members after 15 minutes, case records show, but the public prosecutor called for a sentence that would deter others. Singapore, which has seen bouts of panic buying during a four-month battle with the virus, has imposed tough punishments on those who breach containment rules or spread misinformation as it tackles one of Asia’s highest COVID-19 rates. “The psychological fight to allay fear and hysteria is just as important as the fight to contain the spread of COVID-19,” deputy public prosecutor Deborah Lee said in her sentencing submission, according to case records. Lai, who represented himself and could not be reached for comment, was sentenced to four months’ jail on Wednesday, a spokesman for the State Courts said. The offense of transmitting a false message in Singapore is punishable with a fine not exceeding S$10,000 ($7,000) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years, or both. Last month, a man who broke quarantine with 30 minutes remaining to buy a flatbread worth a few dollars was fined $1,000. Another man who breached an order to stay home to eat pork rib soup was jailed for six weeks. According to case records, police received a complaint on April 20 about Lai’s post which said the government was closing food courts and coffee shops and supermarkets would only open two days a week. “Better go stock up your stuff for the next month or so,” the post said, on which people commented urging him not to spread such rumors.

BERLIN – The number of anti-Semitic crimes committed in Germany rose last year by 13 percent, Interior Minister Horst Seehofer said on Wednesday, laying the blame squarely on right-wing radicals. Germany has stepped up efforts to counter far-right groups in recent months, especially after a gunman in the city of Halle killed two people outside a synagogue in October. “The biggest threat in our country comes from the right. This is a reality…We must remain alert and tackle it,” said Seehofer, a Bavarian conservative. Authorities registered 2,032 crimes with an anti-Semitic background, up 13 percent from 2018 and Seehofer said more than 90 percent of those were perpetrated by right-wing radicals, said Seehofer. Germany’s Jewish community expressed shock. “The attack in Halle last year was a signal,” said Josef Schuster, President of the Central Council of Jews, urging politicians and society do more to fight anti-Semitism which, he said, had become commonplace in Germany. “Especially on the Internet, unrestrained hatred hits us. But also on the streets and in schools the rejection of Jews is a massive problem,” he said. Earlier this month, a Jewish leader warned that many young people in the land responsible for the Holocaust had failed to learn the lessons of history. Overall, the number of politically motivated crimes rose by 14 percent last year to 41,177, more than half of which were committed by far-right radicals. Crimes, mostly vandalism, committed by left-wing militants jumped by 23 percent, said Seehofer. There have been several high profile attacks in the last year. In February a racist gunman killed nine migrants near Frankfurt before killing his mother and himself. In June 2019, pro-migrant politician Walter Luebcke was found shot dead at close range at his home in Hesse state. A far-right radical confessed to the crime, though later retracted his statement. Police have also warned that thousands of protesters at rallies opposing lockdown measures against the coronavirus are in large part driven by far-right sympathizers.

Get this guy a calendar. Mayor Bill de Blasio on Thursday finally unveiled his plan for reopening New York City, but it was nothing more than a vague rehash of the state’s guidelines issued weeks ago — and with no firm dates. “You can expect it to be in the first and second week of June, if the numbers continue to hold or progress,” de Blasio said at his daily press briefing about the city’s comeback — seemingly unaware that Monday is June 1. He also said, “We do not have a specific date.” “We’re not going to tell people the day in advance,” de Blasio said. “The day it happens is the day the numbers tell us we’re there.” Instead of providing specifics, de Blasio reiterated guidelines issued by New York state for phase one businesses, including staying six feet apart and operating under 50 percent of maximum capacity. New York City is the last of the state’s 10 economic regions to reopen amid the coronavirus pandemic, with neighboring Long Island starting back up on Wednesday. As of Thursday, 59 people are currently hospitalized in the city for coronavirus, while 6 percent have tested positive for the disease. “We have never been that low,” de Blasio said of the testing rate. “To date, as we do more and more testing, basically the numbers are going to go down. That’s a great sign for the future of this city.” Under phase one of New York state’s four-phase coronavirus reopening plan, construction, manufacturing and wholesale supply chains, and retail businesses with curbside pickup or in-store pickup only can reopen, as well as businesses in agriculture, forestry and fishing. The frequently time-challenged De Blasio has repeatedly suggested the city is set to reopen in early June. But with the first of the month around the corner, he has yet to release a concrete plan of action, leaving business owners in the lurch.

He’s the real prom king of Raleigh, N.C. — and he’s just 7 years old. A big-hearted kid named Curtis Rogers went the extra mile for his nanny, Rachel Chapman, and not just by being on his best behavior on her watch. Curtis learned that Rachel wouldn’t have a senior prom this season over COVID-19 concerns, so he threw one for her. “He planned a socially distant prom, complete with dancing & her favorite foods,” said Rachel’s mother, Becky, in a May 26 tweet that has since earned 1,1000 retweets and more than 11,000 likes. She added four photos to her sweet upload, showing the pair seated at a flower-decorated table near a magnolia tree — spaced far apart by a long pool noodle — as well as another that showed them posing at least 6 feet apart in their formal wear. The two hadn’t seen each other in two months due to the coronavirus pandemic, ABC11 reports. “I planned it out because Rachel probably wanted to see me a lot,” Curtis told the channel. “She is also one of the best people I’ve known.” Rachel herself enjoyed the party, but says it came with some mixed emotions. “I was kind of like bummed putting my dress on because I was sad; I don’t get to wear it to my senior prom,” she told the channel. “After leaving it and having that time with him because it was the first time I had seen him in two months, it was like, really fun, and I’m really glad that he did that.” Curtis’ kind act also made its way to “Good Morning America” on Thursday, which called him the “pint-sized prom king,” adding he picked his bow tie to match her dress and danced plenty of feet apart to her favorite music. “He was really excited for it to start and make sure he was ready to impress her,” Curtis’ mom, Elissa, told ABC11. Other cute details included eating their favorite after-school snack, apples with peanut butter, as well as some bites from Chick-fil-A. Curtis waited outside when Rachel arrived and then led her to the backyard where they celebrated. “He had all my favorite foods and everything,” said Rachel. “I could tell he put a lot of thought into it.” It wasn’t just a party for a good nanny — it was an event for someone who’s become part of the Rogers family. “Rachel is one of our favorite people and she also helps around the house a lot,” said Elissa. “So, Rachel’s like the best nanny ever.”

MANCHESTER, England — The Premier League is planning to return on June 17 after a 100-day shutdown caused by the coronavirus pandemic. The league’s official broadcasters in Britain — Sky Sports and the BBC — said Thursday that English football will return with a doubleheader featuring Manchester City playing Arsenal and Aston Villa hosting Sheffield United. The league, which last staged a game on March 9, declined comment saying a meeting was ongoing. Approval from authorities is required for sporting events to resume with strict medical protocols to try to prevent COVID-19 being spread. Football has already resumed in Germany, with three rounds of the Bundesliga played in empty stadiums. The Spanish league has government approval to restart after June 8. But lockdown measures have only just been eased to allow full practice sessions to resume at Premier League clubs. The two matches set for Wednesday, June 17, are both make-up games from previous rounds. The full 30th round of games are set to be contested the following weekend. Liverpool is on the verge of winning the Premier League, sitting 25 points in front with nine games remaining. It’s still unclear where games will be played when the league resumes. Police have said only neutral venues should be used over concerns fans would congregate outside, but that plan was opposed by the 20 clubs. “I would think that the vast, vast majority of people would respect what the football club tells them to do,” said Steve Rotheram, mayor of the Liverpool area. “If it said, ‘Do not come to Anfield and congregate,’ then they wouldn’t do that.”

MOSCOW – A Siberian zoo that closed its doors to visitors for over two months due to the novel coronavirus says the lockdown has encouraged a baby boom among its animals. Among the zoo’s new arrivals are rare Egyptian goslings, reindeer calves, llama crias and a baby brown weeper capuchin monkey. “Judging by the baby boom, the lockdown has clearly been good for us because there are a lot of interesting and beautiful baby animals now,” said Andrei Gorban, the director of Krasnoyarsk’s Royev Ruchey Zoo. Gorban said that while the absence of visitors had encouraged mating among some residents, it had confused others and prompted changes in their behavior. “Many (of the animals) are anxious because they really don’t understand what’s going on. They have this sort of look of expectation in their eyes,” said Gorban. The zoo’s herd of camels are among those who appear to be missing visitors; they now follow every zoo employee who walks past their enclosure. Gorban said that while there were advantages to the lack of visitors, the zoo’s finances were suffering. Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered the lockdown measures in March to slow the spread of the coronavirus, although the country’s regions did have some say over local rules.

Sex workers can soon get back between the sheets in Switzerland — but sports involving “close and constant contact” will remain prohibited under lockdown orders, according to a report. Swiss Health Minister Alain Berset said he believes that prostitutes are better equipped than athletes to safely return to business during the pandemic, Bloomberg reported. “There are certainly personal contacts but a concept of protection seems possible. I am well aware of the bizarre aspect of my answer,” he told a press conference. Prostitution, which is legal in the country, will be allowed to return June 6, along with movie theaters, nightclubs and public pools, Berset said. “To tell you the truth, erotic services could have resumed earlier,” Berset said. The move comes after sex-worker advocacy group ProKoRe drafted guidelines on how to do the deed without spreading coronavirus. The group recommended that sex workers service their clients by engaging in “doggy style” and “reverse cowgirl” positions — instead of missionary style, which has a higher likelihood of transmitting the virus with closer face-to-face contact.

Like dozens of other veteran spellers in their final year of eligibility, Anson Cook had big plans for this year’s Scripps National Spelling Bee, which was canceled because of the coronavirus pandemic. The 13-year-old eighth-grader from Potomac, Maryland, was a two-time participant in the bee and last year he finished in a tie for 41st. His objective was to make it into the top 12 or so who participate in the prime-time, ESPN-televised finals. “My goal for 2020 was to make it to the finals of Scripps. After the cancellation, I was like, ‘What do I do now?’ And now I’ve achieved that goal,” Anson said. He reached his goal by becoming one of the 16 finalists in the SpellPundit National Online Spelling Bee, a new event created by two teenage ex-spellers to fill the void left by the cancellation and give eighth-graders one last chance to compete. The National Spelling Bee has always been limited to kids in middle and elementary school and Scripps has said it will not extend eligibility to allow ninth-graders to participate next year. The SpellPundit bee, with spellers competing from their homes over Zoom, concludes Thursday night, the same time the Scripps winner would have been decided. The champion receives $2,500, a pittance compared to the National Spelling Bee’s first prize of $50,000, but worth a middle-schooler’s time and effort all the same. Most of the spellers who would have been favorites at the national bee quickly signed up, including the top three still-eligible finishers from last year. The bee pronouncers and judges are all recent ex-spellers, including Naysa Modi, the 2018 Scripps runner-up and Sohum Sukhantankar, one of last year’s eight champions. Yes, eight: Last year’s Scripps bee ended in an eight-way tie when organizers ran out of words difficult enough to challenge the best spellers. SpellPundit co-founder Shourav Dasari pledged that would not happen with his bee and so far the words have been plenty tough. In a semifinal round on Wednesday night, six out of seven competitors spelled their words incorrectly, forcing a tiebreaker among the six who missed to fill three spots in the finals. Scott Remer, a private spelling coach and author of the book “Words of Wisdom: Keys to Success in the Scripps National Spelling Bee,” said he was impressed with the SpellPundit word list because it has been consistently tough enough to knock out some, but not all, spellers in a round. “Every year as I tutor kids I’m constantly finding new words, not just new words but new words that are difficult, have interesting definitions, are an appropriate length — words that are perfect spelling bee words,” said Remer said. “I don’t think the problem is that those sorts of spelling bee words don’t exist.” The semifinal rounds of the SpellPundit bee ran relatively smoothly on Tuesday and Wednesday, aside from the occasional audio glitch. And the organizers were accountable for their shortcomings — when they failed to give one of two languages of origin to Atman Balakrishnan, he appealed and was granted a new word. He misspelled that word, too. Because there is no way to guarantee spellers aren’t cheating, the bee is operating on an honor system. Spellers are instructed to be alone in a room with only a laptop or desktop computer and to keep their hands in view of the camera while spelling. That requirement led to some odd body language, with many spellers adopting a pose of surrender with hands up and palms forward. Anson said spellers are accustomed to being ill at ease. “It is uncomfortable,” he said, “but I don’t think it’s any more uncomfortable than standing on a stage in National Harbor with hundreds of people in the audience.” Some eighth-graders, their parents and other supporters are not giving up on the dream of competing in the real National Spelling Bee, which is held at the National Harbor complex just outside Washington. They have tried to pressure Scripps to extend their eligibility or host an alternative bee with an online petition, an op-ed published in The Guardian and television appearances. Scripps has been noting the achievements of eighth-graders by posting their accomplishments on the bee website and heralding them on social media and YouTube. The gestures hardly filled the void of Bee Week, an immersive, exhilarating experience for spellers and their families that many describe as a highlight of their young lives. Kimmie Collins, an ex-speller who had planned to volunteer at the bee this year, summed up the feelings of loss in a letter to spellers she posted on social media. “I couldn’t wait to meet you all, to be amazed at how brilliant, gorgeous, talented and fabulous you are,” Collins wrote. “For the last four years, I’ve been yearning to feel that same electricity as the Maryland Ballroom during the Championship Finals because nothing can compare to the camaraderie felt on that night.”

UNITED NATIONS — The president of the International Committee of the Red Cross said it has recorded 208 COVID-19-related attacks against health workers and installations in 13 countries since March, a striking contrast to the cheers and clapping in gratitude for their work in many nations. Peter Maurer said Wednesday that health workers are being attacked and abused and health systems are being targeted at a time when they are most needed. “The COVID-19 crisis is fast threatening to become a protection crisis,” he told the UN Security Council. Maurer told reporters the ICRC compiled data from 13 countries in the Middle East, Asia-Pacific, the Americas and Africa where it operates and it’s “likely the actual numbers are much higher than what we calculated.” He said the incidents range from verbal threats to burning down facilities reportedly housing COVID-19 patients. Maurer said 23 percent of incidents included physical assaults, 20 percent were discriminatory-related attacks on health workers and the rest included the deliberate failure to provide or deny assistance, verbal assaults and threats and a disregard for health personnel protective measures. Maurer said he was struck by the discrepancy with the outpouring of support for health personnel, “while in reality what we see is that it remains an extremely delicate and sensitive issue within which attacks, … violence, the whole panoply of adverse attitudes are visible or detectable, which demand our response.” The ICRC and a dozen other global organizations representing millions of doctors, nurses and health care professionals issued a declaration Wednesday calling the recent displays of public support for COVID-19 responders “heart-warming.” But they said “unfortunately, the sad reality is that health workers have for a long time been subject to many shocking forms of violence.” The organizations pointed to harassment, stigmatization, physical violence and the killing of some health care professionals and the people they were caring for, as well as the 208 incidents reported by the ICRC since the beginning of the pandemic. “We urge governments, communities and weapon bearers to respect and protect health care at all times and to contribute to creating a protective environment in which health care can be provided safely,” the groups including the International Council of Nurses, the International Hospital Federation and Physicians for Human Rights said. UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres also spoke at the council meeting on the protection of civilians in armed conflict, saying that as the pandemic “rages on, causing enormous human suffering and additional stress to health systems,” people already weakened by years of fighting “are particularly vulnerable.” He lamented that support for his March 23 call for a global cease-fire to tackle the COVID-19 pandemic has not been translated into “concrete action.” “In some cases, the pandemic may even create incentives for warring parties to press their advantage, or to strike hard while international attention is focused elsewhere,” he said. “Both scenarios could lead to increases in violence. And civilians always pay the price.” He pointed to conflict-torn Libya where the UN mission documented at least 58 civilians killed and 190 injured between April 1 and May 18. With access to services and safety being curtailed, Guterres also said some leaders are exploiting the pandemic to adopt repressive measures and “it has become even more difficult to protect the most vulnerable” — and “this is particularly true in conflict zones, where civilians were already exposed to significant risks.”

Cineworld, the owner of Regal cinemas in the US, expects to reopen its doors for business in July. The movie-theater giant said late Wednesday it anticipates that government restrictions related to cinemas will be lifted in each of its territories in the coming months and “anticipates the reopening of all of its cinemas in July.” The London-based company — which like rival cinemas, has remained closed since coronavirus lockdowns hit the nation in mid-March when it dimmed all 787 screens in 10 countries — added in a statement that it “has put in place procedures to ensure a safe and enjoyable cinema experience for its employees and customers.” The theater expects to open its doors with the new Chris Nolan movie “Tenet” and with “Mulan.” Despite Cineworld’s rosy outlook, the company is still dealing with the economic fallout of the pandemic. Like AMC and other theaters, it has struggled financially, cutting and furloughing jobs and slashing costs. In March, Cineworld signaled that if it couldn’t renegotiate new terms with lenders, it may breach its debt covenants. Blockbusters like Vin Diesel’s “Fast & Furious 9,” the new James Bond flick “No Time to Die” and Disney’s Mulan” have delayed their box office debuts as a result. In order to make it through the end of the year, the London-based chain Cineworld said Thursday that that it received a waiver from its lenders on a debt covenant during the pandemic, and it also raised $110 million of additional liquidity. The covenant, which was due next month, is now due in December. The company said it also got approval to apply for an additional $45 million through a UK loan, and it expects to receive $25 million through the Cares Act. “Cineworld expects that this additional liquidity, to the extent required, will provide it with sufficient headroom to support the group even in the unlikely event cinemas remain closed until the end of the year,” the company said.

Amazon plans to offer permanent jobs to about 70 percent of the US workforce it has hired temporarily to meet consumer demand during the coronavirus pandemic, the company told Reuters on Thursday. The world’s largest online retailer will begin telling 125,000 warehouse employees in June that they can keep their roles longer-term. The remaining 50,000 workers it has brought on will stay on seasonal contracts that last up to 11 months, a company spokeswoman said. The decision is a sign that Amazon’s sales have increased sufficiently to justify an expanded workforce for order fulfillment, even as government lockdowns ease and rivals open their retail stores for pickup. Amazon started the hiring spree in March with a blog post appealing to workers laid off by restaurants and other shuttered businesses, promising employment “until things return to normal and their past employer is able to bring them back.” Seattle-based Amazon did not disclose how much it was spending to make the positions permanent and whether that cost would be in addition to the $4 billion it has forecast for virus-related expenses. The permanent roles come with benefits that seasonal workers lack, such as employer-offered health insurance and retirement plans. Some Amazon staff, unions and elected officials have said the company has put employees’ health at risk by keeping nearly all its warehouses operational during the pandemic. At least 800 U.S.-based workers have tested positive for the highly contagious virus, according to figures compiled by one employee, which Amazon has not commented on. The company has increased cleaning, added social distancing measures and offered face masks, fever checks and virus tests in response. Amazon said it had 840,400 full and part-time staff at the end of last quarter while it still was in the process of hiring. It has not reported an updated number.

President Trump expressed his “heartfelt sympathy” on Thursday as the US coronavirus death toll passed 100,000. “We have just reached a very sad milestone with the coronavirus pandemic deaths reaching 100,000. To all of the families & friends of those who have passed, I want to extend my heartfelt sympathy & love for everything that these great people stood for & represent,” the president posted on Twitter. “God be with you!” More than 356,000 have died worldwide from the coronavirus. Vice President Mike Pence also offered his thoughts on the grim landmark that the nation reached Wednesday. “Our hearts and prayers are with all the families of the more than 100,000 Americans who have lost their lives to the Coronavirus. We will never forget your loved ones or your loss. God bless them and God bless you all,” Pence said on Twitter. Trump and other leaders have blamed China for misleading countries around the world about the spread of COVID-19 after the initial cases were reported in the Chinese city of Wuhan in late December. He said Beijing’s inaccurate reporting of the number of cases it had left the rest of the world unprepared for the severity of the disease.

An Australian man threw a party at his home just days before becoming the youngest person in the country to die of COVID-19, according to a report. Nathan Turner, a 30-year-old miner, was found dead by his fiancée, Simone Devon, Tuesday afternoon at his home in Blackwater, Queensland, after weeks of suffering from respiratory symptoms, Australian outlet 7News reported. The couple — who had become engaged recently — hosted a party at the home just four days earlier with dozens in attendance, the outlet reported. All of the party-goers who have been tested have received negative results for the virus, including his fiancée, who has shown symptoms, the outlet reported. However, she will undergo more testing while under quarantine at her parents’ home. Turner’s family has questioned whether coronavirus should be blamed for his death, noting that he had a complicated medical history, according to the report. He suffered from epilepsy and asthma — and they claim he regularly came down with the flu, the outlet reported. But health officials pushed back on suggestions that his death was mistakenly attributed to the virus, the report said. “There was a test done … which is a very sensitive test and it came back positive,” Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young said, according to the outlet.

The coronavirus crisis has put more than 40 million Americans out of work, according to new federal data showing another 2.1 million people applied for unemployment benefits last week. The workers sidelined by the pandemic in the past 10 weeks now outnumber the entire population of California and account for roughly 26 percent of the American workforce. Thursday’s seasonally adjusted figures from the US Department of Labor showed the pace of initial jobless claims continuing their steady decline since late March. But the economy still has a long road to recovery from these staggering losses, according to experts. “Although initial claims are declining, the pace may only be plateauing,” said Glassdoor senior economist Daniel Zhao. “If claims remain in the millions for the next few weeks, it may signal that relaxed state-mandated restrictions alone aren’t enough to staunch the flow of unemployed Americans.” The results were in line with economists’ expectations for 2.1 million claims, down from the previous week’s revised total of 2.4 million. The number of people filing continuing claims for benefits also fell for the first time since the pandemic began to gut the labor market, a positive sign as states eased restrictions aimed at curbing the virus. There were about 21 million in the week ending May 16, down from a record 24.9 million the prior week, the feds said. But that shouldn’t get anyone’s hopes up given how muddy and volatile the weekly data have been, said Yelena Shulyatyeva, senior US economist at Bloomberg Economics. The declines must continue for a few more weeks to show the labor market is actually “on the mend,” she said. “This report is a great first signal that things might be stabilizing, but I’m afraid that things will get worse before they get better,” Shulyatyeva told The Post. The still-high numbers suggest the pandemic has sparked a second wave of layoffs hitting managers and supervisors as well as companies that relied on shut-down businesses, according to Shulyatyeva. This week’s report also showed continued job losses among gig workers and others seeking Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, the special federal benefit for people not traditionally eligible for unemployment insurance. The number of new applications for the program fell slightly to just shy of 1.2 million last week, the feds said, citing reports from 32 states. But nearly 7.8 million people filed continued claims in the week ending May 9, up from about 6.1 million the prior week. Those figures are not seasonally adjusted. Standard jobless claims fell last week in New York, where officials have pushed through a massive backlog amid the pandemic. The state recorded 192,193 initial filings last week, down from 223,962 the week before, according to the feds. Experts say recent data indicate the nation’s unemployment rate could approach or break 20 percent in the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ closely watched jobs report for May, which will be released next Friday. That would mark an increase from the record 14.7 percent unemployment seen in April, when the economy shed 20.5 million jobs as the pandemic pushed it into a deep freeze. With Post wires

An Amazon warehouse worker says he was suspended after handing out flyers encouraging colleagues to join a union. John Hopkins’ account of his May 2 suspension from Amazon’s DSF4 facility in California is the latest example of the e-commerce giant allegedly cracking down on critics during the coronavirus pandemic. Amazon told Hopkins he was sidelined for violating social-distancing rules meant to protect workers from the highly contagious virus, he said in a Wednesday blog post. But he suspects it had to do with the pro-union flyers that he says managers previously took away. “I think there’s a pretty clear case to be made that I was suspended as retaliation for raising a concern about my right to organize,” Hopkins wrote. Amazon did not immediately respond to a request for comment Thursday morning. Hopkins said he first brought the flyers to his distribution center in late January and stored them in a locker. He believes managers removed them within about a week, according to his blog post. Another batch of brochures Hopkins left in the facility’s break room around April 26 also disappeared, he said, prompting him to write an email to the human resources office that never got a response. He said other outside flyers had been allowed on the warehouse’s bulletin board. On May 1, Hopkins said, he clocked out of his shift in solidarity with a nationwide strike of Amazon workers and went to the break room to hand out flyers. He left after a manager came in to talk to him about the social-distancing protocol but refused to write him up, he said. He learned he was suspended when he came to work the next day. Amazon took nearly two weeks to formally tell Hopkins why he was suspended and resisted his request to be interviewed by an investigator via email so his responses would be recorded in writing, he said. “If the investigation is about whether I violated social distancing protocol, rather than about whether Amazon violated the [National Labor Relations Act], then Amazon has already gotten what it wanted,” Hopkins wrote. “It can continue union busting with impunity, and fabricate an excuse to fire an organizer.” Amazon has fired several other employees who accused the company of failing to protect workers during the coronavirus crisis. They include Chris Smalls, who organized a small March protest at the company’s Staten Island warehouse. Amazon said it axed him because he didn’t self-quarantine after coming in contact with someone who had the virus. Hopkins echoed the criticisms of former Amazon VP Tim Bray, who recently called the company “chickens–t” for retaliating against dissenters. Amazon VP Brad Porter later defended the company against Bray’s fiery critique, calling it “deeply offensive to the core.” “Based on my experience, my perspective is that Tim’s analysis is exactly correct — although, I do feel compelled to make one criticism of it: he didn’t take it far enough!” Hopkins wrote.

Hey, Jennie Stejna, this Bud’s for you! The 103-year-old Massachusetts woman came back from the brink of death after battling the coronavirus — and celebrated with an ice-cold Bud Light. “She’s feisty and tenacious,” her grandson, Dave Stejna of Easton, Mass., tells The Post. “She is legendary in so many different ways. She speaks her mind and doesn’t put up with anything.” That includes the global pandemic, which has been particularly devastating for the world’s senior citizen population. Stejna, an avid Red Sox fan who lives in the Life Care Center of Wilbraham, became both the first person to contract the deadly virus in the facility and the first there to beat it. About three weeks ago, her health ordeal began with a low-grade fever, and she was moved to a separate COVID-19 unit, fighting the disease for about 20 days. “We were hopeful, but then things started to trend downward so we were bracing for the worst. She lost her appetite and getting her to stay hydrated was challenging,” David, 49, says of his grandmother, who he says uses a wheelchair and is legally blind but still has a very sharp mind. “She kind of didn’t accept what was going on. She kept complaining that she couldn’t listen to Red Sox games [on her transistor radio].” Still, as her condition worsened, Jennie’s family called to say their final goodbyes. Her granddaughter’s husband, Adam Gunn, asked her if she was ready to go to heaven and she replied, “Hell, yes,” Wicked Local Easton reports. On May 3, David said goodbye and told her he loved her. The next day, the family was stunned to learn that their tough-as-nails matriarch, who is nicknamed “The Sheriff” because of her exacting manner, had not only pulled through but did so with gusto. She woke up and proclaimed, “I’m not sick.” Annoyed at the crowd of people in her room, she told them to “get the hell out of here,” according to Dave. Marking the occasion with a cold beer was fitting for the Polish-American granny. Hailing from near Springfield in western Massachusetts, she toiled in the area’s mills and lived there with her husband of 54 years, Teddy, until his death in 1992. Her grandchildren recall her hosting summer cookouts, where she would take the kids for ice cream, stopping off at the liquor store to pick up some suds. “She would say, ‘You gotta have a cold beer when it’s hot out during the summertime,’ ” David tells The Post. “Later in the day she would say, ‘I think I’m gonna split a beer.’ She would never say, ‘I am going to have one.’ She’d sip about two and would do it sort of on the down low.” So once Stejna got the official corona clearance on May 13, both the staff and her family were eager to celebrate. A nurse bought a six pack and gave her a well-earned brew. “She put it to her lips and said, ‘Ooh, that’s cold. It’s good when it’s cold,’ ” David says. Stejna — who has two children, three grandchildren, four great-grandchildren and three great-great-grandchildren — was once an avid bingo player, worked into her 80s, and “could run circles around anyone,” says David. But even before her battle with COVID-19, she would often ask him why she is still alive. “Not to get all existential, but I would tell her that ‘God has a purpose for you and he’s not done with you yet.’ As she pulled through this, I think we might have found her purpose. And that is to give people a glimmer of hope. There’s a perception that this disease is a scarlet mark, and if you get it, it’s over.” Dave has high praise for the home’s director, Dennis Lopata. “Dennis is an absolute gem and did everything in his power to make sure she had the best care. I can’t say enough about him. They’ve had over 30 cases in the facility, so they wanted to do something special for my grandmother. It was very heartfelt,” says David, adding, “Though if anyone could beat it, she can. She has this tenacity for life to still keep going. It astounds me. Somehow, she’s not a quitter. I’m searching for meaning, too.” And perhaps Bud Light has found their newest pitchwoman.

When inside, it might be a good idea to take a few more steps back. Experts on Tuesday said they believe the six feet of distance recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) may not be enough to limit the transmission of COVID-19. In a perspective article published in the journal Science, three experts wrote that aerosol particles can accumulate and remain infectious for hours in indoor air, where they can be easily inhaled deep into the lungs. “Increasing evidence for SARS-CoV-2 suggests the 6 ft WHO recommendation is likely not enough under many indoor conditions where aerosols can remain airborne for hours, accumulate over time, and follow air flows over distances further than 6 ft,” they said. Chia Wang of National Sun Yat-sen University in Taiwan, as well as Kimberly Prather and Dr. Robert Schooley of the University of California, San Diego, said a large proportion of the COVID-19 spread appears to be occurring through the airborne transmission of aerosols. They added the transmission was produced by asymptomatic individuals during breathing and speaking. On Tuesday, the experts said that for society to resume as normal, measures must be implemented to reduce aerosol transmission, which include the universal wearing of masks — in addition to widespread testing. They believe both practices could help identify and isolate those infected asymptomatic individuals. “It is particularly important to wear masks in locations with conditions that can accumulate high concentrations of viruses, such as health care settings, airplanes, restaurants, and other crowded places with reduced ventilation,” they added. The perspective article stated that countries — like Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore and South Korea — have implemented universal masking and were the most effective in reducing the spread of COVID-19. The WHO guideline of six feet of social distancing is based on studies of respiratory droplets in the 1930s. However, technology didn’t exist at the time for detecting tiny aerosol particles, the experts stated. Smaller aerosols will evaporate faster than they can settle, they added. Because of that, they can be affected by air currents, which can transport them over long distances and cause them to stay in the air for hours. “A lot of the evidence has been pointing to aerosol transmission of respiratory viruses,” Prather told WebMD. “This particular virus, a lot of evidence is mounting.” This month, a study by scientists in Hong Kong found that using surgical masks could reduce the rate of non-contact transmission through respiratory droplets or airborne particles by up to 75 percent.

Texas officials fighting to block widespread mail-in voting during the pandemic claimed victory after the state’s highest court ruled Wednesday that a lack of immunity to the coronavirus doesn’t qualify someone to cast a ballot by mail. The decision was unanimous by the Texas Supreme Court, which is stocked with nine Republican justices, including one who revealed last week that she had tested positive for COVID-19. Texas generally limits mail balloting only to voters who are over 65 years old or have a disability. The Texas Democratic Party blasted the decision, and moved its hopes to a similar challenge playing out in federal court. But not all saw the decision as a total loss: the top elections lawyer in Houston, Harris County attorney Douglas Ray, said he believed the ruling leaves room for each voter to decide themselves whether they qualify, and gives clerks basically no ability to second-guess the reasoning. In Texas, voters do not have to describe their disability when requesting a mail-in ballot. Republican Texas Attorney General Ken Paxton, who earlier this month lost lower court decisions that would have expanded mail-in ballots to all of the state’s 16 million registered voters, has argued that fear of getting the virus alone doesn’t qualify as a disability. He applauded the court for keeping the status quo with just weeks until the state is set to hold primary runoff elections in July. Paxton has taken a hard line on resisting efforts by Democrats and voting rights groups to try expanding mail balloting in Texas. His fight comes as President Donald Trump rails against mail-in balloting and alleges without evidence that it leads to “total election fraud.” “In-person voting is the surest way to maintain the integrity of our elections, prevent voter fraud and guarantee that every voter is who they claim to be,” Paxton said. Trump tweeted support of the court’s decision later Wednesday night: “Texas Supreme Court: Lack of immunity to COVID-19 alone not enough to vote by mail … Big win in Texas on the dangerous Mail In Voting Scam!” The fight in Texas is just one of several court battles across the country over efforts, mainly by Democrats, to expand access to mail-in ballots amid the pandemic. In Wisconsin, where election officials drew widespread criticism for holding its April 7 presidential primary even as other states delayed voting, a new lawsuit filed this month argued that not enough has been done since then to ensure that the upcoming elections can be conducted safely and fairly. The court rejected Paxton’s request to bar local election officials from accepting mail-in ballots based on claims of disability because of the virus. Justice Nathan Hecht wrote that the court was “confident that election officials will comply” with the broader decision. But in Houston, Ray said that while the ruling is clear that if voters don’t qualify if they’re “perfectly healthy and all that you’re afraid of is you might get COVID,” he believed the court order didn’t totally shut the door. “As we all know, nobody’s perfectly healthy,” Ray said. “We all have something we can look at, and it’s really up to the voter to decide based on his personal situation whether he would qualify or not. And the clerk basically has no authority or ability to question him.”

NBA commissioner Adam Silver is in agony trying to figure out the season restart without a road map and without a way to satisfy everyone. All roads lead to Orlando, but Silver will have a conference call Thursday with GMs, then another one Friday with NBA owners, to possibly finalize a format. All week, the commissioner has sought ideas from team executives, players, owners and union officials, so here is one, Adam: If you dare bring back all 30 teams to Disney World for a late-July resumption — 14 clubs for a handful of meaningless regular-season games — you better have already fixed the lottery standings as of the March 11 season’s suspension. Otherwise, Silver will host a tankfest in Fantasyland — with the Knicks at the center of it. There are several permutations between 30 teams and 16 playoff qualifiers. To provide incentive to the also-rans, one proposal has the top 12 teams in each conference coming back. A play-in tournament between the Nos. 9-12 teams could decide the eighth seed in one variation. One reported iteration even involves 12 teams from the West for a play-in, compared to only eight teams from the East, totaling 20 clubs. The Knicks would be part of the 24-team festival. They stood in 12th place at 21-45 on March 11 after beating the Hawks in Atlanta. They would be seeded sixth in the lottery with a 9 percent chance of winning it all. “We are still looking at all possibilities,’’ one league source familiar with the situation said regarding lottery procedures. The Knicks appear ambivalent about a restart. Team president Leon Rose probably is more eager to find out where he’ll select in the draft and whether it’s worth trading up for LaMelo Ball. If Silver pulls off a restart, sources believe the draft won’t be until late September/early October. Rose, as a rookie executive, might be better off zeroing in on hiring a couple of more scouts and, most importantly, kicking off a coaching search. It will include interim coach Mike Miller but may begin and end with former Knicks assistant Tom Thibodeau. Nothing will happen until the Knicks know their fate. The club appears in a holding pattern ever since Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Saturday their practice facility in Tarrytown can open for NBA-governed individual voluntary workouts. Most Knicks players decided to leave town after the shutdown. The Post reported at least two players are wary of returning to New York. The Knicks are waiting to hear if they are even invited to the Mickey Mouse dance. Other than the motivation of money, 30 teams makes no sense. Why increasing the number of people at risk in the Disney bubble? The Magic Kingdom will open July 11, and don’t you think Mitchell Robinson will want to ride Space Mountain? It’s not just about players but the non-millionaire support staff such as trainers, equipment managers, video coordinators, security and public-relations staffers. All this trouble for five regular-season games that could hurt a lottery seed. Miller would likely play his young players, but the unprecedented act of returning from three months stuck on the couch could result in severe injuries impacting next season. Even if a playoff berth is at stake in a play-in, would the Knicks want to risk their lottery berth for a long-shot bid at the eighth seed to get swept by Milwaukee?. The idea of staging regular-season games with no playoffs as a carrot is solely about TV money. As The Post first reported on March 30, the drive to get most teams to 70 games is a marker because it satisfies regional sports network contracts. Teams have played between 64 and 67 games. The Trail Blazers are in ninth place in the Western Conference, but Portland star Damian Lillard wants no part of playing without the playoffs at stake. “If they’re throwing us out there for meaningless games and we don’t have a true opportunity to get into the playoffs, I’m going to be with my team because I’m a part of the team,” Lillard told Yahoo Sports. “But I’m not going to be participating. I’m telling you that right now.’’ This still feels like a fragile situation that could be toppled by multiple players testing positive — or an uptick in the nation’s infection rate. The proposal to bring back the top 10 teams in each conference might make the most sense. It is at least less risky than the 24-team or 30-team models. A play-in tournament for the extra two teams in each conference would help ratings as Pelicans rookie sensation Zion Williamson would then be part of the Disney fun. That would exclude the Knicks and wipe out the first RJ Barrett versus Williamson showdown. The Knicks at New Orleans on March 27 was one of the 16 games postponed. The Knicks will be fine with not facing Williamson until next season. They appear more intent on watching NBA exec Kiki Vandeweghe pull pingpong balls out of the lottery machine.

If the players and owners are running out of time to restart the 2020 baseball season by early July, they sure don’t appear to be running out of words. The tense negotiations exploded once more Wednesday night when Nationals veteran pitcher Max Scherzer, a member of the Major League Baseball Players Association’s executive subcommittee, tweeted that the players would not be amenable to a pay cut beyond their prorated salaries. “After discussing the latest developments with the rest of the players there’s no reason to engage with MLB in any further compensation reductions,” Scherzer, a three-time Cy Young Award winner, wrote on Twitter. “We have previously negotiated a pay cut in the version of prorated salaries, and there’s no justification to accept a 2nd pay cut based upon the current information the union has received. “I’m glad to hear other players voicing the same viewpoint and believe MLB’s economic strategy would completely change if all documentation were to become public information.” On Tuesday, MLB presented to the players a sliding-scale proposal in which the players making the most money would lose the highest percentage of their pay. The PA did not like that idea at all, and Scherzer expressed that sentiment quite forcefully and publicly. A counter proposal, expected by the end of the week, will feature a schedule with more than 100 games, a sizable increase from the owners’ suggestion of 82 games. Many union members also appear amenable to deferring player salaries. As Scherzer referenced, at the end of March the two sides negotiated a deal that guaranteed the players a $170 million lump sum payment as well as service time even if the coronavirus pandemic canceled the season — and prorated pay if the coast cleared for a shortened campaign. That agreement also featured language that called for a reconsideration of players’ salaries if circumstances prevented paying fans from attending the games, as is currently the case, and that reconsideration led to this standoff. The players have been reluctant to sign off on further income cuts without getting a substantive look at the teams’ finances, as Scherzer also referenced; this has been a bone of contention for as long as the union has existed. In order to start the season by early July, as is the current desire, and get spring training ready for mid-June, the players and owners would likely have to find common ground by the end of the next week. — With Joel Sherman 

MLB and the players association are in a familiar situation unfamiliarly. They are fighting about money. Duh. Players and owners have done that since the inception of the game, quite publicly since the players association was formally recognized as a union in 1966. Within that frame, what occurred Tuesday is as routine as a pregame national anthem: MLB made a financial offer, the union was irate about it. What’s different, of course, is the dispute is occurring within a pandemic, which changes the financial picture now and at least into the near future while putting public and historic pressure on both sides to find a solution to allow as much of a season as possible. At this moment, the second-to-fourth biggest baseball leagues are either playing (South Korea, Taiwan) or about to start (Japan). The NBA and NHL are inching closer to firm plans for a restart. So if MLB does not play, think of the stain on all the leadership involved. Think of the long-term financial impact to both sides of being out of sight until next spring training while driving even the most loyal fans out of their minds. Think about the opportunity missed to be the first major North American team sport to play — even if by just a few weeks — to audiences so sports crazed they are producing record TV numbers to watch two quarterbacks and two golfers play 18 holes. Usually what drives an agreement is a deadline, but here that is a moving target. Reverse engineer: MLB wants to start by July 4. To get in three weeks of spring means having players in position by mid-June. But there would be much work to do upon an agreement to get sites up to code and players there for pre-camp screening. So every day counts. The longer the fight the greater the risk to not just reputations, but bodies. The sooner players can get to camps and the longer they can stay there the better. Because players are routine-oriented and routines are going to be greatly disrupted. Over time part of what players have won and often what teams want to provide for upgraded performance is greater comforts in clubhouses and personal coaching, etc. There is going to be, at minimum, a scaling back that will need an adjustment phase. I suspect if this fight drags on through this week then don’t be surprised if President Trump — as polarizing as he might be — tries to use the influence of his office to implore both sides to work it out for public good; to help the economy, to provide entertainment to the country and to offer televised optimism that with new practices businesses will return to operation. The sides might need the mediation. MLB’s first offer was so punch-in-the-face not conciliatory that it galvanized the players, moving one of the most influential, Nationals ace Max Scherzer, to tweet Wednesday night, “After discussing the latest developments with the rest of the players there’s no reason to engage with MLB in any further compensation reductions.” The anger is understandable. The union felt MLB delayed a financial offer for two weeks to shorten the clock and, thus, pressure the players to accept their plan because the public is going to generally see the players as the greedy side, no matter the realities. The union hates the concept offered in which lower-paid players would receive most of their prorated salary and the top earners — such as Scherzer — would receive less, often less than half. The union views this as an attempt to split the constituency. It also is revenue sharing in different clothing — just in this case Gerrit Cole and Giancarlo Stanton would be propping up Gleyber Torres and Luke Voit. The players are concerned they are in the dark about the true state of owner finances, at a time when management is claiming the bottom line is so bleak that the pain must be shared. Scherzer also wrote, “MLB’s economic strategy would completely change if all the documentation were to become public information.” But players never have complete knowledge of owner revenue, especially when it comes to what is truly being earned from regional sports networks and land owned around stadiums. Still, the union always comes to a deal despite its very understandable mistrust. That players — even while upset — are flocking to spring training sites means they want to play, so the union needs to work through the mistrust. If the owners truly want to play, then the players even have some leverage, as long as what Scherzer was throwing this time was a standard fastball of rhetoric. ESPN reported Wednesday night that the union is planning to send an economic proposal to MLB by week’s end, though without coming off its stance that players should be paid their prorated 2020 salaries based on games played. But if they send a proposal back, at least they are negotiating. Maybe the players could eventually trade some short-term loss for big-picture gain. An example: Take 60 percent of prorated salaries now across the board in exchange for raising the minimum wage the next two years to $750,000 then $850,000, which helps the bottom end players. Then demand no luxury tax thresholds/penalties for 2021 and 2022. The expectation is that the financial downturn is going to impact those seeking larger contracts, particularly free agents. But if the Dodgers or Yankees or Cubs want to spend, let there at least not be an artificial barrier to doing that. The owners get short-term cash flow they desire without full prorated salaries in 2020, the players receive an avenue to improve their financial lot in uncertain financial times the next two years. It is called a compromise. That would be quite familiar to where these two sides end up at the conclusion of negotiations. That should even go for unfamiliar times.

A study completed by the U.S. Census Bureau in collaboration with five federal agencies found that one-third of all Americans are struggling with anxiety or depression amid the coronavirus pandemic. With at least 100,000 deaths reported in the United States due to the coronavirus and months-long stay-at-home orders isolating billions globally, mental health has become a serious issue. The study, which was initiated on April 23, ran for 90 days and collected data from approximately 40,000 people. According to the results, 47.4 percent of adults age 18 to 29 showed signs of anxiety or depression, where only 19.8 percent of adults in their 70s exhibited signs. The findings also reportedly show a direct correlation to the pandemic, as a question relating to depression from a 2014 study reported nearly 50 percent fewer adults who exhibited signs. People with less education and in the 18-29 age group also had higher rates of anxiety and depression, the study found. Hispanic and black adults also showed higher rates of depression than Asian or white communities that were surveyed, according to the data. Black communities in the U.S., such as communities in Chicago, for example, have also statistically been hit the hardest by the coronavirus, according to health experts. Black Americans made up more than 50 percent of Chicago’s coronavirus cases and nearly 75 percent of the city’s reported COVID-19-related deaths in early April. The study is intended to collect data in order to measure “the social and economic effects of COVID-19 on American households,” according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The survey will help monitor American mental health and align “national health objectives, evaluate health policies and programs, and track changes in health behaviors and health care use,” according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Census Bureau.

A protester who hung an effigy of Kentucky Gov. Andy Beshear from a tree during a gun rally that turned into a demonstration against coronavirus restrictions has been fired from his job, according to reports. The Neil Huffman Auto Group on Tuesday said it canned the unidentified employee following an internal review, adding that it “does not condone threats of violence in any form.” The Louisville Courier Journal identified the staffer as Terry Bush, the president of the right-wing Kentucky Three Percenters, one of the groups present at Sunday’s protest. “He was fired because this governor is more important than the regular Joe out in this state trying to put food on their tables,” his wife, Patsy Bush, told the newspaper on Wednesday. The effigy was hoisted from a tree during a Second Amendment rally at the state capital in Frankfurt, where some of the demonstrators raged against measures implemented by Beshear’s administration in an effort to curb the spread of the virus. 		  A contingent of the group walked down to the governor’s mansion, taunting “Come out Andy” and “Resign Andy.” The crowd then returned to the capitol where a likeness of Beshear was hung from a tree while “God Bless the U.S.A.” by Lee Greenwood played over a speaker. A sign on the effigy said, “sic semper tyrannis,” which translates to “thus always to tyrants,” a phrase famously used by John Wilkes Booth after shooting President Abraham Lincoln. Both Republican and Democrat leaders in the state condemned the hanging of the effigy. Beshear on Wednesday said about the firing: “different decisions have consequences and I would hope that we would all make better decisions.” “But you don’t simply in the moment make a dummy with somebody’s face on it and hang it up,” the Democratic governor said. “I think what we saw was an act intended to create fear and terror.” With Post wires

I’m sorry, but Joe Biden looked ridiculous wearing a Michael Jackson mask and sunglasses that covered most of his face on Memorial Day. It was his first outing in more than 10 weeks from his Delaware basement and should have been an opportunity to project strength and hope for the campaign ahead. Instead, it was a total downer. Politics is about perception, and the image of Biden that history will record shows a frail and muzzled Democratic presidential nominee. The black mask only accentuates the impression with an extra dash of weirdness. As Biden shuffled out to his limo Monday, hand in hand with wife Jill, a large boom microphone hovered overhead to catch any bon mots. Which he duly delivered, but they were so muffled, you couldn’t hear a word. It was a surreal scene, and you expected any minute that someone would burst out laughing. Yet this pandemic kabuki passes for virtue signaling in the modern-day Democratic Party. Look what a good boy Joe is. He does what he’s told. Unlike that ­irresponsible Mr. Trump. Inevitably, Bondage Biden was mocked online. He was likened to the tiny man-fly hybrid crying “help me” at the end of the horror movie “The Fly.” If the intention was to look tough, it backfired big time. Biden could have kept his appearance low-key with a normal surgical mask. Instead, he had to make a political point with the most ostentatious facewear his campaign could find, with his entourage kitted out in matching ensembles. The getup reeked of overthinking and micromanagement. Even if Biden’s campaign is clueless, the symbolism of a black mask on the momentous occasion of his emergence from the basement can’t be overlooked. In every culture, it has gloomy overtones, the opposite of what America needs right now. Biden keeps telling us he is following the orders of “my governor” or “docs,” but he was just driving down the street from his home with his wife and Secret Service detail to place a wreath at a veterans park for a private photo opportunity. The only interaction with members of the public was as he was leaving, when he briefly greeted two men in masks standing 10 feet away. In other words, overkill in the mask department probably wasn’t strictly necessary. After all, the CDC recommends masks only “in public settings where other social-distancing measures are difficult to maintain.” The president, who went bare-faced during two wreath-laying events, couldn’t resist a dig, retweeting a post from Fox News’ Brit Hume that said, “This might help explain why Trump doesn’t like to wear a mask in public,” over a photo of Biden. In his first face-to-face interview in weeks, sitting maskless 12 feet from CNN’s Dana Bash Tuesday, Biden ­responded by branding Trump “a fool, an absolute fool.” “Every leading doc in the world is saying we should wear a mask when you’re in a crowd . . . “Presidents are supposed to lead, not engage in folly and be falsely masculine.” But if Biden aspires to be the leader of the free world, he should be mindful of the message he sends to the rest of the world. Is America on its knees, or is it going to bounce back from ­adversity? Perception matters. When Democrats berated the president for not wearing a mask to the Ford factory in Michigan last week, they overlooked the geopolitical ­optics. It’s no accident that Chinese President Xi Jinping went barefaced at the opening of the National People’s Congress in Beijing last week, where ­almost everyone else was wearing a mask. The same goes for other leaders, such as Germany’s Angela Merkel and Britain’s Boris Johnson. Masks are a necessary evil for the rest of us. But national leaders have a special symbolic role. Even if they wear masks behind the scenes, they cannot face their people in disguise, with their words muffled. In any case, they have security guards to maintain physical distance from others. They are virus-tested all the time. Each to their own, but if Biden is like this now in a safe, stage-managed outdoor setting, how on earth will he be able to campaign around the country? Is the plan to gaslight us into believing excessive masking and extended quarantining is essential until Election Day so that Biden can remain in witness protection? Maybe he’ll do the debates muffled in a mask. That way, his staff can provide the subtitles, and no one will know what he really said. Twitter’s ‘fact police’ just embarked on a slippery slope For Twitter to impose a biased new fact-check system targeting the president five months before an election is an intolerable effort to influence the political process. When it slapped a fact-check alert on two of President Trump’s tweets about voter fraud, Twitter went from freewheeling social-media platform to a publisher with all the curbs on its freedom and legal vulnerabilities that entails. It’s a slippery slope. Now that Twitter has set itself up as the arbiter of truth on a Republican president’s posts, will it also go after fact-challenged liberals? It could start by retrospectively adding fact checks to the millions of tweets that propagated the Russia-collusion conspiracy theory that was proven false by the Mueller probe. A lot of blue “chekists” should find themselves permanently branded as fact-free zones. Former CIA Director John Brennan, for instance, needs a slew of fact-check boxes on his rancid tweets accusing Trump of being “in the pocket of Putin.” Twitter could link to declassified material showing Brennan is a liar. There’s a lot not to like about the president’s tweets. He should not be tweeting murder accusations against Joe Scarborough, for one thing. It’s not fair to the family of Scarborough’s deceased former intern, Lori Klausutis. But if he wants to behave in a shamefully cruel way to a grieving family, he will pay the political price. It’s not up to Twitter to censor the record. ‘Karen’ has paid enough of a price Nobody likes a “Karen.” The generic term for a bossy, entitled, middle-aged woman who throws tantrums when she doesn’t get her own way is an insult that has become a form of social control. But it’s gone too far with “Central Park Karen.” Calling the cops to report “an African-American man threatening my life” after he simply asked her to leash her dog was reprehensible. Amy Cooper deserves condemnation, but she’s paid a heavy price already. She’s lost her dog. She’s been fired from her job. She’s getting death threats. The Central Park Civic Association wants her banned from the park for life. The city Commission on Human Rights has launched an investigation. Legislators want new hate-crime legislation inspired by her actions. Mayor de Blasio felt obliged to opine: “The video out of Central Park is racism, plain and simple.” No kidding, Sherlock. This is overkill. It’s inhumane. Even Christian Cooper, the man she tried to get arrested, says it has gone too far. The irrational thirst for blood on social media should not spill over into real life. Enough. Leave her alone.

Five coronavirus patients in Bangladesh died in a hospital fire on Wednesday, a fire official said. The inferno broke out in a makeshift isolation unit treating coronavirus patients at United Hospital in the capital city of Dhaka, according to Zillur Rahman, a fire service director. Four men and a woman were among the dead, Rahman said. The victims ranged in age from 45 to 75. The isolation unit appeared to be completely destroyed in the blaze, according to a photo from the scene. Its exterior walls were completely damaged, exposing the unit to the outdoors. A recent surge in coronavirus cases in the South Asian country has pushed hospitals to their limits. Bangladesh, as of Wednesday, has reported 38,292 cases of coronavirus and 544 deaths have been attributed to the illness. Health experts, however, fear the actual number of cases in the densely populated country exceeds what’s been reported. With Post wires 

Quarantined Americans tired of cooking aren’t the only ones getting fat off Papa John’s. Starboard Value, the $6 billion activist hedge fund that swooped in last year to push out the pizza maker’s controversial founder and CEO John Schnatter, is seeing its investment pay off big during the coronavirus. On Wednesday, Papa John’s stock soared 6 percent to close up $4.57 a share, to $78.76, after its new CEO, Rob Lynch, said the company saw a second straight month of record sales in May — boosted by coronavirus quarantines. But Papa John’s stock is up more than 70 percent since Starboard first invested in February 2019, said Mark Kalinowski, of Kalinowski Equity Research. “Starboard has done very, very well for itself in this investment,” Kalinowski said. The gains to Starboard’s 20 percent stake translate to a profit of roughly $200 million, according to sources and public records. It’s a win for Starboard CEO Jeff Smith, known for advocating for hotter breadsticks and saltier cooking water at Olive Garden following an investment in the chain’s parent company, Darden Restaurants, in 2014. At the time, the recommendations were ridiculed, but Starboard turned the company around — solidifying Smith’s activist reputation. The hedge fund has made similarly dramatic changes at Papa John’s, sources said. After helping boot Schnatter as chairman, Smith took over the board and filled the CEO slot with Lynch, a turnaround maverick known for driving growth at Arby’s. He also tapped NBA legend Shaquille O’Neal to be the public face of the company. On Wednesday, shares in Papa John’s closed up more than 100 percent from the month before Starboard arrived. At the time, the company was reeling from a series of controversies, including revelations that Schnatter had used racial epithets on a company conference call. On the day of Starboard’s first $200 million investment, on February 4, 2019, the stock closed at $41.97 a share. Starboard followed up within weeks with another $50 million investment, giving the fund a roughly 20 percent stake. “That stock was DOA when they went in on it,” said one analyst at a rival fund. “It was definitely on the way back even before the lockdowns.” Additional reporting by Lisa Fickenscher

State lawmakers voted overwhelmingly Wednesday to give victims of childhood sex abuse an extra year to file suit — more than twice the amount of time that Gov. Andrew Cuomo granted them earlier this month. Legislation to extend provisions of the landmark Child Victims Act through Aug. 13, 2021, was approved by a vote of 60-0 in the state Senate and 135-9 in the Assembly. “By passing this bill today, New York sends a clear and unambiguous message to survivors: we believe you, we support you, and we will continue fighting for you,” said state Sen. Brad Hoylman (D-Manhattan), who sponsored the Senate’s measure. On May 8, Cuomo announced the issuance of an executive order that gave victims an extra five months — until Jan. 14 — to continue filing cases, citing the “reduction in court services” caused by the coronavirus crisis. The CVA, which Cuomo signed into law last year, temporarily lifted the statute of limitations for bringing civil claims over alleged childhood sexual abuse. About 1,700 suits have already been filed statewide against defendants including the estate of the notorious pedophile Jeffrey Epstein, the Catholic Church and the Boy Scouts of America, according to the state Office of Court Administration. The Safe Horizon victim-services group urged Cuomo to sign the longer extension into law “without delay.” “The COVID-19 pandemic has impacted the ability of survivors of childhood sexual abuse to meet with their attorneys and gather evidence, and it’s vitally important that they have enough time to pursue their rights,” said Michael Polenberg, vice president of government affairs for the Manhattan-based nonprofit. “This will ensure that New York remains a leader in protecting children and creating increased paths to justice for survivors.” A Cuomo spokesman said the matter was “under review.”

“Tan” you believe it? The owner of a Staten Island tanning salon fed up with New York’s coronavirus shutdown plans to defy the rules and open up shop on Thursday morning. Bobby Catone, who runs three Sunbelievable salons in the forgotten borough, said he believes he can safely reopen with precautions, despite the statewide stay-at-home order still being in effect. “Small businesses followed the rules and we trusted what was asked to be done from us from the beginning, when they asked us to stop our livelihoods,” he told The Post on Wednesday. “We did what were were supposed to do … we flattened the curve … in Staten Island, we basically demolished the curve,” Catone added. “So why are they treating us like prisoners?” Catone’s intent to open up, which puts him at risk of a hefty fine, was first reported by The Staten Island Advance. He told The Post that his business has been hemorrhaging money due to Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s “PAUSE” order, which has been in effect since late March. Catone expressed frustration over a lack of clarity from officials about when small businesses would finally be allowed to reopen. “It’s at the point where we followed our rules … and they keep moving the goalposts. It wouldn’t be so bad if they had a date,” he said. Lawmakers also don’t seem to care about rent and other bills piling up for small business owners, Catone charged. The $12,000 federal Paycheck Protection Program loan he received isn’t nearly enough to cover his expenses, he added. “They’re not saying, ‘stay closed and send us the bills,’ they’re saying, ‘stay closed screw you,” Catone said of officials. “I have tens of thousands of dollars in rent, I have to take that out of my savings?” he added. Several customers have already booked appointments for Thursday, though the salons will be operating at 50 percent capacity, which won’t be enough for him to make a living, Catone said. He said he’ll incorporate extra sanitizing methods during his daily cleaning efforts already in place. Attorneys Mark J. Fonte and Louis Gelormino, who have said they will represent any business owner who is fined for opening during the pandemic, are backing Capone’s move. “To label some businesses non-essential is insulting to a lot of people,” Fonte told the Advance. “Our position is that everybody mouths the word and speaks loudly. But Bobby is actually taking action.” Arguing that the borough has already met the state’s seven metrics for reopening — measuring hospital admissions, deaths, available beds, testing and tracing — a group of pols led by State Sen. Andrew Lanza (R-SI) last week asked Cuomo to allow the island to reopen on its own. But Cuomo sank the bid on Monday, saying that Staten Island life is inextricably tied to the rest of New York City — which, as a whole, is yet to clear all seven hurdles. Catone’s defiance will “show everyone else on Staten Island that they should open up, too, and follow his lead,” Fonte said. “Once he opens, the floodgates will open. Any business that helps you feed your children is essential.”

The House of Representatives condemned China’s treatment of Muslim Uyghur minorities on Wednesday with dozens of lawmakers voting by proxy for the first time in history. Democrats authorized proxy voting this month due to the coronavirus pandemic, arguing it was a wise move to protect the health of members. Republicans oppose the reform and are suing to have it ruled unconstitutional. Although the legislation is likely to further sour relations between the US and China, it was uncontroversial among lawmakers, passing 413-1. It passed the Senate unanimously this month. The Uyghur Human Rights Policy Act authorizes the Trump administration to sanction Chinese officials responsible for censorship or detaining large numbers of Uyghurs in western China in what the Chinese government claims is an antiterrorism campaign. Republicans supported the bill authored by Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) despite warning that they believe any legislation passed using proxy votes ultimately will be struck down by a Supreme Court decision. “For more than 231 years, never have we seen a proxy vote on the floor of the House,” House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) told reporters Wednesday morning. “Whatever the Democrats move forward will probably never be held up to be law.” Before lawmakers voted, McCarthy noted that 71 Democrats sent letters to the Clerk of the House authorizing lawmakers to vote for them, whereas just 12 Democrats missed a vote this month on a doomed $3 trillion coronavirus package. “I wonder if any of them are having a fundraiser today,” McCarthy said. Four New York Democrats voted by proxy: Reps. Nita Lowey, Carolyn Maloney, Jose Serrano and Paul Tonko. Rep. Grace Meng, a Democrat who represents Queens, removed her mask at a lectern as she announced that she was voting in favor of the bill on behalf of Lowey, Serrano and Tonko. Democratic Rep. Max Rose, who represents Staten Island and part of Brooklyn, voted on Maloney’s behalf. There were minor bumps in lawmakers voting for each other. Rose stumbled over the wording of a statement announcing Maloney’s vote. “Get it right,” a man said into a C-SPAN hot mic. Rep. Brad Sherman voted on behalf of fellow California Democrat Rep. Ro Khanna, but twice mispronounced his name as “Ka-hanna.” Rep. Don Beyer of northern Virginia voted on behalf of seven colleagues, but had to return to the lectern after appearing to forget one, Rep. Ted Lieu (D-Calif.). Beyer also voted for Reps. Earl Blumenauer (D-Ore.), Steve Cohen (D-Tenn.), Rep. Bill Foster (D-Ill.), Gwen Moore (D-Wis.), Marc Veasey (D-Texas) and Alan Lowenthal (D-Calif.). Democrats and Republicans sparred throughout the day on whether the reform is legal. House Rules Committee Chairman Jim McGovern (D-Mass.) said Republicans were wrong to characterize proxy voting as a dereliction of duty, saying lawmakers still “have to pay attention to the proceedings” and inform their proxy how to vote. Similar versions of the bill condemning China’s treatment of the ethnic group passed the House and Senate last year, before the coronavirus pandemic, which many US officials blame on ineffective containment and deception by Chinese government officials. Later Wednesday, the House is schedule to vote on extending provisions of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. That bill is likely to fail after late-breaking opposition from President Trump and the Congressional Progressive Caucus.

New York is getting lapped on restaurant reopenings by a city that can’t even do pizza right. Chicago has released a 13-page list of guidelines for how its eateries can safely resume on-premises service amid the coronavirus pandemic, while Big Apple Mayor Bill de Blasio remains short on answers. The Windy City issued the pointers on Tuesday, according to Eater, painting a picture of what a night out in the city could soon look like. Tables will be placed at least six feet apart, or have a permanent barrier, such as Plexiglas, installed between them, while parties at one table should be capped at six people, the pamphlet reads. Patrons must always wear face coverings — except, of course, when eating — while employees should cover up in protective gear at all times. Potential Petri dishes such as self-service food and drink stations will be packed away for the time being. According to Eater, Chicago Mayor Lori Lightfoot has said the city will begin outdoor dining before June 10. New York City, by contrast, could enter phase one of its reopening as early as June 1, but de Blasio has been stingy with specifics on everything from getting around on public transit to what rules must be followed by those sectors eligible to resume, to the frustration of business owners and lawmakers. While the first phase does not includes eateries — but rather low-risk industries like construction, manufacturing and curbside pickup retail — city restaurant and bar owners have still been among those clamoring for guidance. Hizzoner has teased some likely precautions, which left several city restaurateurs feeling queasy.

How we respond to the novel coronavirus should be based on emerging evidence about the danger posed by the virus — a reasonable road. Despite what many people hoped, COVID-19 is clearly worse than the seasonal flu. But despite what other people feared, it doesn’t seem to be nearly as lethal as the Spanish Flu of 1918, which killed about 0.7 percent of the total US population — the equivalent of more than 2 million people today. As we move from lockdowns to something more closely resembling normal life, the emerging evidence about the threat posed by COVID-19 should inform our judgment about which precautions make sense. The initial, ham-handed approach — which confined hundreds of millions of people to their homes except for government-approved purposes — should be replaced by more carefully targeted measures focused on protecting the people who face the highest risk. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the current “best estimate” of the death rate among Americans who develop COVID-19 symptoms is 0.4 percent. By that measure — the symptomatic case fatality rate — the novel coronavirus is roughly four times as deadly as the seasonal flu but far less deadly than the Spanish Flu. Unlike the Spanish Flu, which commonly struck down healthy people in the prime of life, COVID-19 primarily kills elderly people. The CDC estimates that the symptomatic case fatality rate for people younger than 50 is just 0.05 percent, compared to 1.3 percent for people 65 or older and 0.2 percent for 50-to-64-year-olds. In other words, older people, who account for about 17 percent of the population, are 26 times as likely to die from COVID-19 as people in the youngest age group. Age seems to be largely a proxy for serious preexisting medical conditions such as hypertension, heart and lung disease and cancer, which are independently associated with COVID-19 deaths and become more common as people get older. The CDC also estimates that 35 percent of people infected by the COVID-19 virus never develop symptoms, which implies that the infection fatality rate — deaths as a share of total infections — is between 0.2 percent and 0.3 percent. That is far lower than the rates assumed in the horrifying worst-case scenarios that had a profound impact on COVID-19 control policies in the United States and around the world, which suggested that the disease could cause as many deaths per capita as the 1918 pandemic. Those projections were never ­realistic, since they counterfactually assumed that people would carry on as usual despite COVID-19 — that they wouldn’t take voluntary precautions such as avoiding crowds, minimizing social contact, working from home, wearing masks and paying extra attention to ­hygiene. If the CDC’s current estimates are in the right ballpark, those models also were based on infection fatality rates that were much too high. There is an even bigger gap between these new estimates and the crude case fatality rate — reported deaths as a share of confirmed cases. Even taking into account underreporting of deaths, the crude case fatality rate, which currently is close to 6 percent nationwide, vastly overstates the lethality of the COVID-19 virus, since testing so far has been skewed toward people with severe symptoms, who are not representative of everyone who has been infected. The national average also ­obscures striking regional variations in the percentage of COVID-19 patients who succumb to the disease. The current crude case fatality rate in New York, for instance, is nearly 8 percent, compared to 4.3 percent in Florida. One plausible explanation for that difference is that Florida, which lifted its lockdown at the end of April, strove to keep elderly COVID-19 patients away from nursing home residents. By contrast, Stanford epidemiologist John Ioannidis notes, “A very ­unfortunate decision of the governors in New York and New Jersey was to have COVID-19 patients sent to nursing homes.” The current challenge is finding a way to emulate Florida’s apparent success in protecting people who are especially vulnerable to COVID-19 without broad business closure and stay-at-home orders, which are unsustainable and economically ruinous. We need to steer a middle course between our worst fears and our highest hopes. Jacob Sullum is a senior editor of Reason. Twitter: @JacobSullum 

What if MLB gets what it wants — players to forgo a significant part of their salaries for 2020 — and then a group of players does not show up? That would be victory turning to defeat quickly for the owners, especially if these are star players, and particularly since it could spark another round of fights over issues such as pay and service time for those players. Already, it was understood a group of players or coaches/managers with pre-existing conditions might opt out over health concerns with the coronavirus still not under control. For example, on the Cubs, Jon Lester and Anthony Rizzo are cancer survivors and Brandon Morrow has Type 1 diabetes. Those types of players will have to decide for health reasons whether to opt in or opt out. But could there be players who decide not to play for financial reasons? I spoke to a half-dozen agents in recent days who said they expected most players to return if there are games due to love of baseball, sense of responsibility to their careers and teammates or perhaps even being shamed into participating because to not play would make them look bad. But the agents also said if a more favorable financial proposal than what MLB offered Tuesday is not reached, they would not be surprised if some players decide not to play. One of the agents said, “I would actually be more surprised if we did not get a few who sat out.” No one named names, but there were educated guesses on what types of players might strongly consider not playing a shortened season in a pandemic for less than their contracts are worth: 1. The super-rich players. The ones who are being asked under the current MLB offer to take the biggest cut. They have either made plenty already and/or have lots of money coming beyond this year. No one spoken to suggested that the two players who were due the most this year ($36 million), Gerrit Cole and Mike Trout, would not play. But a few noted the coincidence that both have wives due with their first child in saying how other external pulls plus money could push some players to stay away in 2020. One of those pulls, by the way, could be principle: I worked hard to get to the point to make this amount and it is unfair to penalize me in such a finite career. 2. The players with contracts for multiple years in which 2020 is a low year. Many long-term deals start low and rise each year. Recently, Blake Snell created a stir by mentioning he would not play unless he got his full prorated pay. In Season 2 of his five-year, $50 million pact, Snell was due $7 million. So even if paid a full prorated amount, he would be looking at about $3.5 million for 82 games. Under MLB’s current proposal, that would drop to roughly $2 million. Snell is due $10.5 million next year, then $12.5 million in 2022 and $16 million in 2023. Will players with rising contracts strongly consider forfeiting the fraction they receive this year with the guarantee of what is still coming? Given the current atmosphere, would MLB or a team argue that such a maneuver would leave a healthy player in violation of his contract? 3. A free agent who feels he could do more harm to his case than good. It already is understood by agents that arbitration-eligible players and especially free agents are facing a financial bloodbath this coming offseason as teams react to 2020 revenue loss. Will some walk-year players decide they can only further damage their credentials by risking injury with a shortened/very different spring training 2.0 and just a half season to accumulate statistics? For example — again, no one mentioned names — can stars such as Mookie Betts or J.T. Realmuto help themselves at all this year or only hurt their free agency with injury or down performance?

“It might be problematic for word to get out that the DOE is encouraging folks to make noise,” wrote anti-testing activist Miriam Nunberg. But word did get out, and “problematic” isn’t the half of it. Nunberg, co-chair of the New York City Alliance for School Integration and Desegregation, had already blasted word that top Department of Education officials were actively pushing for opposition to PLACE, a parents’ group trying to maintain standards in the city school system — specifically, the screened admissions at some of the city’s best middle and high schools. The Post’s Selim Algar got his hands on both Nunberg’s original e-mail enthusiastically passing along the DOE request, and her followup asking people to keep quiet about how the supposedly nonpolitical bureaucrats are playing political hardball. Chancellor Richard Carranza has gone to war against all selective admissions, charging that any effort to uphold standards is racist. To him, the top schools are bastions of “white privilege” — never mind that white students are usually in the minority at those schools. And he’s exploiting the pandemic in his war: The state’s cancellation of year-end testing — and his own decision to end serious grading and all attendance-taking — badly complicates screening for the next round of selective middle-school admissions. Carranza’s on record saying it’s wrong to “waste” this crisis. So when his DOE insists, “We have not yet made any decisions on this policy, and will not do so without hearing first from our students and families,” you’re right to roll your eyes. Meanwhile, the chancellor still refuses to confront the real problem: Far too many public schools in the city’s poor and minority communities just don’t work — even as public charter schools in the same ’hoods regularly achieve excellence. Carranza needs to quit trying to undermine schools that work and focus on replacing the ones that don’t.

A decade ago, Lisbon Black was squatting in an abandoned house in Brooklyn, fresh out of jail, panhandling for money and dealing with a substance abuse problem. But these days, Black is a star volunteer for The Alliance for Positive Change — helping struggling New Yorkers get through the coronavirus crisis.  The non-profit — which works with New Yorkers with HIV/AIDS, chronic health conditions and other challenges like homelessness — is the same organization that got him back on his feet so many years ago.  “If there’s anything that the agency may need assistance with, and I can help out, I will help out,” Black, 69, told The Post.  Prior to the coronavirus crisis, the native New Yorker did outreach work for the organization but once the pandemic struck, that work was no longer possible.  He didn’t want to stop giving back, however.  “They asked me if I would volunteer [during the crisis] and I jumped to the task immediately,” Black said.  Matthew McDermott Matthew McDermott View Slideshow Armed with a mask and gloves, Black takes the train from his Harlem apartment a few days a week and heads to the Lower East Side, where he helps Alliance deliver food, masks and gift cards to struggling clients.  Even though Black is older and considered to be high-risk for the virus, he still wanted to help.  “He served as security in different sites, he served in reception, because we were working with a skeleton crew, pretty much anything you asked Lisbon to do, he did,” said Brenda Starks-Ross, chief operating officer for Alliance.  “When others were afraid to come out, he said ‘I’m willing to do anything, count me in.’”  Black said if it wasn’t for the Alliance, he likely wouldn’t be where he is today and he wants to make sure he pays that kindness forward.  “It basically was their support and their help that helped pull me off the streets, you know, and it gave me encouragement, gave me back my dignity, my self-esteem. And they gave me somewhat of a direction that I didn’t have at the time,” Black said.  “They’ve always been there and been very, very supportive and always looked at my needs and were there to assist me all the time so I thought it was a good thing for me to be able to give back to them … they always had an open door for anyone that was in need.” Do you have a nominee for The Post’s Hero of the Day? Email heroes@nypost.com.

Italy’s Colosseum Archaeological Park in Rome (PArCo) announced Tuesday it will reopen to the public on June 1 after having been closed for three months due to coronavirus restrictions. There are new guidelines in place to ensure health and safety standards are met. All visitors are required to wear a mask and each ticketholder will need to have their temperature taken “before crossing the entrances to the Colosseum and the archaeological area of ​​the Roman Forum and Palatine Hill,” according to PArCo. Groups are allowed up to 14 people and each group will have to wait 15 minutes after the party in front of them has been allowed in. Italy, which was Europe’s epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic, has had more than 230,000 cases of COVID-19. It is also the third-leading nation in the world in fatalities, behind the United States and the United Kingdom, with more than 33,000 deaths, according to Italy’s Ministry of Health. Nearly 145,000 people in Italy have recovered from the coronavirus while almost 53,000 people are still sick. The health ministry lists the average age of death from the virus at 80 years old, and close to 60 percent of those who died suffered from three preexisting conditions. Italy has started to relax restrictions that were in place and phase two of the country’s reopening plan has begun. Churches, restaurants, bars, shops and hairdressers have been allowed to reopen, but social distancing regulations are still in place. “Over the weekend, we reached 100,000 new cases per day worldwide and 5 and a half million in total,” Italian Minister of Health Roberto Speranza tweeted Monday. “These numbers are impressive.” “In Italy the curve continues to bend on the right side, but caution is needed,” the minister added. “Never forget that the virus is only defeated with a global approach.” Health experts continue to warn about social distancing measures amid easing restrictions.

More than 100,000 people have died from the coronavirus in the US, according to the latest data. The country passed the grim milestone Wednesday, with more than 1.6 million testing positive for the bug, according to a count from Johns Hopkins University. The news comes just over four months after officials announced that the virus had reached US soil — when a Washington state man was identified as the first patient on Jan. 21. Since then, more Americans have been lost to the coronavirus than deaths from the Vietnam and Korean wars combined. The US continues to lead the world for the highest death toll, followed by the United Kingdom, Italy and France, the data shows. Still, there have been optimistic signs of relief for the US, with many of the worse-hit areas seeing key measures declining. View Slideshow New York — the epicenter of the nation’s crisis — saw new hospitalizations for the virus drop this week to the lowest level since the state started to track the pandemic. New Jersey, which is the second hardest-hit state, has also reported downward trends in recent weeks, including the number of coronavirus hospitalizations Monday at the lowest in seven weeks, according to NJ.com. Gov. Phil Murphy has said hospitalizations are the best real-time indicator of the state’s COVID-19 outbreak and one of the main measures being used to ease the lockdown orders. But across the world, health leaders have warned that the pandemic is far from over, with more than 5.6 million cases recorded, and at least 352,000 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins. With Post wires

From the right: We Can Handle the Virus “The COVID-19 lockdown has served its purpose” and must end, declares The Washington Post’s Marc Thiessen. “The objective” was never to stop every infection, “which is impossible; it was to buy time to learn about the virus and prevent our health-care system from being overwhelmed.” We’ve done that — at a cost. Of the 38 million lockdown layoffs, 42 percent “may be permanent.” One expert predicts the toll on non-COVID patients will be higher than COVID deaths because they’ve “been forced to put off care” for “cancer and cardiac disease,” and one study sees “an additional 40,000 deaths due to suicides and drug overdoses among the jobless.” It’s “senseless” to wait for a vaccine; we must “stop asking millions of Americans to sacrifice their livelihoods” when we “have the capacity to handle” any spike in cases when lockdowns end. From the left: I Was Wrong — We Must Reopen USA Today’s Michael J. Stern’s “status as a die-hard Democrat” put him in the “stay at home until it’s safe” side of the coronavirus debate. No longer: “New circumstances have convinced me that cities should reopen sooner rather than later.” Not only does the science show “the chance of an effective vaccine is far from guaranteed,” but we now know that “staying home won’t deliver us to the safety zone.” A “life of home confinement” is “not economically feasible” and “not a world in which most of us would want to live.” People will have “hard choices to make” about “working from home, going to restaurants and visiting friends” — but balancing “risk and reward” should now be a choice individuals make themselves. Campaign watch: Joe’s Auspicious Absence Democrats worry that Joe Biden’s absence from the campaign trail amid the pandemic makes him look “weak and marginal at a time of national crisis.” They shouldn’t, argues The Week’s Damon Linker: Unlike most politicians, “Biden benefits by staying in the background.” By laying low and “avoiding embarrassing gaffes,” he plays to his key strength, the “warm glow” of “affirmative feeling” voters have for him, and “comes closer to resembling” a popular “generic Democrat.” His campaign will eventually “need to decide precisely how, and how much, to use the candidate on the stump,” but now Biden’s “best way to win the game is barely to play at all.” Liberal: The Better Way To Shame Angry mobs are punishing social-distancing violators, most notably Dominic Cummings, top adviser to British Prime Minister Boris Johnson. “The mobs,” sighs The Atlantic’s Graeme Wood, “are doing God’s work, but badly.” It suggests “our shaming skills need sharpening. If you are conducting your shaming in the frozen-food aisle, you’re already too late.” Better to mobilize “silent disgust,” associated with the primal sense of “honor” many older societies understood — as in the “moral revolution” in 18th-century England that saw gentlemen reject dueling as not only “wrong but also dishonorable. Feeling silent disgust” is “a much more visceral reaction than merely to recognize that something is wrong, and to say so loudly.” Once we get to the point where a would-be father-in-law would be ashamed to announce his daughter’s marriage to a distancing violator, “silent disgust” will have done its work, rendering “outrage mobs” superfluous. Culture critic: Pandemic Self-Righteousness The “universal” coronavirus crisis “should be a unifying moment,” with everyone “feeling the same fear, anxiety and uncertainty” — and yet, laments National Review’s Jim Geraghty, some are taking the opportunity to “judge others and whip up and direct public scorn.” From Staten Island shoppers who decided to “swarm and berate a woman for not wearing a mask” to Gothamites heeding Mayor de Blasio’s calls to rat out their neighbors, some Americans insist they’re “the good people — practicing the right steps to protect themselves and their loved ones” — while anyone “doing something different is one of the bad people.” It seems “if we cannot feel good, then we can at least feel superior.” Such “smug virtue-shaming” isn’t persuasive, especially when we’ve never had “a greater need for empathy.” — Compiled by The Post Editorial Board 

A 29-year-old vagrant accused of swiping $11,000 worth in various items from an out-of-state volunteer coronavirus doctor is back out on the streets, authorities said Wednesday. Ronaldo Lewis was arrested Tuesday night after cops were tipped off to the man’s identity through news coverage and was slapped with a slew of charges, including burglary — only to be released without bail Wednesday, officials said. Lewis was arraigned Wednesday afternoon and was released on his own recognizance, because his crimes were not bail-eligible under state criminal justice reforms that took effect in January, according to the Brooklyn DA’s Office. The homeless man allegedly broke into the Texas doctor’s room at the Brooklyn Hotel on Atlantic Avenue near Nostrand Avenue in Crown Heights at about 9 a.m. Saturday, cops said. The accused thief left the hotel room “in disarray” and snatched various items, including the doctor’s purse and wallet, according to the criminal complaint. Lewis was captured on surveillance camera lingering in and around the hotel before leaving with a duffel bag, the complaint adds.

On MandaLeigh Blunt and Jeff Laszczych’s third date, they donned masks, joined gloved hands — and drove to an antibody testing site. Blunt, a 32-year-old realtor, says she was “chronically single” before the pandemic. But in February, she plucked up the courage to ask a mutual friend to set her up with Laszczych. She’d seen her 36-year-old crush around Roosevelt Island, where she lives and where Laszczych works as a sergeant in the public safety department. The two went on as many dates — a dinner in Brooklyn and lunch at her apartment — before the coronavirus crisis rocked the fledgling relationship. “Two days later, he spiked a fever of 104,” she says. Laszczych, who had trouble breathing, was admitted to the hospital for six days. Blunt was worried, but didn’t want to come on too strong. “It was a lot of freaking out if I didn’t hear from him, wondering if he was OK, and thinking, ‘Wait, I don’t even know this guy, he could be ghosting me,’ ” says Blunt. Eventually, Laszczych, who recovered from COVID-19 in his Greenpoint apartment, began to feel better, and the duo continued to bond from a distance. Three weeks after Laszczych’s release from the hospital, the couple went to CityMD to get tested for novel coronavirus antibodies together. Now, there’s just one problem. “He has the antibodies, and I don’t,” Blunt says. “I was so sad when I found out.” To protect her from the coronavirus, dates with Laszczych are limited to gloved walks, car rides with the windows down and the occasional “mask kiss.” Singles have been forced to get creative with dating during the pandemic. Even before stay-at-home orders were announced, locals were scrambling to lock down a “quarantine boo,” while others turned to videoconference dating for safety. But as restrictions begin to loosen, couples whose relationships blossomed from afar are forced to confront the potential risks and rewards of in-person meetups — and the challenges that come along with the leap from FaceTime to face-to-face time. Can virtual chemistry translate to real life? Recently, desperate dudes have started touting their COVID-19 antibody statuses on their profiles in the hopes of scoring an in-person rendezvous with their crushes, giving new meaning to traditional dating tropes like “getting tested” and “using protection.” (Your Saturday night paramour might be referring to PPE.) Plus, in a city where bars packed cheek by jowl used to be hot spots for romance and casual hookups were the flavor of the weekend, how will dating norms shift when even a bare-handed touch is taboo? The connections may be stronger than ever, starry-eyed experts and singles proclaim, but what about the sparks? Before the crisis, singles were largely commitment-phobic, according to Chicago-based matchmaker Sara Heimerl. “The pandemic has heightened the feeling for singles that they would like a romantic partner,” Heimerl tells The Post. The love expert adds that the coronavirus “has allowed dating to slow down. People are taking more time to get to know each other.” Prospect Heights resident Samantha Lobo, for one, has witnessed a shift from pre-corona flings to more earnest searching for the real thing. “Dating before the coronavirus was pretty awful,” says Lobo, a 29-year-old television producer who “had pretty much every app.” “I’d go on a first date, and then not hear back. … I wasn’t even that serious about it.” Lobo remembers “liking” a man’s profile on Hinge before boarding a plane to Cuba for a vacation in early March. She hadn’t put much thought into what was essentially a virtual wink. “When I got back, everything was shut down,” she recalls, “but I had a message from this guy when I landed. We’ve been talking nonstop since.” Thus far Lobo has only called, texted and FaceTimed her Brooklyn-based beau, but she reports the lo-fi channels have actually allowed their conversations to plumb depths she wouldn’t have dared before. “Our conversations have gone deeper than the typical ‘what do you like to do for fun?’-type conversations,” says Lobo, who has divulged “upsetting” stories about friends and concerns over the coronavirus. “I wouldn’t normally delve into personal problems with someone I’ve never met. I sent him a no-makeup selfie, which never happens.” Dating from the couch can help reserved guys and gals open up to a potential partner, Heimerl says. ”When you meet in person, there are expectations around ‘What do they look like? What’s their body language?’ ” she says. “Over the phone, where you’re at home, you’re completely comfortable and more at ease talking.” Pre-pandemic, Lobo might have suggested grabbing drinks for a first date. Now, she’s hoping for something a little more romantic. “Because we’ve talked so much, and because of COVID, I’d want it to be more well planned,” she says, “like doing dinner in his backyard because restaurants aren’t open.” Still, it can be tough to differentiate between a coronavirus cling — and the real thing. “What if the kiss sucks? I’m afraid it might fizzle out,” worries Lobo, who has no set plans to meet her match in real life just yet. “It’s a weird territory, because I don’t want to get anyone sick, and it’s hard to know what’s acceptable.” Aisha Hatter, 27, also had jitters when it came time to meet her quarantine sweetheart. The marketing account director and her dude had been buddies, but started exiting the friend zone after marathon phone calls and simultaneous movie binges while they each self-isolated for weeks. “We were going back and forth about meeting. I don’t want to be publicly shamed about seeing him in person… I was so nervous, I had never had a stomachache like that,” she says. “Could you imagine getting your hopes up, and then there’d be no chemistry?” The two ultimately masked up and picked up frozen coffee cocktails to go. “We sat on my roof and were like, ‘Should we be boyfriend, girlfriend?’ ” says Hatter, who lives in Bed-Stuy, while her guy is a Jersey resident. “The whole thing felt like middle school. “Before, it could feel like you had to use sex to keep people interested, but now it’s pretty much off the table,” adds Hatter. “It’s a dream situation.” Likewise, Blunt says, “We keep telling each other we feel like teenagers — it’s so giddy.” The precautions make every milestone matter. “Even our first hug was a big deal,” Blunt adds. “I made him turn around because I couldn’t not hug him, but I didn’t want either of us to breathe on each other.” Coronavirus has imbued every move with meaning, Blunt adds, which is a welcome reprieve from sexy hookup culture. “I really didn’t like dating in the city because of the pressure to have a speedy physical relationship,” she says. “In our relationship, that was a non-issue, because [Gov.] Cuomo says we’re not allowed.” Adds Laszczych, “We joked when we were apart and I was in the hospital that we were having a very old-fashioned relationship, like we were courting via letters. Except it was through FaceTime instead of the mail.” And while the pair looks forward to “fishing, sailing and going to restaurants…when the world turns on again,” for now, they’ll settle for the roundabout road to the meet market. “We went to this grocery store — Stew Leonard’s, in Yonkers — because it’s a longer drive,” says Blunt. “It was one of the most romantic dates we’ve had.”

SIKINOS, Greece — Using dinghies, GPS and a portable refrigerator, doctors deployed by Greece’s national public health agency have launched a coronavirus testing drive on the country’s Aegean Sea islands ahead of the summer vacation season. Ferry service for visitors to the islands resumed Monday, and Greece plans to start welcoming international travelers again on June 15. The government hopes the comparatively low number of confirmed coronavirus cases and deaths in Greece — just under 2,900 cases with 173 deaths — will attract foreign tourists and and ease the effects of an expected recession. While many island residents depend on tourism for their livelihoods, they have also taken comfort in their isolation during the pandemic and worry about opening up to outsiders. “So far things have gone well. … Now with the people who will come, what will happen?” asked Katerina Vikeli, a resident of the island of Milos. According to Greek Health Ministry, the entire Cyclades island chain, which includes Milos as well as the popular holiday destinations of Paros, Naxos, Mykonos and Santorini, accounts for only four of the country’s total reported cases. Only three of Greece’s virus deaths took place on inhabited islands, of which there are more than 200. To prevent a surge in infections, ferries are running with reduced capacity. Hospitals on the Greek islands are receiving resources to create intensive care units. Many smaller islands with only basic medical facilities are being helped by local aid groups like Symplefsi, which supplied volunteers and inflatable dinghies to help doctors from a state-run health agency perform virus tests on remote islands such as Sikinos. The islands is 18 miles northwest of Santorini and has a population of 260. “Our goal is to make the residents feel safer (with) faster intervention when needed for residents or tourists,” National Public Health Organization President Panagiotis Arkoumaneas said while joining the island test initiative. “That’s why we are strengthening our islands, we are strengthening our ability. We have to perform COVID testing,” he said. ___ Derek Gatopoulos and Theodora Tongas contributed from Athens.

Heading to JFK for my May 20 flight home to Seattle, I prepared myself for the worst. I drenched my palms in hand sanitizer, strapped on a KN95 mask and had an army of Clorox wipes in my purse at the ready. I even vowed to skip my traditional Bloody Mary at the terminal to avoid the risk of contracting germs — a previously inconceivable thought to me. But instead of the miserable toxic wasteland that I envisioned, I was greeted by a very different reality. Streets that were normally backed up with bumper-to-bumper traffic were nearly empty as my dad and I approached Terminal 8 by car. Inside the airport was no different. The check-in line for Alaska Air — usually packed with dozens of people — had only seven passengers. And everyone was respectful about maintaining at least 6 feet of social distance, a courtesy barely observed at my local grocery store in Bushwick, Brooklyn. “The security line has to be worse,” I told myself. Wrong. It was even more pleasant. I waited all of three minutes before reaching the noticeably jovial TSA agent who joked with each flyer, an abrupt departure from the disdain I was used to. At the gate, I got to choose my own empty row to settle into before boarding. I did get a little nervous as we filed into the plane, but my anxiety was quelled when I realized there were no passengers in the middle seats. I even enjoyed sleeping with my mask on since I could unabashedly let my jaw hang agape without anyone noticing. While I kept waiting for the monster from “The Twilight Zone” to hop onto the wing and ruin my perfect trip, I had no such misfortune. The biggest foul of the day? The $5 SmartWater I was forced to buy. After what felt like a click of my ruby slippers, we were already landing in the Emerald City. Did I get the coronavirus? I hope not. But I do know one thing for certain: Out of the dozens of flights I have taken around the world, this was easily the best experience I’ve ever had. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t condone flying during a pandemic. The only reason I did is because my mom is very sick and needs my help. But if you have to fly, don’t worry — you’ll enjoy the lack of turbulence.

As lonely, stir-crazy Americans wait for a coronavirus vaccine to materialize in the distant future, some might be wondering if it’s safe to hang out with friends or rope extra family members into their quarantine bunker. The answer, experts say, will depend on where they live, the precautions they take, and the level of risk each party is willing and able to take on. “Expand gradually, cautiously at first. As we gain more experience, we can adjust our behavior. Initially, small groups of friends and family, people we trust,” Stephen Morse, a professor of epidemiology at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health, told MarketWatch in an email. “The decision has to be on an individual basis, as everyone differs in their risk tolerance and personal history.” Morse added, “Unfortunately, we don’t have meaningful tests that could tell individuals who’s ‘safe,’ as the tests are still evolving and we’re still learning how to interpret the results. Some people may have recovered from COVID-19 already, and probably can expand their circles more.” As many states begin reopening parts of their economy after weeks of COVID-19-induced shutdowns, surveys suggest that Americans — despite their broad support for stay-at-home orders — are starting to venture outside their immediate bubbles. The share of Americans who say they’ve been avoiding small gatherings declined from 84% on April 12 to 63% on May 17, according to Gallup polling. Some 55% now say they’re “completely” or “mostly” isolating themselves from non-household members, a number that has steadily slid from a high of 75% during the week of March 30 to April 5. Julia Marcus, a professor of population medicine at Harvard Medical School, highlighted the mental-health toll, economic damage and “quarantine fatigue” that mass shutdowns have caused in a recent piece for The Atlantic magazine — suggesting that a harm-reduction approach, which acknowledges that people will take risks and provides support to help them mitigate the fallout, could be an effective strategy. Public-health professionals and policymakers could “help the public differentiate between lower-risk and higher-risk activities” and provide a roadmap for “how to have a life in a pandemic,” Marcus wrote. Such an approach would be more sustainable in the long run than shaming people into “100% risk reduction,” she said, drawing a parallel to abstinence-only sex education. “Everyone is just not going to be able — either mentally, or logistically with jobs — to just stay at home and avoid everything,” Tara Smith, a professor of epidemiology at Kent State University, told MarketWatch. “That’s the only way this is going to work moving forward.” So what activities are OK to engage in? Is it safe to meet up with friends, ask the neighbor to watch your kid, or consolidate households with another family? Public-health experts spoke to MarketWatch about some basic best practices: Keep an eye on COVID-19 transmission and public-health guidelines where you live “It’s really important for people to know what’s happening in their communities,” said Amanda Castel, a professor of epidemiology at George Washington University. Are cases in your area trending up or down? Is your city or town currently a hot spot? Is testing available? Weigh all of these factors in your decision, Castel said, and abide by your state and local health departments’ guidance. Danielle Ompad, an associate professor of epidemiology at the NYU School of Global Public Health, said she hadn’t seen friends in person since New York City shut down in March. “I live in an epicenter, and we know that neighborhoods like the one I live in, where there’s quite a bit of economic disadvantage and predominantly communities of color, have been really devastated by this disease,” she told MarketWatch. “The last thing I need to do is contribute to that.” Wear a mask and practice social distancing while hanging out with friends
“Even if you’re going to meet up with friends, you still need to socially distance and use masks until we’re basically told otherwise by Anthony Fauci or another person who has the scientific authority and gravitas to make those types of decisions,” Ompad said. Castel agreed. “[If] you don’t live with that individual, I would still be practicing social distancing with them and I would still be wearing a mask around them,” she said. “Masks and social distancing are now going to be foundational to how we operate when we’re out in the world and in society.” Outdoor hangouts are better than indoor ones Experts agree it’s better to interact with non-household members outdoors rather than indoors, as research indicates that it’s far more difficult to transmit COVID-19 in outdoor settings. “We’ve seen multiple studies where people in indoor environments, in workplaces as well as in dining settings, end up being infected because of air circulation and lack of adequate ventilation,” Castel said. Outdoor meet-ups are not without risk, Smith said, especially if you’ll be in contact with someone for hours at a time — but they do seem to be less risky than doing the same activity indoors. Besides, your mental health will benefit from your getting outside for some air, Castel added. Activities that don’t involve food or drink are best You can’t properly wear a mask while you’re eating or drinking, pointed out Emily Landon, the medical director for infection prevention and control at University of Chicago Medicine. She recommended finding an alternative activity, such as a lawn-games tournament that allows everyone to wear masks, run around and maintain physical distance. If you do choose to eat with friends, get together in an outdoor space that will allow for social distancing (like a backyard) and wear masks as much as possible, Castel said. “Have people bring their own food and utensils, so that you minimize the risk of sharing contacts and surfaces but you’re still able to see each other and have that sense of community,” she said. “If you get to the park and see it’s overcrowded with no way to socially distance, then you may have to reconsider.” Choose your contacts wisely The size of a person’s existing social circle, as well as their potential exposure from working outside the home, should figure into your decision, Smith said. Choose people whom you trust to be honest about their potential exposures to the virus. “Remember that once you introduce them into your network, you’re basically sharing your network and their entire network amongst your groups,” she said. Consider people’s ages and underlying health conditions, Castel added. “Are the family members that you want to interact with those that are at higher risk for a COVID infection?” she said. “If so, maybe you need to consider an alternative way to connect with them that might be safer.” Take into account where people are traveling from — do they live in a high-transmission area? — as well as how well they’ve been practicing social distancing, Castel said. It also matters what mode(s) of transportation people are taking in order to meet up, Ompad said: “If your buddy is negotiating the rest of the world in order to come and see you, then they are potentially going to be exposed,” she said. Keep any gatherings small, Castel said, and tell people that if they or someone in their household isn’t feeling well, they should stay home. If you want to expand your ‘quarantine family,’ understand the risks Not every public-health professional is on board with the idea of merging quarantine households. Ompad, for her part, said that such a decision would depend on each household member’s potential exposure to the virus. “To the extent that you don’t have to do that, it’s probably a better idea not to,” she said. But some families juggling work, child-care and/or homeschooling responsibilities might find it helpful to have an extra set of hands during this time, Landon said. She and her son have such an arrangement with the family of four that lives across the hall, with whom they’ve been close for years. (Landon isn’t currently exposed to COVID-19 patients.) “Teaming up with another family is not a bad idea, and it can be done safely and carefully in order to ameliorate some of those issues,” she said. “You’ve got to acknowledge that there’s a risk, but it may be a solution to a problem that’s been plaguing people.” If you do commit to being around another family or individual without taking social-distancing or masking precautions, all parties need to be vigilant about their interactions with everybody else, Landon said. You might choose a person or family with whom your household will now interact regularly — maybe cousins who visit weekly, or your best friend and her kids — but otherwise maintain your quarantine. That way, if someone were to get sick, the infection wouldn’t spread beyond your slightly widened circle. “Everybody’s entitled, as the situation is improving, to have a few more contacts — we don’t have to stay locked up forever,” Landon said. “Either have careful, casual contacts where you’re wearing a mask and keeping a distance, or absorb someone into your family so that you have a group where you’re basically all like household members — so if someone gets sick, transmission will stop with your household members.” Try to minimize your casual contacts with others, she added. Some people might want to get tested and/or self-quarantine for two weeks before joining someone else’s bubble. Discuss in advance what you’ll do if someone in the group develops COVID-19 symptoms, Landon said; it’s particularly important in this situation that everyone understands and agrees to the risks involved. “If you don’t want to take on all of that person’s risk onto yourself,” Landon said, “then you need to wear a mask and keep your distance.”

The majority of small businesses in the U.S. are optimistic about reopening amid the coronavirus pandemic, a new study says. Nearly three-quarters of businesses (74 percent) expect to return to business as usual within six months of coronavirus restrictions being lifted, the Connected Commerce Council (3C) said Wednesday. “This report shows that in the face of the COVID-19 global pandemic and economic crisis, digitally empowered small businesses are weathering the storm and optimistic about the future,” said Jake Ward, president of 3C, a non-profit membership organization. “Small businesses drive the American economy, and they will drive the American recovery.” The study was based on a survey by LRWGreenberg, a research & strategy consultancy in California. The company surveyed 502 small business owners in the U.S. from May 6-18. The businesses were based in various sectors including: education and food services, retail trade, arts, entertainment, and recreation, and more. The coronavirus and subsequent stay-at-home orders have placed a tremendous strain on small businesses, in what’s been described as one of the worst business climates in history. The swift and cruel nature of the virus and response to it blindsided many businesses and put the future of many more in jeopardy. It’s also left nearly 40 million Americans without a job since March. The survey found small businesses that adapted to using digital technology have been able to survive in the face of the outbreak, which has led them to be optimistic about reopening the economy. Examples of using digital tools include selling their products online on places like Amazon, using online marketing channels such as Instagram and YouTube, or continuing to build relationships by using Salesforce and Constant Contact. Charlie Meyer, owner of the Spice House in Evanston, Ill., said his company implemented communications tools such as Slack and Zoom, which helped his business survive and stay connected during the pandemic, according to the study. Nearly one-third of owners said they would have been forced to close all or parts of their business during the crisis without using online tools. and roughly 50 percent of businesses said they would have been negatively impacted if they didn’t use them. While digital technology has been beneficial as helping many small businesses, others that require in-person sales to survive — like restaurants — face a much more challenging road ahead until shutdowns are finally ended. An overhaul of small business aid will be the next thing Congress focuses on in hopes of helping employers reopen shops and survive the coronavirus pandemic. Fox Business’s Ken Martin contributed to this report.

Ford is ready to bring the heat to the coronavirus fight. The automaker has developed a software update for some of its Explorer-based Police Interceptor Utility patrol vehicles that allows them to use the climate control system to raise the cabin temperature to 133 degrees for 15 minutes to help kill any coronavirus inside. Research conducted in conjunction with The Ohio State University found that the cycle could reduce concentrations of the virus present by up to 99 percent. The software is compatible with the 2013-2019 models of the SUV. Depending on the year, the feature is engaged either with a smartphone app or by manually inputting a code using the cruise controls buttons on the steering wheel then exiting the vehicle. External lights and messages on the instrument cluster indicate when it is in operation, and the cabin is returned to a safe temperature after the heating session is complete. Ford has already field-tested the feature with several police departments, including the NYPD and LAPD, and is now making it available across the country. It is also looking to develop the software for its other law enforcement vehicles but is not currently planning to offer it on any consumer models. Ford Ford Ford Ford View Slideshow

The crackdown didn’t even last a day! Just hours after City Hall sent in the Sheriff’s Office, at least four Borough Park stores exposed by The Post for operating in violation of emergency coronavirus orders were back open — and, again, packed with maskless customers. “Maybe it’s illegal to open it, but you have to understand, these stores are living things,” said Chaim Fogel, who stood outside of Tip Top, a crowded clothing store on 13th Avenue. “The economy is a living thing. If you see you’re going to die if you don’t do something, you do it, because what’s the alternative?” Fogel conceded the shop needed to do a better job of managing the crowds and forcing people to wear masks. The shop was one of at least four a reporter spotted Wednesday afternoon doing brisk business while staff and most customers failed to take protective measures, like maintaining social distancing and wearing masks. The roster of open 13th Avenue storefronts also included party supply retailer ‘Party Shop,’ kids clothier ‘Pastel’ and womenswear shop ‘Miller’s Family Wear.’ Nor did the crackdown on businesses appear to deter large groups from gathering on the avenue or encourage those out to wear masks, which remained virtually unseen when The Post returned to the street after the crackdown. Only one shop identified in the initial story, Toys4U, appeared to have heeded the knuckle rap from officials and sharply limited access to customers. The toy store has remained open during the pandemic by getting into the bike repair business, one of the categories of work deemed essential by Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s executive order. “We’re a bike shop. A bike shop is allowed to be open. We’re not looking for a fight with the city,” owner Joseph Itzkowitz said Wednesday. “At least let us be open. We have to make a living.” That’s a different tack for the retailer, which Post reporters spotted packed with customers buying toys and other non-essential goods on Monday and Tuesday. City, state and federal health officials say that observing social distancing measures and wearing masks is essential to slow the spread of the coronavirus, which has killed more than 21,000 people in New York City alone. Borough Park has been hit particularly hard. City Health Department data shows that more than 200 people who live in the 11219 zip code have died from the pandemic and the area is suffering from one of the highest rates of COVID-19 cases in Brooklyn. Outraged city officials promised they would be back to shut the businesses down again when The Post contacted them about the reopenings. “This behavior is absolutely unacceptable and we will be taking further enforcement action,” said City Hall spokeswoman Olivia Lapeyrolerie.

Drive-in entertainment is having a moment. The Bel Aire Diner, which has recently experienced wild success with its drive-in movies, is not only reviving the retro film-watching format, but applying it to live comedy shows. Less than a month after kicking off its drive-in series with a screening of “Grease,” the Astoria eatery hosted a stand-up show in its adjacent parking lot Tuesday. “Bel Aire was laughing out loud today when the comics came to town,” the family-owned diner posted following the event. “Such a fun and interesting evening out.” For the comedy drive-in, a lineup of comedians with credentials including “The Late Show with Stephen Colbert,” Comedy Central and Netflix’s “The Degenerates” stood in the bed of a pickup and delivered their lines to a lot of some 45 socially distanced cars. Audience members paid $32 a car to attend. “This is like a Zoom show except there’s no delay on the laughter. There’s just no laughter,” one performer joked. The audience instead expressed their approval by honking, shouting and slapping the roofs of their cars. “It’s great to be back on stage” one comedian commented of the experience, adding that the new pandemic performance format would still take some getting used to. For their sets, comedians leaned into the coronavirus theme. “Face masks, I like it, everybody staying safe. If you have one in your car, please take it off,” joked a performer, to honking. “You don’t [have to wear one], in your car, unless you don’t trust the person you came with, and then, we got problems people.” The diner has been blown away by the response to their events, which sell out within seconds of making tickets available. “We’re like The Beatles now,” the Bel Aire’s manager, Kal Dellaportas, tells The Post. “I can’t imagine that after social-distancing guidelines are relaxed, it continues to be a thing.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo insisted he had a “good conversation” with President Trump during their Wednesday White House meeting on New York’s infrastructure — but sure didn’t seem in any rush to talk about it. After emerging from the sit-down, Cuomo held a press briefing in which he went the first half-hour recycling go-to talking points with nary a mention of the meeting with the commander in chief. Only when prodded by reporters at the National Press Club in Washington, DC, did Cuomo cough up a few details about the huddle, which he said was focused on ramping up infrastructure projects in New York, both for their own sake and to revitalize the state’s coronavirus-hobbled economy. “It was not about politics,” Cuomo said. “It was about, how do we supercharge the reopening, especially in New York, which has been harder hit.” Among the projects Cuomo highlighted were the revitalization and expansion of the Hudson River Amtrak tunnels, the overhaul of the AirTrain at LaGuardia Airport and the next phase of the Second Avenue subway. “It was a good conversation,” said Cuomo. “I think the president also acknowledges and realizes that in New York we’re very aggressive about getting these projects done and getting them done on time. “I have a shovel in the trunk of my car, we’ll start this afternoon.” Despite his eagerness, Cuomo said that he kept his wish list short to avoid overwhelming the president. “I didn’t want to give him too long a list. I didn’t want to seem too aggressive,” he said. “I didn’t want to seem like … a quintessential New Yorker.” One thing Cuomo said didn’t come up during the meeting was his attempt to pin responsibility on Trump for a widely criticized policy prohibiting nursing homes from turning away coronavirus-positive patients. The governor said that his telling critics earlier this month to “ask President Trump” about the mandate was just meant to highlight what he claims is the partisan nature of the criticism, and attacked The Post for reporting on the firestorm issue. AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images View Slideshow While in Washington, Cuomo took the time to renew his call for lawmakers to provide sorely needed funding for state and local governments during the next round of financial relief talks, specifically calling out Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.). As he did earlier in the pandemic, Cuomo decried the “ugly” partisan stance that aid for hard-hit states including New York are “blue-state bailouts.” “Do you really want to cut schools now? Do you really want to cut hospitals now?” asked Cuomo, referring to what he has warned the fallout will include if New York doesn’t get the aid it needs. Cuomo also offered an update on the coronavirus fight back home, where metrics continue to move in the right direction, if at an agonizingly slow pace. Total hospitalizations and the three-day rolling average of new hospital admissions both continued to decline — the latter to 181, the lowest figure since the pandemic’s onset in late March. However, another 74 New Yorkers died in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Wednesday, holding steady after 73 were lost in the period prior and raising the overall number of confirmed deaths to 23,643. “Only in this time of crisis would 74 deaths be anything less than truly tragic news,” said Cuomo. “But when you’ve gone through what we have gone through, it’s a sign that we are headed in the right direction.”

The Wuhan wet market believed to be the origin of the coronavirus pandemic has been unfairly made into a scapegoat for the pandemic, China’s top health official claimed. “At first, we assumed the seafood market might have the virus, but now the market is more like a victim,” George Gao Fu, who is director of Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention, told the state-owned Global Times. Gao suggested that the bug had been circulating for a while before the outbreak, saying samples collected from animals in the market in early January showed no traces of the virus. “The novel coronavirus had existed long before,” Gao said. He said more time is necessary before researchers can come to any conclusions about the source of the outbreak. “The novel coronavirus overturns much of what people have known and many of its patterns are beyond our cognition,” he said. The city’s Huanan Seafood Market has been identified as the site where the first human may have contracted the virus that has now killed more than 350,000 people worldwide. China has resisted calls to allow outside health officials investigate the source of the outbreak, only recently coming around to the idea of an inquiry focused solely on “global response” in fighting COVID-19.

Chinese scientists say the coronavirus didn’t originate at a live animal market or a laboratory in Wuhan, pushing back against US officials over where the pandemic began, according to a report. China’s top epidemiologist, Gao Fu, said samples taken from the wholesale market — where the deadly virus was reportedly first passed to humans — failed to show links between animals sold there and the pathogen, according to the Wall Street Journal. “It now turns out that the market is one of the victims,” Gao told state-run media Tuesday. The director of the Wuhan Institute of Virology, Wang Yanyi, also shot down accusations that the facility had unleashed the virus during a lab accident. There’s no way it could have leaked from the laboratory because researchers have not studied pathogens similar enough to the coronavirus, he told the state-run China Central Television. While both officials said they’d ruled out the sites as a possible ground zero, their comments didn’t address important issues such as widespread evidence that China initially covered up the severity of the outbreak. The question of where the coronavirus began has been hotly disputed among Chinese and US officials in recent months, with President Trump dubbing it the “Chinese Virus” and blaming the country for failing to halt its spread. Chinese officials have pointed fingers at the US, with one government spokesman saying the US Army is responsible for the outbreak. As of Wednesday, more than 5.5 million people had been infected with the coronavirus globally, and the death toll had topped 350,000.

Megabus will resume its budget bus service between New York City and Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington, D.C. next week, the company announced. Even as the Big Apple remains on coronavirus lockdown, inter-city buses will run on “limited schedules” beginning June 1, the company said in an email to customers Tuesday. The email insisted Megabus is “reopening responsibly” after canceling all service in and out of the city in March. Megabus is requiring passengers to wear masks, according to its website, and says it will limit bus capacity to allow for social distancing. Tickets are currently available just for two trips per day between New York City and D.C. in each direction. On Wednesday, Trailways of New York, which provides inter-city service across the state, also said it would resume service on June 1. Trailways buses have been off the road since April. Other NYC to D.C. bus services in and out of New York remain out of commission due to coronavirus, including Bolt Bus and Vamoose. The latter plans to resume service June 18. Greyhound has continued to operate through the pandemic.

The US arm of Le Pain Quotidien, an upscale bakery chain known for its chocolate-filled pastries, on Wednesday filed for bankruptcy protection, a victim of coronavirus lockdowns that have idled stores. The company, however, hopes to stave off liquidation via a $3 million sale to Aurify Brands LLC. The deal would allow for 35 of the 98 Le Pain Quotidien locations to reopen – possibly with employees originally laid off in the closures of stores. Le Pain Quotidien, which offers such lunch dishes as avocado toast in addition to baked goods, began faltering before the coronavirus crisis because of undercapitalization and increased competition. The US division reported a nearly $17 million loss on $153 million in sales last year.

First he blamed nursing homes, then he blamed President Trump — and now Gov. Andrew Cuomo is attacking The Post for shining light on his widely panned state policy barring nursing homes from turning away coronavirus-positive patients, which may have fueled more than 5,000 deaths in the facilities. “There are columnists who made this point at The Post who are 100 percent supportive of Donald Trump and that’s fine — but then believe, you know, we have to kill all Democrats,” Cuomo told reporters in Washington, DC, when asked whether the mandate came up during his meeting with the president about an hour earlier. “I get it, I understand it,” Cuomo said from the National Press Club. “They’re open in their support of the Trump administration, and I guess their attitude is to be pro-Donald Trump, you have to be anti-Democrat, which I don’t really understand.” Cuomo has been under bipartisan fire for his Health Department’s March 25 mandate prohibiting nursing homes from turning away those who have tested positive for the bug, despite repeatedly acknowledging that the facilities’ elderly populations are among the most vulnerable. In announcing a probe by the state attorney general’s office not of his policy but of nursing homes, Cuomo has maintained that the facilities always had not just a right but a responsibility to seek alternate arrangements for patients they were unable to care for. And earlier this month, Cuomo said critics could “ask President Trump” about the policy enacted by his Health Commissioner Howard Zucker, arguing that it was originally crafted by the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and that the state was simply following that agency’s lead. He did not mention that the CDC guidance was just that, while the state order bound the nursing homes under law. All the while, Cuomo has publicly clung to the policy, despite well over 5,000 confirmed or suspected coronavirus deaths in state nursing homes, though he curbed it earlier this month, under withering criticism, by mandating that hospital patients must be coronavirus-free before they can be discharged to nursing homes. He denied Wednesday that he was trying to pin the blame on the president. “I never did that,” he told reporters Wednesday, despite previously having said, “Anyone who wants to ask, ‘Why did the state do that with COVID patients in nursing homes,’ it’s because the state followed President Trump’s CDC guidance.” “I said, ‘They want to play politics with this.’ There are Republicans who are trying to make political hay out of this, in my opinion,” Cuomo maintained. “What I said to the Republicans who are making this accusation [is] you have to find an accusation, for it to work politically, that you can make against the Democrat that is not a boomerang and comes back and affects the Republicans.” Criticism from lawmakers in Cuomo’s home state, however, has been firmly bipartisan, with Democratic and Republican pols alike calling for probes of what role the March 25 mandate had in the staggering death toll. “I never blamed him for anything,” he continued about the president, adding, “The context to what I said was, I said it to a Post reporter.” Cuomo said the issue did not come up during his White House meeting with Trump, instead insisting that it was a “good conversation” largely focused on infrastructure projects in New York.

The Long Island mom who gave birth while in a coronavirus-induced coma finally got to take her baby home Wednesday. Mom Adriana Torres left NYU Winthrop Hospital in Mineola clutching 7-week-old Leah Robledo Torres, who weighed in at just 5 pounds. “The truth is I feel very happy and very fortunate for the great work of the doctors and nurses here,” Torres said through an interpreter. “It is because of them that we are able to go home with my baby today, and I thank God.” Torres was six months pregnant when she was rushed to the Mineola hospital on April 5 with several COVID-19 symptoms. With her conditioning worsening, doctors decided to sedate her and place her in a medically induced coma. Doctors then made “a very difficult decision” to deliver the baby prematurely. Baby Leah was born at 29 weeks on April 8, weighing just 2 pounds and 15 ounces. Miraculously, Torres began to recover and emerged from her coma on April 10 — her 41st birthday. Dr. Nazeeh Hanna, chief of neonatology at NYU Winthrop, said Wednesday that the delivery came at the height of the hospital’s COVID-19 crisis — and was hardly routine. “They told us the likelihood of survival was very low,” Hanna said. “We were very worried about the baby.” Dennis A. Clark Dennis A. Clark Dennis A. Clark View Slideshow He said Torres was in an adult intensive-care unit in a separate building from the neonatal unit, and doctors determined it would take 7 minutes to get the baby from one building to the next — a potentially fatal time frame after a premature delivery. “So, we had to set up an intensive care bed in the hallway of the adult ICU,” Hanna said. “So this is basically what we dealt with that day and it was very difficult,” he said. “If someone told me a few months ago that we would have a baby here in this way … I would have said that this was science fiction, and a bad one too. But it really happened.” Torres wasn’t the only one elated to be taking Leah home — her 22-year-old daughter, Michelle, was in tears as she held her baby sister.

A rare whale with long, spiked teeth washed up on a southern California beach. According to Jim Serpa, a former Doheny State Beach supervisor who lives in San Clemente, Calif., the photographs he was sent of the nearly 9-foot-long fierce-looking creature confirmed his hunch — that it was a pygmy sperm whale. “When I saw the big bulbous head, the tiny dorsal fin way back on its back and the dagger teeth, I knew exactly what it was. It also had an odd blowhole that’s farther up than any other whale and slightly off-center,” Serpa told The Orange County Register. “As I walked up to it, I knew my ID from the first photos was correct.” Serpa had never seen a live pygmy sperm whale before this one was discovered by a lifeguard on May 15 at San Onofre State Beach in San Diego County, Calif. These whales tend to eat squid and use their long, pointy teeth to keep them captured as they devour them. Pygmy sperm whales, which typically have between 20 and 32 teeth, are most endangered by entanglements from fishing lines. “Scientists say the Pacific is super warm right now, so maybe it just came up here in a warm patch,” Serpa told the newspaper. “Or, maybe they are here more than we know, and we don’t see them because they shy away from us.” The carcass was marked with what Serpa first theorized coud have been a bullet hole. Officials from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration want to take a closer look at the rare beast. “This is a deep-diving species, and these small sharks commonly bite them and the resulting wound is a perfect circular wound that we get misidentified all the time,” Justin Viezbicke, marine mammal stranding coordinator, told The OCR. “This species is deep diving and the chances it came across someone with a gun is much lower than that of it being a shark bite.”

You might have a new excuse to keep your distance from your coworkers. When Americans return to work, they’ll likely be tasked with staying away from each other while performing their everyday duties. Because as companies reopen, it appears that workplace distancing will become a reality to stem the further spread of the novel coronavirus. Some workers may even be asked (or required) to wear monitoring bracelets or badges to track employees. Several different companies have announced products intended to help employees maintain a proper distance from one another, The Intercept reports. These devices include bracelets that can be worn around the wrist or badges which can be worn around the neck. Companies like AiRISTA and Redpoint are looking to utilize Bluetooth, WiFi and radio signals in products designed to help companies monitor employees’ exact locations. In concept, the employees would wear these devices, and whenever they got too close to another employee, the device would issue some sort of notice. Depending on the settings, the device might sound a warning, for example. These devices could be used to keep a log of each instance and even to track employee interactions. Some hospitals already use devices that utilize RFID chips to monitor employees’ movements, according to Slate. These devices can also be placed on door handles, sinks and soap dispensers, to recognize when an RFID-enabled lanyard is nearby, thereby tracking which employees are washing their hands properly. These hospitals, too, can reportedly monitor which workers are interacting with specific objects and keep a log of behaviors. Redpoint, meanwhile, said in a recent press release that companies in China are already utilizing its technology to help enforce social-distancing measures. “When we saw our solution helping our clients in China, we wanted to make it available to the rest of the world,” said Chunjie Duan, CEO and co-founder of Redpoint, in a press release. “We can use our technology to help.”

There is good news and better news for the Islanders. A day after the NHL announced its plan to return with a 24-team playoff format, general manager and president Lou Lamoriello said on a conference call everyone on the roster is healthy — including top defenseman Adam Pelech — and construction on the team’s new Belmont arena has resumed.  It was a mostly optimistic 30-minute call in which Lamoriello expressed confidence in the plan set forth by NHL commissioner Gary Bettman — the seventh-seeded Islanders would face the No. 10 Panthers in a best-of-five qualifying series — and expressed his belief that the league and players’ association are doing all they can to give fans a full postseason in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic. “In my opinion, the league and the union have done a tremendous job in coming up with the best possible scenario they could to satisfy all the individual situations of each team, barring none,” Lamoriello said. “Everyone had input. Everyone had an opportunity to express their concerns on either side. “I’m totally supportive of what the results were and just excited we have a template to get back, certainly knowing there are a lot of details that have to be worked out. Until that’s done, we won’t have a full picture of everything. But we’re proceeding and looking forward to getting started and playing.” Lamoriello said certain Islanders players are in the process of getting back to the area, but he declined to disclose how many of them remained local. Limited workouts can begin, possibly in early June as part of the league’s Phase 2 reopening. Lamoriello said he is comfortable and confident with the plan in place, though there could be bumps along the way due to the ever-changing nature of the virus. “There are certain things that are step-by-step, but everything is pointing in the right direction,” he said. “I’m comfortable today because of the state of where we are in our country and our area, and the progression that its made with the distancing, the masks, the discipline the majority of our country has had. I just hope we continue to stay on that path.” There are details left to be resolved, including the length of the first two playoff series, which two hub cities will host the games, numerous health and safety issues, and the dates of the contests. Once play can be resumed, the Islanders are expecting to be at full strength, a significant development for a team that struggled prior to the season’s postponement on March 12, going 0-3-4 down the stretch. Getting back Pelech — out since Jan. 2 with an injured Achilles tendon — would be a major boost, as would the return of center Casey Cizikas (leg laceration) and defenseman Johnny Boychuk (eye laceration). “Certainly, [Pelech] is a valuable piece to our team,” Lamoriello said. “He’s physical healthy, he feels good. He’s ready to play.” “We will have every player available to us,” he added. “Everybody should be healthy to go and physically able to do so.” As for the Belmont arena, Lamoriello said construction resumed Wednesday and the expectation is it is still on target to open in October 2021 as originally planned. Construction was halted March 27 due to the coronavirus. “It’s a great sight that’s happening and the most comfortable feeling is we were ahead of schedule when this all took place and I do not think and believe there will be any hiccups or delays of when we’re supposed to be open,” he said. “And that’s great news.”

There’s no place like home, so it all should be just right. One Oregon family is dazed that a public vote for the new paint color of their house went viral on social media, with more than 2,000 entries from over 20 countries pouring in overnight. The Landreth family of Portland recently combined a home improvement project with a learning moment for middle schooler Grace, who was tasked with completing a school project about documenting data, KOIN reports. To bring the lesson to life, the family painted five colors on the side of their house and created a QR code for passersby to scan with their smartphones, leading to a Google Doc to vote for a favorite choice for the fresh paint. The poll exploded in popularity when neighbor Michal Naka tweeted out a photo of the project on Monday, which has since gone viral with nearly 13,000 likes and 6,300 shares. “We went to bed last night and had about 60 people walking by and we’re like, ’60, that’s crazy!’” Brian Landreth, Grace’s father, told KOIN on May 25. “Currently, there’s more than 2,000 entries.” Now, through the magic of the Internet, the dad and daughter say they’ve received responses from over 20 countries around the world. Participants can rank five shades: a muted “Rocky Mountain” brown, “Wild Orchid” purple,” an “In Good Taste” slate blue,” the turquoise “Blessed Blue,” and “It’s Well” sky blue. “Please help us decide by ranking the following colors for our house,” the survey says of the numeric grading scale. “1 being amazing and 5 being ‘I seriously can’t look at that color every day.’” While Twitter commenters seem partial to the turquoise blue hue, you can vote for your favorite choice here while the poll remains open.

To-go alcohol might not be going anywhere. When bars and restaurants were forced to close their dining rooms due to the coronavirus pandemic, several states and cities adjusted the rules to allow these businesses to sell alcoholic drinks to go, or for delivery. And as it turns out, the concept of being able to order alcohol directly to your house is a somewhat popular idea. In fact, it’s possible that in Washington, DC, this change becomes permanent. A provision included in Mayor Muriel Bowser’s latest proposed budget would permanently allow for these deliveries, Fox 5 DC reports. This move is designed to help businesses that have been hit hard by the lockdown, according to officials. “These businesses, in order for them to have a lifeline, they’ve got to kind of pivot and adapt and find new ways to bring in revenue,” John Falcicchio, acting deputy mayor for planning and economic development, told the outlet. “So this is just one way they can do that.” “We know our businesses are really stressed about how they’re going to recover and so one of the aspects of their recovery is how they operate in a new normal,” he continued. The provision is scheduled to be reviewed by the DC Council next month. According to Falcicchio, 775 businesses have already been approved to take part in the program. The owner of one local DC establishment, Beuchert’s Saloon on Capitol Hill, spoke with Fox 5 about the possible provision, saying that during the pandemic the restaurant saw a drop in sales of about 50 percent. Without alcohol to go, he believes the drop could have been much bigger. “It’s a great way to help us survive and help us pivot into this new unknown territory about what restaurants are going to look like and what we’re going to continue moving forward,” said Beuchert’s owner Andrew Markert.

The defiant New Jersey gym that was repeatedly shuttered for violating the state’s coronavirus lockdown is suing the state in federal court. The owners of Atilis Gym in Bellmawr charged that Gov. Phil Murphy, state Attorney General Gurbir Grewal and other New Jersey officials violated their constitutional rights by forcing them to close up shop for three months, putting their business on the verge of collapse. “If allowed to stand, now 67 days after the first executive order and over 40 million Americans unemployed, defendants’ orders will not only continue to violate plaintiff’s rights under both the US Constitution and New Jersey Constitution but will continue to inflict massive and widespread economic damage to plaintiff,” according to the lawsuit, filed Monday. Atilis Gym owners Ian Smith and Frank Trumbetti defied Murphy’s order last week and opened their doors for a limited number of clients — with social distancing and other measures to guard against the spread of COVID-19. State inspectors cited the gym for violating the order, but the owners continued to open for business. On Saturday, state health officials shut the gym and changed the locks on the door, Atilis attorney James Mermigis said. “This is a disaster, and everybody needs to open up their business,” Mermigis told The Post on Wednesday. “We need to get this country going again because if we don’t get it anytime soon, we’re gonna reach a point of no return. And I commend these gym owners for taking a stance against Gov. Murphy and saying enough is enough.” “We can’t be treated like children, like babies told, ‘Go to your room and stay in your room and don’t come out until I tell you to come out,'” he added. “People come to American for freedom, not to be told to shut down your shop and go into your room.” Mermigis said Atilis was operating at 20 percent capacity as it is, and Smith and Trumbetti just want to stay afloat until the lockdown is lifted. According to the lawsuit, the gym claims the state’s decision to classify it is a “non-essential” business was “manifestly irrational and arbitrary.” They’re asking the state to lift the lockdown order and to compensate them for any incurred costs and attorney’s fees. A spokesperson for Murphy’s office said Wednesday the state does not comment on pending litigation.

New Zealand’s last hospitalized coronavirus patient was discharged Wednesday as the country’s infection rate dipped to below two dozen people, health officials said in reports. The unnamed patient left an Auckland area hospital as the Pacific island nation reported only 21 infected people remaining — and no new cases of the deadly illness in at least five days, according to CBS News. The low infection numbers will likely lead to lifted lockdown measures within weeks, according to officials, who are already allowing gatherings of up to 100 people. “The increase in gathering size means we now have some of the most permissive settings of any of the countries we compare ourselves to, including Australia,” Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern said at a press conference earlier this week. “Going hard and early [with lockdown measures] has paid off for the economy, and now we need to just continue the level of vigilance that has got us here,” she said, according to SBS News. She added, “We are still in a global pandemic. Cases continue to grow overseas, and we do still have people coming home, but for the most part, many aspects of life can and should feel much more normal.” New Zealand — which has been praised for its quick and decisive response to the pandemic — closed its borders on March 19 and implemented a strict stay-at-home order the same week. Overall, the number of new infections reported in the country has remained steady in recent weeks, with no new cases in the last five days and only three since May 11. The nation has also carried out 267,435 tests and has nearly another 200,000 more testing kits available, officials said. In total, the country has reported 1,504 infections and a death toll of 21, which has not increased since May 6.

No roof on MetLife Stadium did not stop the Super Bowl from coming to New Jersey in 2014. And now no roof on MetLife Stadium could be the reason fans can watch Giants and Jets games in person at some point in 2020 as New Jersey begins to reopen amidst flattening of the coronavirus pandemic. Gov. Phil Murphy did not rule out the possibility of fans returning to the stands Wednesday on WFAN’s “Moose and Maggie” midday radio program. He has been in contact with ownership of both franchises and NFL commissioner Roger Goodell. “I think it’s too early to tell,” Murphy said. “I think it’s a great aspiration. And outdoors is better than indoors with this virus. There’s no question about that. A ball game outside? Potentially.” Murphy decreed Tuesday the Giants can open their East Rutherford headquarters and the Jets can open their Florham Park headquarters. Professional sports are free to begin training in New Jersey – the NBA’s Philadelphia 76ers and MLS’ New York Red Bulls both practice across the border – in accordance with proper health protocols. The NFL is prohibiting coaches and non-injured players from returning to its facilities around the country in order to preserve competitive balance. A capped number of other team employees can return now where allowed by the government. NFL training camps begin in the final week of July, the Giants-Jets preseason-opening game is Aug. 13 and the regular-season opens Sept. 10. Does Murphy realistically see training camps starting on time? “Yes I can, actually,” he said. “This assumes the metrics [of COVID-19 cases] are continuing to go … in the right direction. God willing, we don’t have to pull the emergency brake.” As for Rutgers and the link between students returning to campus and a football season in the fall, Murphy said plans are “not there yet and that’s not any comment on Rutgers.” The Big Ten has a ban on all athletic activities through Monday. Murphy exchanged texts with Rutgers football coach Greg Schiano earlier Wednesday. “I don’t have guidance for you yet on Rutgers,” Murphy said, “other than they are a program on the move and they are going to be a football power in a very short amount of time. I can say that with confidence.”

Seventy-one Democrats asked colleagues to vote on their behalf when the House of Representatives holds its first-ever proxy floor vote — but Republicans bracing for possible votes Wednesday are vowing to overturn in court anything the majority party passes. “For more than 231 years, never have we seen a proxy vote on the floor of the House,” House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) told reporters Wednesday morning. “This challenges the Constitution, only to protect and empower a speaker.” Republicans argue the Constitution requires lawmakers to be present for votes and on Tuesday announced a lawsuit in the US District Court for the District of Columbia. Republicans said Wednesday they expect the Supreme Court ultimately to rule that proxy voting is unconstitutional. The Constitution sets a 50 percent attendance threshold for lawmakers to have a quorum allowing votes. Democrats allowed the proxy reform in a near-party-line vote this month, arguing the coronavirus pandemic puts lawmakers’ health at risk. The House may use proxy voting Wednesday, including in a possible vote on Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act legislation that Republicans are asking House Speaker Nancy Pelosi to pull after President Trump urged a “no” vote Tuesday night. “Whatever the Democrats move forward will probably never be held up to be law,” McCarthy warned. “We look at the history of America through yellow fever of 1793, the Civil War, the burning of this Capitol during the War of 1812, the Spanish Flu of 1918 and even 9/11 — Congress has never flinched from its constitutional duty to uphold and assemble inside this body,” McCarthy continued. House Minority Whip Steve Scalise (R-La.) noted that many states are reopening as COVID-19 cases decline, and lawmakers already “have been able to have votes on the House floor successfully and safely.” West Coast Democrats are well-represented among the 71 lawmakers who filed with the Clerk of the House to vote by proxy, in letters designating a colleague to vote for them. There are 26 California Democrats, three Oregon Democrats and three Democrats from Washington state. Four New York Democrats filed to vote by proxy: Reps. Nita Lowey, Carolyn Maloney, Jose Serrano and Paul Tonko. Pelosi (D-Calif.) denied during recent floor debates that proxy voting would centralize power to party leaders. Pelosi said, however, she understood the concern because House committee chairmen wielded great power when she was a younger congresswoman thanks to proxy votes, which were allowed in committee until the ’90s. At their morning press conference, Republicans offered different opinions on how to proceed with House business during the coronavirus pandemic. Third-ranking Republican Rep. Liz Cheney of Wyoming said she was open to some form of remote voting, which many other Republicans oppose. Pelosi and House Democrats say lawmakers would have to dutifully implement the wishes of peers who could not be present. But Republicans including McCarthy argue that motions and amendments may not allow time for consultation. “The founders believed we should assemble,” McCarthy said at the press conference. “If Democrats are successful in allowing a proxy vote to make their own rules, what stops them from making a rule that only certain people can vote, or certain members cannot have a full vote — a half vote? Nothing.”

Not even music royals are safe from mask harassment in Tennessee. Johnny Cash’s eldest daughter, Rosanne Cash, took to Twitter Tuesday to share her daughter’s story of being bullied for wearing the protective gear, which helps prevent the spread of the coronavirus, while out shopping. “My daughter lives in Nashville & wore her mask to buy groceries. Guy yells at her: ‘Liberal p—y!'” the 65-year-old singer-songwriter writes. She found the remark offensive not only because the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends wearing face coverings to prevent potentially-infected people from spreading the virus — but also because Cash’s daughter is high risk should she get it. “Back story: she nearly died of H1N1. She was in the ICU for a week, on a ventilator for 3 days. She CANNOT get covid,” Cash, a four-time Grammy winner, continues. “The ignorance & hatred is so painful. She’s trying to survive.” The tweet has racked up over 212,000 likes as well as a number of people accusing Cash of making up the story to prove a point. “It reveals a lot about you, that you think I would make up a story that used my daughter’s compromised health to make a point,” Cash rebuts, specifying that the grocery store where the incident took place was the “Green Hills Kroger.” Cash did not specify which of her four daughters, all with former husband and songwriter Rodney Crowell, she was referring to. The musician declined to comment to The Post when reached via a rep. Face masks have proved polarizing with Americans, with politicians both controversially forgoing them and branding them “cool.” While many New York City businesses now require masks to be worn to enter, one Kentucky convenience store told customers to take off their face masks or “go somewhere else” in what some deemed a “patriotic statement.” (The store later changed its message.) Following her viral tweet about her daughter’s ordeal, Cash published an essay in the Atlantic about how much she loves being quarantined and her feelings about not being able to tour right now. — Chuck Arnold contributed to this report.

New York City is now $9 billion in the red thanks to the coronavirus shutdown, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Wednesday as he once again begged for a federal bailout or help from the state. “There is literally no way we can solve this problem without federal help or without having to make very, very painful choices that will affect the quality of life in this city,” the mayor said at his daily coronavirus press briefing. He renewed his call on Albany to let the city borrow a maximum of $7 billion for up to 30 years though acknowledged the agreement — if passed — was far from ideal. “This week I asked the state of New York for help. That is borrowing authority, it’s not something we want to use or intend to use in the first instance but it’s something we need as a last resort,” de Blasio said. “No one wants to borrow. What we want is our federal government to step up.” State lawmakers returned to Albany Tuesday and are expected to vote on the matter this week. The mayor previously estimated that the city would lose $7.4 billion in tax revenue as a result of the months-long shutdown of businesses. Last month, he introduced a new $89.3 billion budget that slashed $6 billion, including cuts to the city’s public pools and other summer youth programs, from what critics charge was already a bloated spending plan. The city has until the end of June to adopt its budget. Gov. Cuomo, meanwhile has been loathe to OK the city-borrowing bill, noting “borrowing for operating expenses is fiscally questionable” during his daily briefing Tuesday. “We don’t want to create more debt than the state can pay going forward, and we don’t want to create a situation for the state or any local government borrows so much money that they can’t repay it,” he said. “Then you have to start to cut services and now you’re in that vicious downward spiral. Right? We’ve been there before, New York City has been there before.” Meanwhile, de Blasio said as of Monday, there were 55 new coronavirus hospital admissions citywide. “That’s really good news,” he said. Eight percent of people have tested positive for COVID-19, well under the city’s threshold of 15 percent.

Disney fans, rejoice! Orlando’s Walt Disney World will reopen its family-friendly gates in July after being shuttered since March 15 over coronavirus concerns. The move follows in the footsteps of rival Universal Studios Orlando, which will welcome visitors once again beginning on June 5. Disney World executives were given the green light after presenting proposals for their Florida parks’ phased reopenings to the Orange County Economic Recovery Task Force on Wednesday, reports the AP.  As a result, the Magic Kingdom and Animal Kingdom are slated to reopen July 11, while Epcot and Disney’s Hollywood Studios will follow suit on July 15, according to Walt Disney World’s senior vice president of operations, Jim MacPhee. However, a trip to the House of Mouse will look a bit different than it did prepandemic. According to MacPhee, the theme park will enforce social distancing via special markers, temperature checks for both guests and staffers, and “limited-contact enhancements” such as mobile payments at restaurants, reports Variety.  Numerous hand-sanitizer stations will be peppered about the park, while cast members will be required to wear face masks while working. To further help reduce the spread of disease, Disney World will be operating at a reduced capacity and nixing its famous parades and other crowd-attracting activities. The Orlando resort will be the first Disney park in the US to welcome visitors in the time of corona. Worldwide, Shanghai Disneyland reopened May 11, the first of its parks to do so during the pandemic.

Presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden clapped back at President Trump and his GOP allies following weeks of being mocked for observing social distancing guidelines and remaining on lockdown in his Delaware home. “All this stuff about ‘Biden’s hidin,’ well, you know, the fact of the matter is, it’s working pretty well so far, doing the rules,” the former vice president said in an interview with CNN Tuesday. “He’s behind in almost every — every state,” he continued, noting that he recognized that the numbers could change between now and the November election. Biden was referencing his climbing poll numbers, which have recently shown him ahead of Trump both nationally and in key swing states. Since the coronavirus pandemic forced Americans into their homes in March, the Democratic presidential hopeful has been campaigning virtually from home. In the two months since then, he has appeared for interviews on news programs, late-night talk shows and virtual campaign events via a television studio he had installed in his home. Trump and his allies have gone after Biden for his coronavirus-focused approach of staying home and following Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines to stop the spread. During her briefing Tuesday, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany remarked, “I think, look, you know, the president is excited to see that Joe emerged from the basement.” McEnany was referencing Biden’s first public appearance in two months on Monday, laying a wreath at a veterans memorial near his home with his wife, Dr. Jill Biden. During that unannounced Memorial Day appearance, Biden kept his mask on while speaking from a distance to reporters, saying he was happy to be outdoors. Asked if he had a message for the country on the holiday, the 2020 contender said, “Never forget the sacrifices that these men and women made. Never, ever forget.”

With more than one in six young people out of work, international leaders on Wednesday warned of the repercussions of creating a “lockdown generation” of young people who struggle to find work. The United Nations’ International Labor Organization issued the grim prediction in a report showing that more than one in six young people have stopped working since the COVID-19 crisis began, while those who still have jobs have had their hours cut by 23 percent. “If we do not take significant and immediate action to improve their situation, the legacy of the virus could be with us for decades,” ILO director-general Guy Ryder said in a statement. “If their talent and energy is side-lined by a lack of opportunity or skills it will damage all our futures and make it much more difficult to re-build a better, post-COVID economy.” The pandemic has slammed young workers with a “triple shock” by killing their jobs, disrupting their education and creating barriers to entering the labor market or moving between gigs, the ILO said. That’s reflected in ILO data — roughly half of young students report likely delays in completing their studies, 10 percent fear they won’t be able to finish at all, and a majority of young workers “view their career prospects with uncertainty or fear,” according to the report. The ILO urged officials to ward off lasting damage to the youth labor market with aggressive policy actions, such as employment and training “guarantee” programs in developed nations. Such measures should address the specific challenges faced by young women, who have been hit harder than men, the United Nations agency said. Young workers were already in rough shape before the pandemic kneecapped the global economy, the ILO said. Last year’s global youth unemployment rate was 13.6 percent, higher than the 12.3 percent recorded in 2007 before the last financial crisis, the group’s report shows. The ILO’s report is just the latest sign of how the coronavirus crisis has gutted the global labor market. The organization expects the world economy to lose the equivalent of 305 million full-time jobs in the second quarter of the year, with the Americas accounting for 13.1 percent of the losses. The US unemployment rate hit a record 14.7 percent in April.

Kate Middleton is a secret scissors whiz. The Duchess of Cambridge, 38, has reportedly been providing her children George, 6, and Charlotte, 5, with at-home haircuts during the coronavirus pandemic. “Kate would certainly trim George and Charlotte’s hair as she is very competent and they are used to home haircuts,” a source told The Sun. “Carole Middleton taught both Kate and sister Pippa how to cook and cut children’s hair. To them, it is no big deal.” The two tiny royals sound fairly low-maintenance. “George’s is easy. Charlotte likes her hair off her face and so it’s long enough for a mini ponytail. They both have easy hair to cut,” the source said. According to the outlet, the children typically get the royal treatment from Middleton’s regular stylist Richard Ward at their Kensington Palace home, with princes ranging from £45 to £75 per child. Ward even left his professional kit with the family so that the mom of three can have the correct tools handy. As for Middleton’s hair, the children’s nanny has reportedly been helping with those trims.

Companies in Switzerland must contribute to their employees’ rent if they’re working from home, the country’s top court has ruled, according to reports. The court made the ruling in a case brought by an employee of an accounting firm, who claimed his company was responsible for part of his rent while he was forced to work from home, Swissinfo reported, citing the German language Tages-Anzeiger newspaper. The company argued they were not responsible for the rent payment because they had not made an agreement ahead of them working from home, according to the report. But the court rejected the company’s argument — and even said an employee could retroactively recoup rent costs after leaving a company, the news organization reported. The court ruled a monthly dividend of up to $154 for rent cost was warranted. The ruling only applies to employees who work from home at their company’s orders — not workers who personally request to do so, according to the report.

A volunteer in a key coronavirus vaccine trial has revealed that it left him the sickest he has ever been in his life — but still “cautiously optimistic” about the drug’s potential. Ian Haydon, 29, identified himself in a series of interviews as one of four volunteers who had bad reactions during the trials that Moderna hailed for “positive” early findings of antibody responses. The Seattle-based communications manager told STAT News that he started getting chills within hours of getting home from his second dose — waking in the early hours with a 103.2-degree fever. He was already nauseous and had aching muscles, so his girlfriend called a 24-hour hotline set up by those leading the study, following their advice to go to urgent care, getting there at 5 a.m., he told STAT. Haydon said he turned down an offer to be taken to a local hospital, and instead went home to rest with Tylenol. After sleeping a few hours, he still had a temperature of 101.5 — feeling so nauseous, he threw up in the bathroom, he said. He then fainted on his way back to the bedroom — with his girlfriend luckily on hand to stop his head from slamming into the floor, he said. Calling doctors in the study a second time, he ultimately decided to stay home and rest, with the fever eventually dropping that night, he said. Haydon initially hid the full drama of his reaction, having only told CNN’s Anderson Cooper that he had a “rough go of things for 24 hours.” He was wary about revealing the horror he suffered because he was wary about “triggering anti-vax” people, he admitted in a series of tweets. “I understand that sharing the story, it’s going to be frightening to some people,” he told STAT News. “I hope that it doesn’t fuel any sort of general antagonism towards vaccines in general or towards even this vaccine.” He stressed that he had received the highest dose from the trials — one 10 times stronger than others — which he has been told “will no longer be tested.” “There’s no failure here — this is a big reason why we do clinical trials,” he insisted on Twitter. “Even safe meds can’t be taken at 10x doses.” He also insisted that as sick as he was, it was never “life-threatening,” saying, “They’re over, and I’m back to marathon training.” Even after his sickness, he said, he remains “cautiously optimistic” about a vaccine breakthrough from the trial. “Vaccines are the single most important medicines we have. It’s important to test them carefully — which is what’s happening here,” he wrote. “What I went through pales in comparison to being hospitalized with COVID-19. Or to the pain of losing a loved one to the pandemic,” he said. Ian Haydon AP Ian Haydon View Slideshow The study, run with the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, tested 45 patients between the ages of 18 and 55. Initial results showed the drug created antibody levels that were equal to or exceeded those found in patients who recovered from COVID-19. Moderna CEO Stephane Bancel told Bloomberg that the results “couldn’t have been better.” Moderna did not immediately respond to requests for comment on Haydon’s interviews.

Families yearning to visit their elderly, high-risk loved ones who are trapped inside adult care facilities might have a sleek, new solution thanks to a Brooklyn-based interior designer. Avigail Eisenstadt, the CEO and principal designer of AE Design Group, has developed a pandemic-friendly visitation room complete with a flexible hug wall, UV lighting and lots of plexiglass to make visiting the elderly safe as New York creeps closer to a “new normal.” “During this COVID epidemic it’s just been terrible how the residents are unfortunately getting hit hard and they’re quarantined in their rooms and within the facilities and the only way they can see their families is through a drive by window and it’s just very sad and disheartening,” Eisenstadt, 37, told The Post. “These residents, most of them are living out the twilight of their lives in these facilities and they deserve to have a beautiful, comfortable and safe environment.” Renderings of the design show three separate pods with plants, couches and a coffee table that are accessible from a separate entrance and are airtight with its own ventilation system. Eisenstadt’s design includes copper fittings, which kill germs within a few hours, and tables made of a stone-like antimicrobial material developed in Spain called KRION that also kills germs. AE Design, which specializes in outfitting healthcare spaces, developed the prototype for a Brooklyn nursing home facility after they asked her how they could bring visitation back safely. “In between the rooms we can smoke up the glass so it’s private, we have UV lighting to purify the air and kill the germs, it’s on when nobody’s in there, as well as a sanitizing mist that will clean the room in between each use,” Eisenstadt explained. “We put in a flexible hug wall, we still have to verify the safety of that and the feasibility, that’s something we’re working on to see if we can make it happen for them because it makes a big difference,” the mom of five went on. “Seeing someone through a glass is great but it’s still kind of cold so if we can get that to work that would be fantastic.” Eisenstadt said the designs are customizable based on budget but could include voice-activated technology that will allow those on either side of the barrier to converse as if they’re seated next to each other. She also has plans for an iPad-like screen that’d allow kids to make drawings to share with their loved ones. “They’re anticipating there may be another outbreak in the fall, God forbid, we’re trying to get this in as soon as possible so people can resume some sort of normalcy when it comes to visitation but at the same time, we think this is a great thing to have in the facilities beyond COVID. There’s flu season, there’s residents with very frail health who shouldn’t be exposed to elements, people are carrying germs so we think this is something that could be beneficial in facilities long term,” Eisenstadt said. “We’re just trying to help them reunite safely, it’s just so important. There’s nothing more important in life than family.”

Mayor Bill de Blasio talked at length Wednesday in response to a question about his plan to reopen the city’s restaurants and bars — but he offered zero new details on how and when that would happen, while threatening “aggressive” enforcement of businesses that reopen before he says they can. The mayor said officials are still “looking” into implementing outdoor dining when the city emerges from its coronavirus coma. “We’re going to figure out how and when we can reopen bars and restaurants, how much outdoors is going to play a crucial role in that,” de Blasio told reporters during his daily press briefing. He threatened businesses that open up in defiance of the state’s mandatory shutdown order that they’ll face summonses — or worse, closure. “If people jump the gun and they don’t follow the rules … of course we’re going to enforce this and we’re going to enforce this aggressively because we have to get this right,” the mayor said. Several businesses in the Borough Park neighborhood of Brooklyn have secretly reopened in violation of shutdown orders, as witnessed by Post reporters. On Tuesday, de Blasio said he was “confident” the city would begin phase one of reopening by “the first or second week of June” — but was mum on other details, frustrating business owners looking for guidance. Restaurants are not permitted to open until phase three of the state’s four-step reopening plan. Earlier this month, de Blasio offered up a vague idea of what dining in the city would look like post-coronavirus, saying outdoor seating was “an interesting option we’re looking at.” He reiterated that possibility again Wednesday. “That’s not part of phase one but it is something we’ll have more to say on soon,” he said.

Dr. Anthony Fauci, an infectious disease expert on the White House coronavirus task force, said the Republican and Democratic nominating conventions could go on as planned in August if there’s a dramatic downturn in the number of cases. “I mean, if we have a really significant diminution of new cases and hospitalizations, and we’re at a level where it’s really very low, then again, according to the guidelines, you may be able to go to whatever phase you’re in, and that’s some sort of a capability of gathering,” Fauci told CNN in an interview Wednesday. But he cautioned that “we need to reserve judgment right now to see what the situation would be.” Both political parties are struggling with how to hold the conventions and the boost they provide the campaigns going into November’s election without the big crowds and rousing speeches because of social distancing guidelines in place due to the pandemic. President Trump has told North Carolina’s Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper that he has a week to let the Republicans know that his state can handle the convention scheduled for Aug. 24 to 27 in Charlotte. “Now, if he can’t do it, if he feels that he’s not going to do it, all he has to do is tell us, and then we’ll have to pick another location.  And I will tell you, a lot of locations want it,” Trump said Tuesday at an event at the White House. “But I picked North Carolina because I do love that state, and it would’ve been a perfect place for it and it still would be.” Trump said the deadline is needed before the Republican National Committee spends “millions and millions of dollars on an arena to make it magnificent for the convention.” He also said Charlotte would miss out on the throngs of people who would descend on the city for the convention, noting the “economic development consequences are tremendous.” The Democratic National Committee moved its convention from July to Aug. 17-20 in Milwaukee because of the coronavirus.

The coronavirus pandemic has been raging in the United States for months now, but not every state has been impacted in the same way. Some states have likely seen the worst of the first wave of infections, while others are only now grappling with sharp increases in the number of cases they’re seeing. A new study (PDF) from an international group of scientists and researchers uses existing data and predictive modeling to forecast when the disease will peak (or has peaked) in each individual state. Unsurprisingly, around half of the states in the country have yet to see a peak and case numbers continue to grow. Based on the numbers, the researchers are confident that half the states have reached their peak. The states that the researchers believe may not yet have reached their peak are listed below, in order of most confident (that a peak is still coming) to least confident: If you see your state on this list, that doesn’t necessarily mean that you’re in store for more widespread infections and skyrocketing fatalities. It just means that, based on the data, it doesn’t look like your state has the pandemic under control. Likewise, if you don’t see your state on this list, it doesn’t mean you can run out and start pretending life is back to normal. It’s not. Even in some states that have peaked, the loosening of restrictions and stay-at-home orders has already resulted in a secondary increase in positive cases. The list is a good resource insofar as it shows us that, as a country, the United States is not out of the woods yet. With half the country yet to experience a peak in coronavirus cases, we still can’t even begin to estimate what the final death toll will be by the time it’s all over. But when will it really be over? Right now we’re biding our time until a vaccine is developed. Scientists are working hard on that front and several companies have promising trials in the works. Still, vaccine development takes time, even when it’s being fast-tracked and we shouldn’t expect a vaccine to be available until 2021 at the earliest. In the meantime, it’s important that we practice the things we’ve been practicing all along, like social distancing, wearing protective masks when in public and avoiding gathering in large numbers.

PARIS – France, Italy and Belgium acted to halt the use of hydroxychloroquine to treat patients suffering from COVID-19, the illness caused by the new coronavirus, amid questions about the safety of the generic anti-malaria drug. France on Wednesday canceled a decree allowing hospital doctors to dispense the medicine, while the Italian Medicine Agency (AIFA) suspended authorization to use hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 outside clinical trials. Belgium’s medicine agency warned against using the drug to treat the virus any more except within ongoing clinical registered trials. It said trials aiming to evaluate the drug should also take potential risks into consideration. The sudden changes highlight the challenge for governments as they scramble to find ways to treat patients and control a virus that has spread rapidly around the world over the past three months, killing more than 350,000 and infecting millions. It also illustrates at least a temporary about-face for regulators on a drug that at the outset of the pandemic had been seen as a promising treatment option. The moves by three of the countries hardest hit by coronavirus infections and deaths follow a World Health Organization decision on Monday to pause a large trial of hydroxychloroquine due to safety concerns. France on Wednesday cancelled a decree allowing hospital doctors to dispense the medicine, while the Italian Medicine Agency (AIFA) suspended authorization to use hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 outside clinical trials. Belgium’s medicine agency warned against using the drug to treat the virus any more except within ongoing clinical registered trials. It said trials aiming to evaluate the drug should also take potential risks into consideration. The sudden changes highlight the challenge for governments as they scramble to find ways to treat patients and control a virus that has spread rapidly around the world over the past three months, killing more than 350,000 and infecting millions. It also illustrates at least a temporary about-face for regulators on a drug that at the outset of the pandemic had been seen as a promising treatment option. The moves by three of the countries hardest hit by coronavirus infections and deaths follow a World Health Organization decision on Monday to pause a large trial of hydroxychloroquine due to safety concerns. France’s cancellation, which effectively bans the drug for COVID-19, was confirmed by the health ministry. It did not refer to the WHO suspension. France in March allowed the use of hydroxychloroquine – which beyond malaria is approved to treat lupus and rheumatoid arthritis – in specific situations for hospital treatment of COVID-19. The United States has issued an emergency authorisation for the drug promoted by US President Donald Trump, among others, as a possible coronavirus antidote. British medical journal The Lancet has reported patients getting hydroxychloroquine had increased death rates and irregular heartbeats, adding to several disappointing results for the drug as a COVID-19 option. Italian health authorities concluded that the risks, coupled with little evidence hydroxychloroquine was beneficial against COVID-19, merited a ban outside of clinical trials. “New clinical evidence on the use of hydroxychloroquine in subjects with SARS-CoV-2 infection…indicates an increased risk for adverse reactions with little or no benefit,” AIFA said. The WHO said a safety panel would act by mid-June to evaluate the drug’s use in its multi-country trial of potential COVID-19 treatments. Germany is looking at The Lancet study and the WHO’s decision but has not made any decision about new guidance on hydroxychloroquine, a spokeswoman for its drugs regulator said. No vaccine or treatment has been approved for COVID-19.

Ralph Lauren said on Wednesday a surge in online shopping was helping it get back on track in China and putting it on course for a recovery from the financial damage wrought by the COVID-19 lockdowns in other markets as well. Online sales in China, a crucial growth market for luxury goods companies, jumped 76 percent in the fourth quarter. The New York-based company said it expanded the number of stores that could fulfill online orders in the country during the pandemic and rolled out digital services like advising big-spending clients on style and events. Ralph Lauren, which is now testing these services in North America as well as Europe, said sales growth in China could return to pre-health crisis levels by its second quarter as most of its stores there are now open. “We ultimately have an opportunity to gain market share as we emerge from this crisis,” Chief Executive Patrice Louvet said. Ralph Lauren said loungewear and athleisure products were in strong demand as people spend more time at home. The company also said spring collections stocked in warehouses could still be sold later in the year. However, as a deep recession looms, Ralph Lauren said it continues to expect significant pain in fiscal 2021. In the fourth quarter, net revenue fell 15.4 percent, to $1.27 billion, but was slightly above analysts’ average estimate of $1.22 billion, according to IBES data from Refinitiv. Excluding certain items, it lost 68 cents per share, while analysts were expecting a loss of 40 cents. The company’s shares were up 1.4 percent in late morning trading, at $82.47.

MLB and the Players Association are in a familiar situation unfamiliarly. They are fighting about money. Duh. Players and owners have done that since the inception of the game, quite publicly since the Players Association was formally recognized as a union in 1966. Within that frame what occurred Tuesday is as routine as the national anthem before a game: MLB made a financial offer, the union was irate about it. What’s different, of course, is that the dispute is taking place within a pandemic, which changes the financial picture now and at least into the near future while putting public and historic pressure on both sides to find a solution in time to play as much of a season as possible. At this moment the second-to-fourth biggest baseball leagues are either playing (South Korea, Taiwan) or about to start (Japan). The NBA and NHL are inching closer to firm plans for a restart. If somehow all of that happens and MLB does not play, think of the stain on all the leadership involved. Think of the long-term financial impact to both sides of being out of sight until next spring training while driving even the most loyal fans out of their minds. Think about the opportunity missed to be the first major North American team sport to play — even if by just a few weeks — to audiences so sports crazed they are producing record TV numbers to watch two quarterbacks and two golfers play 18 holes. Usually what drives an agreement is a deadline, but one problem here is that is a moving target. Reverse engineer: MLB wants to start by July 4, which means to get in three weeks of spring means having players in position by mid-June, but also remember that there is much work to do upon an agreement (not just on money, but health/safety and new rules) to get sites up to code and players there for pre-camp screening. So every day counts because the longer the fight the greater the risk to not just reputations, but bodies. The sooner players can get to camps and the longer they can stay there the better. Because players are routine oriented and routines are going to be greatly disrupted. Over time part of what players have won and often what teams want to provide for upgraded performance is greater comforts in clubhouses and personal coaching, etc. There is going to be, at minimum, a scaling back that will need an adjustment phase. I suspect if this fight drags on through this week, then don’t be surprised if President Trump — as polarizing as he might be — tries to use the influence/bully pulpit of his office to implore both sides to work it out for public good; to help the economy, to provide entertainment to the country and also to offer televised optimism that with new practices businesses will return to operation. But the sides shouldn’t need that. They should be capable of working this out and it is why I think it is so important that the union returns to the table not just saying “no” to what MLB submitted. They need a full proposal in return. And I write that understanding the anger. The union felt MLB waited two weeks after expectations of presenting a financial plan to use the clock as an ally because the public is going to generally see the players as the greedy side, no matter the realities. The union hates the concept offered in which lower-paid players would receive most of their prorated salary and the top earners would receive less, often less than half. The union views this as an attempt to split the masses. It also is revenue sharing in different clothing — just in this case Gerrit Cole and Giancarlo Stanton would be propping up Gleyber Torres and Luke Voit. The players are concerned they are in the dark about the true state of owner finances, at a time when management is claiming the bottom line is so bleak that the pain must be shared. This also is not new. Players never know exactly what to think of owner revenue, especially when it comes to what is truly being taken in from regional sports networks and land owned around stadiums. They have heard the owners cry poor even in good times. Still, they always come to a deal through their very understandable mistrust. And that players — even while upset — are flocking to spring training sites means they want to play, so the union needs to work through the mistrust. If the owners truly want to play, then the players even have some leverage. How about trading some short-term loss for big-picture gain? An example: Take 60 percent of prorated salaries now across the board in exchange for raising the minimum wage the next two years to $750,000, then $850,000, which helps the bottom-end players. Then demand no luxury tax thresholds/penalties for 2021 and 2022. The expectation is that the financial downturn is going to impact those seeking larger contracts, particularly free agents. But if the Dodgers or Yankees or Cubs want to spend, let there at least not be an artificial barrier to doing that. The owners get short-term cash flow they desire without full prorated salaries in 2020, the players receive an avenue to improve their financial lot in uncertain financial times the next two years. It is called a compromise. This is quite familiar to where we end up with these sides. That should even go for unfamiliar times.

PARIS — Soggy, algae-caked surgical masks resting on the seabed. Soiled, waterlogged rubber gloves, waving eerily beneath the Mediterranean waves. A French environmental group is finding this virus-era detritus littering the Mediterranean floor near the French Riviera resort of Antibes and is trying to raise awareness and clean it up. Video shot by the group Operation Clean Sea last week shows scattered masks and gloves on the seabed, among beer cans, cigarette butts and other trash. The group shared the images online as France and other countries gradually reopen their beaches to warn that it could worsen pollution problems in the Mediterranean. A local legislator has proposed stiffening fines for littering. “We were rather unpleasantly surprised when we started to see gloves that were buried in the sand,” Joffrey Peltier, founder of Operation Clean Sea, told The Associated Press. “(A mask looked) like a jellyfish, we didn’t know exactly what it was at first.” The amount of virus garbage remains limited, he said, but “it’s the promise of pollution to come if nothing is done. On our beautiful Cote d’Azur, we know that as soon it starts to rain, all the garbage coming from the gutters will end up in the sea.” Street cleaners in Paris have also complained about a rise in masks littering the sidewalks as France started relaxing confinement measures and more public places require people to wear masks.

Just call it the coronavirus discount. Tesla this week cut the prices of its vehicles in North America as auto demand has taken a hit thanks to pandemic-related lockdowns across the region. The Model X SUV, which was previously selling for $84,990, on Wednesday had its price reduced to $79,990. Tesla’s cheapest car, the Model 3 sedan, had $2,000 knocked off of its original price tag and now retails for $37,990. Customers will have to pay up elsewhere, however: Tesla said its Supercharger quick-charging service will no longer be available free-of-charge to new buyers of those two vehicles. Hopeful Tesla customers in China will also see a 4 percent price reduction for the Model X and Model S vehicles. The price cuts come shortly after Tesla restarted its Fremont, Calif. factory following a weeks-long standoff with local authorities. CEO Elon Musk briefly defied a state lockdown order which had required the plant to cease operations. Auto retail sales in the United States likely halved in April from a year earlier, according to data from J.D. Power. However, sales in May are likely to improve due to pent-up demand and incentives offered by most carmakers, the analytics firm said. Automakers including General Motors, Ford and Fiat Chrysler, are offering 0 percent financing rates and deferred payment options for new purchases. Factories in the United States started to reopen earlier this month with suppliers gearing up to support an auto industry employing nearly 1 million people. Shares of Tesla were down slightly Wednesday morning, at $814.80. With Post wires.

Antibody tests for COVID-19 — used to determine if people have been infected in the past with the deadly illness — might be wrong up to half the time, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced. The antibody tests, often called serologic tests, look for evidence of an immune response to infection, but are not accurate enough to use in making important policy decisions, the CDC said in new guidance. “Serologic test results should not be used to make decisions about grouping persons residing in or being admitted to congregate settings, such as schools, dormitories, or correctional facilities,” the federal agency said. “Serologic test results should not be used to make decisions about returning persons to the workplace,” it added. The tests “can play an important role in understanding the virus’s epidemiology in the general population and identifying groups at higher risk for infection,” the CDC said. The tests “do not typically replace direct detection methods as the primary tool for diagnosing an active SARS-CoV-2 infection, but they do have several important applications in monitoring and responding to the COVID-19 pandemic,” it continued. “Although serologic tests should not be used at this time to determine if an individual is immune, these tests can help determine the proportion of a population previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 and provide information about populations that may be immune and potentially protected.” Health officials or health care providers who use the tests must use the most accurate ones they can find and may need to test people twice, the CDC said. “In most of the country, including areas that have been heavily impacted, the prevalence of SARS-CoV-2 antibody is expected to be low, ranging from less than 5% to 25%, so that testing at this point might result in relatively more false positive results and fewer false-negative results,” it added.

NICOSIA, Cyprus — Cyprus is pledging to cover all costs for anyone testing positive for the coronavirus while on vacation on the eastern Mediterranean island nation, according to a letter obtained by The Associated Press on Wednesday. The Cypriot government says it will cover lodging, food, drink and medication for COVID-19 patients and their families. Patients will only have to pay for the taxi ride to the airport and the flight back home. A 100-bed hospital will cater exclusively to foreign travelers who test positive. About 112 intensive care units equipped with 200 respirators will be reserved for critically ill patients. A 500-room “quarantine hotel” will be reserved for patients’ family members and other close contacts. The pledge came in a five-page letter dated Tuesday that was sent out to governments, airlines and tour operators outlining strict health and hygiene protocols that the government is enacting to woo visitors to the tourism-reliant country. Tourism directly accounts for 13 percent of Cyprus’ economy. This year, the country expects to lose as much as 70 percent of the 2.6 billion euros ($2.85 billion) in tourism-generated revenue. The letter, signed by Cyprus’ foreign affairs, transport and tourism ministers, boasts that the country has one of the lowest coronavirus ratios per capita in Europe after having tested more than 10 percent of its population. International air travel to Cyprus begins June 9, initially from 19 countries, with passengers required to undergo a COVID-19 test three days prior to departure. That measure will be lifted June 20 for 13 countries, including Germany, Finland, Israel, Greece and Norway. Officials say travel will be expanded to more countries depending on a constant evaluation of their infection rates. Passengers will have to show their test certificate prior to boarding an aircraft and may have to wear masks throughout the flight. Their temperature will be taken on arrival to Cyprus and some random testing may take place at no cost to the traveler. Tourists will also have to fill out a “COVID-19 Traveler Declaration” stating all their travels 14 days prior to their Cyprus trip and that they have neither shown any coronavirus symptoms for 72 hours before departure nor that they have been in contact with infected people 14 days before. While in Cyprus, people who aren’t in the same travel group are obliged to keep apart at least two square meters (21 square feet) outdoors and three square meters (32 square feet) indoors. Regularly disinfected sunbeds will be two meters (6.5 feet) apart for people not belonging to the same travel group. Hotel staff will be obliged to wear masks with rooms being disinfected after every departure. At restaurants, bars, cafes and pubs, tables will be at least two meters (6.5 feet) apart with a maximum party size of 10. Guests will be encouraged to pay by card instead of cash. It’s unclear what the exact protocols will be for nightclubs.

The iconic billboards in Times Square will go dark for a minute Wednesday night to shine a light on struggling restaurants, hospitality businesses and nonprofits amid the coronavirus pandemic, according to the Times Square Alliance. More than 100 million pixels will be darkened at 9 p.m. at 46th Street and Broadway and the corner of 47th Street and Seventh Avenue to send a message that more federal support is needed, the group said. The blackout will be followed by a video that will urge the insurance industry to honor business interruption claims and back legislation. The video will include messages from Whoopi Goldberg, Rabbi Marvin Hier of the human rights group Simon Wiesenthal Center, chef Eric Ripert of famed eatery Le Bernardin, Broadway actress and singer Liz Dutton and local business leaders calling for the federal government and insurance companies to take action. In addition to the Times Square Alliance, the coordinators of the publicity event are the Business Interruption Group, the NYC Hospitality Alliance and a coalition of restaurants and other businesses co-founded by Louisiana attorney John Houghtaling, according to the Insurance Journal. “Business interruption insurance claims are being wrongfully denied. That is crippling the essential hospitality businesses that drive tourism and are woven into the fabric of our cities,” Houghtaling said, the outlet reported. “The loss of revenue without the opportunity to recover lost funds robs business owners of the capital necessary to reopen,” he added.

  Ronaldo Lewis, 29, was busted at 7 p.m. Tuesday after a tipster recognized him from photos in the media. He was charged with burglary, criminal trespass, criminal mischief, and criminal possession of stolen property, according to cops. Lewis broke into the doctor’s room in the Brooklyn Hotel on Atlantic Avenue near Nostrand Avenue in Crown Heights at about 9 a.m. Saturday, cops said. He grabbed about $11,000 worth of jewelry and clothing and fled, police said. Lewis has 11 prior arrests, most recently for criminal possession of a weapon and a controlled substance in April, according to cops. Police initially described the suspect as a woman, and released photos of a person with shoulder-length hair, wearing a tank top, leggings and earrings. But arrest paperwork indicates the suspect is a male, cops said.

Apple and Google inked a historic partnership a few weeks ago, to develop a common standard for apps that can allow governments to conduct sophisticated contact tracing campaigns that could help them contain the novel coronavirus outbreak. COVID-19 is more contagious than we would have hoped, having infected more than 5.7 million people worldwide as of Wednesday morning and claiming the lives of more than 353,000 patients. Countries including South Korea, Iceland, Germany, Vietnam and New Zealand excelled at testing and contact tracing in previous months. But as the curve has been flattened in most places and social distancing measures are loosened, there are plenty of second wave worries. New outbreaks are possible and sustained testing and spread tracing campaigns will be required to prevent widespread transmission. Tools like the Apple-Google API that can be used in tracing apps are definitely needed to increase the scale of contact tracing well beyond what human tracers would be able to achieve. The first country to launch an app based on the Apple-Google standard is Switzerland, with Latvia and other European countries to follow soon. The Swiss coronavirus contact-tracing app will initially be available to members of the Swiss army, hospital workers and civil servants. The app is called SwissCovid and will soon be available to the general population, per BBC. The Apple-Google API gives developers continuous access to Bluetooth on iPhone and Android, as well as several security and privacy features meant to secure the identity of users and prevent data collection. Apps based on the API will allow phones to talk to establish a link via Bluetooth and store record of that interaction. In all this process, only an anonymized ID of each interaction record is stored on a database, which is why the Apple-Google way is the most private contact tracing technology proposed so far. When a person confirms their positive COVID-19 diagnosis inside the app, the phone will ping that database. The other phones will keep downloading the same database and look for positives. That’s how they could tell you that you may have been in the proximity of a person infected with the novel coronavirus at some point in the past two weeks and you’d be warned that some action might be required. Apple-Google coronavirus contact tracing app concept for iPhone Apple’s app uses a decentralized model because no authority would be able to collect any data about the users. Centralized apps, like the one the UK has been piloting and which has seen plenty of criticism lately with experts finding seven security flaws in the app already. France is looking to implement its own contact tracing app, one that would not use the Apple-Google APIs. Members of parliament will have to debate and approve the Swiss app before it’s available to the public. But 70 percent of Swiss residents already support the initiative, BBC notes. Latvia is on the verge of launching its Apturi Covid app as soon as Thursday, as the app doesn’t depend on a vote in parliament. Apple has approved it and Google needs to do the same for the app to show up in the Play Store. Latvia could become the first country to roll out a COVID-19 tracing app based on Apple-Google that would be available nationwide. “Of course we would be very happy to be the first [national launch], but the most important thing is to help our inhabitants fights the virus,” a Latvian spokesperson told BBC. “The developers believe that reliance on this standard will ensure widespread adoption and also compatibility over time with contact tracing apps around the world that are also expected to adopt the same exposure notification framework,” the app developers told Reuters earlier this week. Indeed, the API would allow contact tracing across borders, which could be beneficial for large countries like the US and the entire European Union. Apple and Google already confirmed that some 22 countries and some US states have already requested access to the API.

An MSNBC reporter was humiliated live on air when he tried to shame passersby for not wearing masks in Wisconsin — even as most of his crew were also unprotected. Cal Perry was doing a live segment from Lake Geneva where he complained that “no one” was wearing masks as they enjoyed the Memorial Day sunshine. The masked reporter then turned his cameraman to shoot a man walking past, saying on air, “As you can see, no one is wearing them.” “Including the cameraman,” the local shot back, soon adding that “half your crew’s not wearing them.” Clearly embarrassed, Perry appeared to cut the segment short, looking down to the ground as he admitted, “There you go, including the cameraman. Yeah.” The former CNN reporter’s blunder soon went viral online — with President Trump’s son Don Jr. one of those who retweeted a clip of the exchange that by Wednesday morning had been seen more than 2.8 million times. The local, Andy Olson, then backed up his claims — with his wife posting their own video of the exchange that showed two out of three crew members hiding behind the camera with completely unprotected faces. He further called out Perry — noting that he had defied social distancing advice himself by touching his cameraman’s arm during the recording. “He turned the camera on me and tried to shame me and it backfired on him big time,” Olson later insisted to Bugle Newspapers. “It exposed him for his hypocrisy. The camera guy is there in plain view with a mask around his neck.” He insisted he “wasn’t trying to be rude or ignorant” and assumed it would be edited out later. “Good thing it was live,” he said. “I thought it was just a local guy – never did I think it was MSNBC doing a live report.” He said his only objection was the reporter “calling out people on the street and mask-shaming them.” “I won’t bash anybody for wearing a mask. If someone wants to – that’s fine,” Olson told the local paper.

The Duchess of Cornwall is reading for a good cause. Camilla Parker-Bowles joined Taika Waititi’s reading of Roald Dahl’s “James and the Giant Peach” on Wednesday, alongside Lupita Nyong’o and Josh Gad. The 72-year-old royal played The Ship’s Captain in her first-ever character role. “Holy cats! Send a message to the Queen at once!” she read from the iconic children’s book. “The country must be warned!” The Roald Dahl’s Story Company has been putting on the star-studded reading to support charities impacted by COVID-19, including Partners in Health and Roald Dahl’s Marvellous Children’s charity. “I hope this campaign will raise vital funds to support those most in need at this very challenging time – as well as helping families and children currently in lockdown to find a moment of comfort through the joy of reading,” she said in a rare statement. Other celebrities who have participated already included Meryl Streep, Liam and Chris Hemsworth and Eddie Redmayne.

With flights grounded and borders closed amid the coronavirus pandemic, several countries are offering to pay tourists to visit once the crisis is over, according to a report. In Italy, travelers to Sicily will be paid half their plane fare, as well as for one of every three nights they spend at a local hotel, The Sun reported. They also will receive museum and archaeological site tickets. The government will use 50 million euros — almost $55 million — to fund the effort, the news outlet reported. In Mexico, Cancun resorts also plan to offer hotel specials for returning tourists. According to the Cancun Hotel Association, the “Come to Cancun 2 for 1” offer will include two free nights for every two paid ones, as well as possible flight discounts, The Sun reported. In Bulgaria, some beaches will be open for free and include amenities such as sun loungers and umbrellas, though the government won’t pay tourists for their holidays. Meanwhile, the Japan Tourism Agency has clarified that a campaign under consideration to pay for half of the airfares of tourists is meant only for domestic travelers, the UK’s Standard reported. The campaign seeks to “to stimulate domestic travel demand within Japan after the COVID-19 pandemic and only cover a portion of domestic travel expenses.” During a news conference, The Japan Times reported earlier that Hiroshi Tabata of the Japan Tourism Agency said the government plans to allocate $12.5 billion to a reimbursement program that could launch as soon as July.

The coronavirus that causes COVID-19 is “almost perfectly human adapted” — lending credence to the possibility it was man-made in a Chinese lab, a top Australian vaccine researcher says. Nikolai Petrovsky was shocked when research found that the virus was more virulent in humans than any other animal, the Daily Mail reported. He said it was like the new strain of coronavirus, called SARS-CoV-2, was “completely optimized from day one without the need to evolve” like other viruses. “This is a new virus that has never been in humans before, but it has an extraordinarily high binding to human receptors, which is very surprising,” Petrovsky told the Mail. “It is almost perfectly human adapted, it couldn’t do any better.” He said it is possible the virus was created in a lab in China — deepening suspicions that the global pandemic originated in Wuhan. “We have to ask how that happened. Was it a complete fluke? It can be as nature has many shots at goal and you only see the ones that land,” Petrovsky said. Vaxine Pty Ltd AFP via Getty Images View Slideshow He also said release of the deadly virus could’ve been a complete accident. “Another possibility which still cannot be excluded is that SARS-CoV-2 was created by a recombination event that occurred inadvertently or consciously in a laboratory handling coronaviruses, with the new virus then accidentally released into the local human population,” he said.

A slew of businesses that have reopened in Brooklyn’s Borough Park — some in apparent violation of shutdown orders — are allowing customers to pack their stores as if the coronavirus pandemic never happened, The Post has learned. Some of the stores have attempted to mask their operations by covering their windows with butcher paper, though a steady stream of customers observed by two Post reporters over two days quickly gave them away. “There are too many customers, but we can’t really stop them from coming in,” said one worker at Toys4U, which was jammed with more than 50 customers Tuesday afternoon. “They want to come in and shop.” A second employee said the shop managed to stay open selling toys by getting into the bicycle repair business, which has been deemed an essential function during the shutdown. The Post did see two-wheelers getting fixed, though a search of the store’s website only turned up one model of bike for sale: WeeRide’s ‘Learn 2 Ride Balance Bike’ for tots. It comes in white, has 10-inch wheels and retails for $50.96. When asked about the crowds, the second added: “That might be a problem.” All told, the Post spotted a half-dozen open and crowded businesses along the stretch of 13th Avenue — including a child’s clothing store, a womenswear shop and a shoe retailer — that did not appear to meet the criteria in Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s emergency shutdown order to be considered an essential business. Cuomo’s order also urged essential businesses “to maintain social distancing measures to the extent possible,” criteria these establishments were not abiding by. The rejection of COVID-19 restrictions also extended to other visible aspects of life in Borough Park, including Health Department’s guidelines to stay six feet apart. Groups of women and children walked the sidewalks in large bunches, men gaggled tightly together in the streets — and almost none donned the protective masks that have become a staple of pandemic life in the Big Apple. “I would never go in there. Do you see a single mask on any of the women in there,” said one woman Tuesday as she stood outside of Miller’s Family Wear, a crowded women’s clothing store on 13th Avenue. “They act as if COVID just vanished, like magic,” she added. “I pray that none of them are going to get sick, but prayer requires action as well. They’re putting themselves in the line of fire and then expecting a miracle.” The NYPD would not provide statistics on enforcement of the social distancing guidelines by the 66th Precinct, which patrols the neighborhood. Mayor de Blasio has repeatedly claimed that New Yorkers — by and large — are complying with the shutdown orders and distancing advice, helping to wrestle the pandemic that’s killed more than 21,000 people in the city back under control. Borough Park has been hard hit, with 205 people dying from the disease in the 11219 zip code alone, according to city statistics reviewed Tuesday. The Department of Health and Mental Hygiene data also shows the zip code is home to the second-highest number of coronavirus cases per capita in Brooklyn, trailing just the massive Starrett City development in East New York. Some businesses in the area have been vocally pushing to reopen through their city lawmaker, Councilman Chaim Deutsch (D-Brooklyn), and have promised they would observe social distancing rules to ensure customers can safely shop. When asked for comment late Tuesday, City Hall dispatched the Sheriff’s Office to the neighborhood and ordered four businesses closed. No summonses were issued. “As soon as we were contacted by The Post, the City immediately sent out the Sheriff’s Department to conduct inspections and distribute face coverings,” said de Blasio spokeswoman Olivia Lapeyrolerie. “Four non-essential businesses were shut down, and we will continue to monitor this neighborhood closely.” She added: “We thank the Post for partnering with us to protect New Yorker’s health and safety during this pandemic.” Additional reporting by Julia Marsh and Craig McCarthy

Chris Cuomo says he’s not fully recovered from his bout with coronavirus, which “freaks me out a little bit.” The CNN anchor gave an update on his recovery Tuesday night on his CNN show, “Cuomo Prime Time.” “People who’ve been through this have strange tales to tell and not a lot of great answers from doctors to weird stuff in their blood work,” Cuomo said. “I’m one of them. I still have weird stuff going on with my lungs. I’m not back to where I was before I had the virus but I can work. I can hang out. I can engage with my family.” Cuomo, the brother of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, said he plans to donate his plasma to help others infected with COVID-19. “But I’m not 100 percent,” he continued. “There is funky stuff in my blood work, that doctors say is what they see in people who had COVID. So it freaks me out a little bit.” Cuomo, 49, announced in late March that he’d been diagnosed with coronavirus with symptoms so severe, he chipped a tooth from shivering, suffered from hallucinations and dropped 13 pounds. His wife, Cristina, and their 14-year-old son Mario also battled the disease. Cuomo has since tested negative for coronavirus and positive for antibodies.

House Republicans have filed a lawsuit against House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and two other chamber officials as part of a long-shot effort to block the use of proxy voting before it goes into effect this week. The lawsuit alleges that the proxy vote legislation passed by the House earlier this month is unconstitutional and sets a dangerous precedent. Filed on Tuesday in DC federal district court, the lawsuit names House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) as the top plaintiff. He is joined by GOP Reps. Steve Scalise of Louisiana, Jim Jordan of Ohio, Liz Cheney of Wyoming, Tom Cole of Oklahoma and 16 others. Four constituents are also included as plaintiffs in the suit. Under the changes approved by House Democrats, lawmakers are now permitted to vote on behalf of up to 10 other members who are left unable to travel during the coronavirus pandemic, which has left dozens of politicians trapped in their home districts. The reform was passed earlier this month in a near-party-line 217-189 vote, with all Republicans opposed and joined in their nay votes by three Democrats and Rep. Justin Amash (L-Mich.). As of Wednesday morning, 63 Democrats had submitted letters to the House Clerk’s Office to authorize their vote to be cast by proxy. Last week, less than 20 Democratic lawmakers were on the list. In announcing the lawsuit, McCarthy said Democrats in Congress’ lower chamber were breaking “over 230 years of precedent.” “This is not simply arcane parliamentary procedure. It is a brazen violation of the Constitution, a dereliction of our duty as elected officials, and would silence the American people’s voice during a crisis,” the top House Republican said in a statement. “Although I wish this matter could have been solved on a bipartisan basis, the stakes are too high to let this injustice go unaddressed. That is why, along with other members of the House and our constituents, I have filed a lawsuit in federal court to overturn Speaker Pelosi’s unconstitutional power grab,” he continued. In response to the lawsuit, Pelosi released a statement slamming the move. “House Republicans’ sad stunt shows that their only focus is to delay and obstruct urgently needed action to meet the needs of American workers and families during the coronavirus crisis,” she said. “The House’s position that remote voting by proxy during a pandemic is fully consistent with the Constitution is supported by expert legal analyses. Further, the Supreme Court made clear over a century ago that the Constitution empowers each chamber of Congress to set its own procedural rules,” she continued, referencing the GOP claim that the rule change was unconstitutional.

Italian opera singer Andrea Bocelli has revealed that he contracted COVID-19 in March, made a “swift and full recovery” and has donated his blood to help vaccine research. “The pandemic which has shaken the world has also affected — albeit mildly — me and certain members of my family,” Bocelli, 61, said on Facebook. “Out of respect for those for whom contracting the virus has had more serious consequences, I decided it would be best not to share the news. I certainly didn’t want to unnecessarily alarm my fans and also wished to protect my family’s privacy,” the famed blind tenor continued. “We were fortunate enough to have a swift and full recovery by the end of March,” he wrote. “Given the chance to donate blood to help find a cure for Covid, my response was an immediate ‘yes.’ A modest — but fundamental — gesture, through which I am playing my small part,” added Bocelli, who shared a live-stream of himself performing in Milan on Easter Sunday. His “Music for Hope” concert, which was viewed by more than 28 million people worldwide in its first 24 hours, has currently been viewed over 40 million times, according to Variety. Bocelli, who said he had a little fever but no severe symptoms, was seen entering the University hospital of Pisa, known as the AOUP, to donate his blood, Yahoo reported. The singer lives with his second wife and manager, Veronica Berti and their 8-year-old daughter. His wife, 36, also donated blood, suggesting that she, too, had contracted the illness, according to the outlet. Blood known as convalescent plasma from coronavirus survivors contains antibodies and is being used by researchers who hope it can be given to patients with severe symptoms to increase their ability to fight the bug.

A Ukrainian woman has gone viral for removing her panties and wearing them as a mask after being refused service at a post office, according to a report. The woman was caught pulling off the stunt on surveillance footage at the Nova Posha post office in Kiev, where she walked up to the counter without a face covering, the Sun reported. When told that she would not be provided service without a required mask, the flustered woman removed her pants in front of stunned customers — then took off her white panties and placed them over her face. Witnesses said the woman is a mother of two who was unhappy with safety measures imposed amid the coronavirus pandemic. “Well, she found a way around it,” one person said in a social media post. “No one has banned the use of panties instead of a mask yet!” Another user said: “She was lucky she wasn’t wearing a thong that day, otherwise the idea would have failed!” The video was posted online by a postal employee who now faces punishment for sharing the footage. In April, Ukrainian authorities ordered all residents to carry an ID and wear a mask in public.

South Korea reported its highest daily spike in new coronavirus cases in about a month and a half Wednesday — an outbreak linked to a now-closed facility run by one of the country’s largest e-commerce companies, officials reported. The Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported 40 new cases of the deadly bug as of midnight Tuesday — the highest daily number in 49 days — bringing the total tally to 11,265. A day earlier, only 19 new cases were reported. At least 36 of the country’s cases have been linked to a logistics center operated by SoftBank-backed e-commerce firm Coupang Corp. in Bucheon, west of Seoul, officials said. It’s unclear how many of those cases have been reported in the past 24 hours. The center was closed Monday and is undergoing the strongest disinfection measures recommended by authorities. At least 3,600 people at the facility are being tested. Coupang’s business has boomed during the COVID-19 pandemic, as orders surged for groceries and other products. The logistics center, which opened in early March, is in charge of deliveries to western Seoul, according to a spokeswoman. The center’s first coronavirus case, reported Saturday, is suspected to be connected to an outbreak at a Seoul nightclub earlier this month. Health officials fear that the center could see even more cases. “We are very nervous about community infections and we are keeping a close eye on the situation,” vice health minister Kim Kang-lip said at a briefing, adding that an investigation is underway, amid suspicions that the center did not comply with “basic” quarantine guidelines. But a Coupang spokeswoman insisted the center underwent daily disinfection and all workers wore masks and gloves, and had their temperatures checked. Meanwhile, more than 2 million South Korean children returned to classrooms Wednesday, the beginning of a phased reopening of schools. With Post wires

Amtrak plans to slash up to 20 percent of its workforce as the coronavirus pandemic devastates its ridership and revenue. The beleaguered national railroad with more than 18,000 employees will make the cuts by October despite receiving a $1 billion federal bailout under the CARES Act stimulus bill, CEO Bill Flynn told employees in a memo. “This reduction is necessary to ensure we have a sustainable Amtrak that can continue to make critical investments in our core and long-term growth strategies, while also keeping safety as our top priority,” Flynn said in the memo, which Amtrak provided to The Post. The company will start offering incentives for retirements and voluntary separations before imposing involuntary layoffs, Flynn added. The Wall Street Journal and Reuters first reported on the plans Tuesday. The cuts come as Amtrak grapples with a 95 percent plunge in ridership and revenue since the start of the pandemic, which has caused demand for travel to evaporate, according to Flynn. Amtrak expects just half of its pre-pandemic ridership to return in the 2021 fiscal year as the nation tries to recover from the virus crisis. Even that will take “substantial growth over the next 16 months, and it will have to be achieved against a backdrop of stunning unemployment, socio-economic dislocation and a potential recession,” Flynn said in the memo. “This may sound easy, but the climb back will be hard,” Flynn wrote. The Washington-based railroad says it will need about $1.5 billion in additional federal aid to avoid suspending some long-distance routes, cutting schedules on others and scaling back its high-speed Acela service between Boston and DC, Reuters reported. Amtrak is also planning to cut about $500 million in operating costs, according to the news agency.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo is taking a hit over his administration’s handling of nursing homes amid the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new poll released Wednesday. The number of New Yorkers who approve of Cuomo’s job performance sunk from a record 71 percent last month to just 63 percent — with the majority disapproving of how he dealt with the elder care facilities, the statewide Siena College survey found. “When it comes to addressing the needs of nursing homes, only 44 percent give him positive marks, compared to a plurality, 48 percent, who rate him negatively,” said Siena pollster Steven Greenberg. A widely-criticized health department mandate issued on March 25 required all nursing homes to readmit residents who tested positive for the coronavirus. Cuomo has twice blamed federal guidance for the controversial directive. And he didn’t appear to regret the mandate, even with roughly 5,800 confirmed or suspected COVID-19 deaths now reported in nursing homes. The state partially backtracked the policy earlier this month, saying hospitals cannot send COVID-positive people back into homes, and also ordering all staff to be tested twice weekly. A flood of state lawmakers, however, have in turn called for independent investigations into what role the March 25 directive played in the hellish nursing home death tolls. Still, about 54 percent of Democrats view Cuomo’s handling of the nursing homes positively, while 55 percent of Republicans and 61 percent of independents give him a negative grade, the poll found. “Voters 55 and older are closely divided, with 49 percent grading him positively and 46 percent negatively,” said Greenberg. Overall, 76 percent of respondents approved of Cuomo’s handling of the pandemic, down from 84 percent in April. “Cuomo’s stratospheric ratings from New Yorkers in April have fallen from their record highs but remain very strong as two-thirds of voters still view him favorably,” said Greenberg. One Democratic lawmaker critical of Cuomo’s nursing home policy said he was amazed that many voters supported it. “I’m actually shocked that 44% of New Yorkers approve his handling of nursing homes. I believe once they fully understand how this administration decided early on to protect the business interests behind nursing homes over the lives of nursing home residents, those approval numbers will continue to plummet,” said Queens Assemblyman Ron Kim.

The show might go on sooner than we think, but the reopening of the Great White Way comes with a few guidelines that the Actors Equity Association (AEA) will be following when the lights go back on. The guidelines, which were released Tuesday, will be implemented to ensure the safety of the actors and stage crew so they are not treated like “epidemiological guinea pigs,” writes Deadline. “I do not think that making everything safe for the audience — although that is important — and leaving the people on stage to be epidemiological guinea pigs is the right answer,” says Equity president Kate Shindle. The four guidelines for Broadway’s reopening are: The guidelines were presented by AEA officials and public safety consultant Dr. David Michaels, who said more detailed plans were in the works, but it was too early to give anything concrete. “These four principles are the foundation for our continued work with Dr. Michaels,” said executive director Mary McColl. “We intend to build out protocols that can be used by our employers and all of our colleagues to ensure that everyone who works in the theatre has the safest workplace possible.” As of now, Broadway is scheduled to reopen Sept. 8, provided that it meets the guidelines, as well as the city’s own directives.

The Oakland Athletics are placing their scouts and a significant number of other front office employees on furlough, suspending pay for minor leaguers and cutting the salaries of other executives as part of a cost-cutting move in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. A’s owner John Fisher announced the moves Tuesday in a rare public statement on what he called a “tremendously difficult day.” “Baseball is more than a job — it is a way of life,” Fisher wrote in a letter to fans and staff. “People who work for our team are our family — our very foundation — and they work tirelessly to help the A’s compete in this most precious game. COVID-19 has brought a tragic loss of life and sickness to so many in our community, and it has impacted us all in ways we could have never imagined. Our organization, like so many others across the country, has had to make tough and painful decisions.” The furloughs for the scouts and other front office personnel will begin next week, although the team’s amateur scouts are expected to stay on through the draft on June 10-11.  Minor leaguers will stop receiving $400 weekly stipends next week. The A’s will continue to pay the health care, 401k and pension costs for their employees.  The team also will cut pay for all front office employees making more than $60,000, with the biggest cuts coming to the highest-paid employees. “I know that many of you will wonder why the A’s are cutting costs now,” Fisher wrote. “Nobody knows how this pandemic will evolve over the long term. What is clear is that our revenues will be dramatically reduced this year. None of this diminishes the pain of today’s actions, but it is an honest acknowledgement of the circumstances of the moment.” Fisher, whose family founded the clothing retailer the Gap, is worth more than $2 billion, according to Forbes. The Los Angeles Dodgers are reducing pay for team employees who make over $75,000 because of the coronavirus pandemic. A team spokesman confirmed multiple media reports that said cuts range from 15% to 35% on salaries above $75,000. There will be no cuts for employees making less than that. “This plan allows us to avoid organization-wide furloughs and to preserve hundreds of jobs,” the team said later in a statement. “Over the last several weeks, we have considered every way to better withstand the challenges presented by the virus. Today — while we remain very hopeful that there will be a 2020 season — we are implementing a number of measures to reduce our costs. We remain ready to play as soon as that becomes feasible.” The baseball season has been put on hold since March because of the coronavirus pandemic. Owners and players are in negotiations about playing an abbreviated 82-game schedule, likely without fans.

One of the people entering data into Florida’s coronavirus website was fired in a dispute over what information should be made public and was, according to a report in the Daily Mail, allegedly also fired from Florida State University in 2017 for having an affair with a student — and later was charged with cyberstalking. Rebekah Jones, who says she helped design the site, said she was fired because she would not manually change data to support Gov. Ron DeSantis’ decision to begin the reopening of the state. DeSantis denied that, saying Jones was fired for insubordination and should never have been hired because she is being investigated for cyberstalking. He said she was not one of the site’s designers but someone who entered data. The Daily Mail reported Jones was charged with three counts of cyberstalking her student Garrett Sweeterman, then 21, who filed a restraining order against her. She allegedly created a “revenge porn” website called SurvivingGarrett and sent the link to online boards focusing on feminism and the #metoo movement. Jones also wrote a 342-page manifesto with a narrative of her affair with Sweeterman; she posted online at least 60 pages, including screen grabs of their sexts. In the manifesto, she said she was impregnated by Sweeterman. She gave birth to a girl in mid-2018, and she has an 8-year-old son with her husband. Jones, whose dismissal as an information systems manager with the Florida Department of Health was first reported by Florida Today, could not be reached for comment. Robert A. Morris, Jones’ lawyer in the revenge porn case, emailed a statement to the Daily Mail. “It is unfortunate that Ms. Jones has been thrust into this spotlight,” he wrote. “I am certain that appropriate investigation and inquiry from oversight committees and other investigative agencies will reveal what has happened and why it has happened. Ms. Jones has a sound academic history. Her prior personal history and challenges should not be mixed with the present circumstance. Ms. Jones is working hard to resolve personal and private legal issues that are completely unrelated to her awkward thrust into the national media through no choice of her own.” Sweeterman’s lawyer also emailed a statement to the Daily Mail. “Mr. Sweeterman has nothing to do with the current situation between the Florida Department of Health and Ms. Jones, and does not know anything about it,” Tiffany Cruz wrote in an email. “In 2019, Ms. Jones published a number of allegations about Mr. Sweeterman, from the time he was her student at FSU. Ms. Jones filed a number of legal actions against him, which the court records will show were rightly dismissed by her and the court.” Jones has a PhD in geography from Florida State University, a master’s in geography and mass communication from Louisiana State University, and a BA from Syracuse in geography and journalism, according to a resume posted on FSU’s website. FSU could not be reached for comment. Jones had announced in an email to researchers that she was reassigned from her duties overseeing an online dashboard that provides daily snapshots of Florida’s COVID-19 infections, testing and deaths. In the email she sent to researchers and others, Jones said that as of May 5, she was no longer in charge of the dashboard and that she would not expect “the same level of accessibility and transparency” in the data presented on the dashboard, adding that her “commitment to both is largely (arguably entirely) the reason I am no longer managing it.” Jones was more pointed in an email to West Palm Beach television station WPEC when she said she was removed from her role because she would not “manually change data to drum up support for the plan to reopen.” It was unclear what data she was asked to change. Afterward, the governor’s spokeswoman, Helen Ferre, said in an email that Jones had “exhibited a repeated course of insubordination,” asserting that Jones had made “unilateral decisions to modify the Department’s COVID-19 dashboard without input or approval from the epidemiological team or her supervisors.” The dashboard debuted on March 16, providing a detailed glimpse of where coronavirus has hit, how many Floridians have tested positive for the infection, how many have been hospitalized and how many people have died. Over the weeks, new information was added, including the number of infections by ZIP code. After some prodding by the news media, the state also began releasing data on nursing homes and prisons, although it has declined to disclose some information that is now part of public records lawsuits filed by several news media companies. In the early weeks of the outbreak, health officials cited privacy issues in declining to identify where infections were occurring, only to reverse themselves when public concern over the outbreak grew and quickly became a political issue.

North Carolina is grappling with a steady surge in new coronavirus cases as President Trump demands the state accommodate a full-capacity Republican convention. The number of infected residents continues to rise in North Carolina, where Republicans for two years have planned to hold their national convention this August. There are 24,418 confirmed cases in the state, with 1,600 new infections reported on Friday — the largest single-day rise North Carolina has seen, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Trump still has insisted Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper allow for the Republican National Convention to pack the Spectrum Center in Charlotte for the event. The president on Monday tweeted threats to move the convention if Cooper wouldn’t cooperate. Cooper on Tuesday said he is still in talks with Republicans over the logistics for the convention. His administration has demanded a written safety plan from the convention’s organizers and brushed off Trump’s tweets, saying he’s “not surprised at anything that happens on Twitter.” “We have asked them to present a plan on paper to us laying out the various options that we’ve already discussed,” Cooper said. “They know we’re talking about a time that’s three months from now, so we have to have options regarding how this convention is going to be run depending on where we are with the virus in August.” North Carolina’s Mecklenburg County, which includes Charlotte, has recorded nearly 3,400 coronavirus cases — more than double the next-highest county. Cooper has eased up on the state’s lockdown, though, allowing restaurants to let customers dine inside. But the governor, like leaders of other states easing out of lockdowns, has still barred gatherings at venues, bars and gyms. Trump on Tuesday insinuated that Cooper was intentionally slow-walking a reopening and said he would have the Republican National Committee explore alternatives if it can’t get confirmation “within a week.” “We have a governor who doesn’t want to open up the state,” Trump said. “He’s been acting very, very slowly and very suspiciously.” With Post wires

MLB’s latest proposal didn’t go over well with the union on Tuesday, and one major league pitcher says it didn’t do any favors for the game’s top players. And he wasn’t referring to the money they will lose in the proposal. “Interesting strategy of making the best most marketable players potentially look like the bad guys,” Milwaukee Brewers lefty starter Brett Anderson tweeted. According to The Post’s Joel Sherman, MLB’s latest plan would allow players making the least amount of money to have nearly their entire salary on a prorated basis for games played. But the game’s stars would take the biggest financial hit under this proposal. For example, Gerrit Cole — who is slated to earn #36 million this season and would be making $18 million if his contract were prorated —  would receive around $8 million if this proposal passes. The MLB and the union previously had agreed on March 26 to the players’ salary being pro-rated based on an 82-game schedule, but the league said that agreement also left the door open for further financial negotiations if the games were to be played with no fans in attendance. The union says the pay issue already has been settled. Many believe it’s crucial for both sides to come to a deal this week, if they want to start the season in early July. Cincinnati Reds starter Trevor Bauer, who has often been outspoken about different issues affecting baseball, didn’t sound pleased about MLB’s latest plan. “Alright… y’all want another video of my thoughts on this or would you rather I just “shut up and play baseball”??” Bauer tweeted on Tuesday night. New York Mets starter Marcus Stroman tweeted “this season is not looking promising,” after he heard about the news.

If this was the best that Major League Baseball could do to kick off Hell Week, then let’s just defer the players’ prorated payments and live to fight another day. There will be more fights, naturally. There might not be much living for baseball, though, if the players and owners can’t find sufficient common ground in the next week or so to restart this pandemic-delayed campaign. And this sliding-scale concept, proposed by MLB to the players association on Tuesday, generated about as much excitement on the players’ side as did the “No postgame showers” suggestion. As veteran pitcher Brett Anderson of the Brewers tweeted, “Interesting strategy of making the best most marketable players potentially look like the bad guys.” Of course the players view this as a divisive tactic. How couldn’t they? Suddenly Gerrit Cole and his fellow baseball one-percenters find themselves with the dilemma of being either magnanimous or selfish? Yuck. Don’t bother summoning setups that might seem comparable on the surface. The collectively bargained revenue-sharing rules, by which the big-market entity Yankees must write a check to the small-market Rays and so on, are founded on the principle of competitive balance. This idea emanates from the principal that the clubs want to save. When teams deploy sliding scales on their own employees, as the Mets recently did to control costs during the shutdown, they can do so unchecked. Whereas for teams to proffer that to a union, to instruct it how to divvy up its share of the kitty, feels patronizing.  Therefore: deferments, as The Post’s Joel Sherman first proposed earlier this month. Give the players their prorated salaries, just over a longer period of time. The players will be amenable to humane timelines I’m guessing. Shoot, players association official Bobby Bonilla has a holiday named after him for the $1.19 million he receives from the Mets every July 1 through 2035 thanks to the deferments he agreed to receive way back in 1999. You don’t think a 55-year-old Cole wouldn’t be delighted to receive a $500,000 check from the Yankees? The owners did very well in the last round of negotiating two months ago when they signed off on a very reasonable lump-sum payment of $170 million to the players — that wound up being about $300,000 for each veteran player — as well as protection against future litigation, a shortsighted decimation of the amateur draft and language that empowered them to reopen talks in the event that paying fans couldn’t attend the games. That last part brought the parties to Tuesday’s dialogue, and a deferment would indeed provide the owners with some breathing room that acknowledges the intake lost by no fans at the ballpark — while at the same time acknowledging the concessions made by the players so recently. It’s time to cut a deal. The two sides have about a week to virtually shake hands in agreement if they want to begin the season in early July. That should be enough time for two antsy parties to realize how badly they need each other for self-preservation. For the owners, in particular, to look at themselves in their antique mirrors and wonder whether it really would be worth it to not play games at all rather than play them while losing more money than they want. James Ingram once sang, “I did my best, but I guess my best wasn’t good enough.” If the sliding scale served as MLB’s best, it most certainly wasn’t good enough. It’s time to take the path of almost-least resistance and maximum satisfaction. Deferrals shouldn’t be deferred any longer, and as the National Hockey League and National Basketball Association take steady paths toward restarts, neither should baseball’s revival.

Catholic churches in Brooklyn and Queens shuttered for months due to the coronavirus outbreak reopened on Tuesday with some changes — including social-distancing signage and mandatory masks. Worshipers in protective face coverings flocked to pews, at a maximum of 10 at a time, and some were even spotted donning plastic gloves as they prayed. Diocese of Brooklyn Bishop Nicholas DiMarzio gave his blessing for churches, closed since March 20, to open for private prayer and devotion, with 6-feet social-distancing regulations being maintained. DiMarzio also granted permission to start holding funerals, baptisms and weddings, also with a strict maximum of 10 people and mandatory masks. Mass is still being streamed online. At least two houses of worship, Immaculate Heart of Mary in Kensington and Our Lady of Perpetual Help in Sunset Park, plastered bright yellow police-style “CAUTION” tape to keep people a safe distance apart. “I know it may look like a crime scene, or a construction site . . . but, it is a sign that light is at the end of the tunnel!” Immaculate Heart of Mary wrote on Facebook, announcing it will now be open daily from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. for private prayer. Numerous yellow warnings also reminded parishioners to “maintain social distancing” of at least 6 feet. “Social Distancing is a MUST!” the church stressed on Facebook, outlining other rules including “sanitize your hands frequently” and “No Touching the Statues!” At Our Lady of Perpetual Help, at least a dozen worshipers cycled through in just 30 minutes between 11:45 a.m. to 12:15 p.m., with a staffer escorting people to specific seats a safe distance apart. Another church, Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph in Prospect Heights, used more subdued signs to split up seating areas, including for families, couples and those coming to pray on their own. They also tacked on blue tape to pews to the mark 6-feet distance. The precautions are being taken “to provide atmosphere that everyone can feel safe coming to church,” said Msgr. Kieran Harrington, the rector at the Co-Cathedral of St. Joseph. “Some people will be scared, and we want to let them see that the church is a place where you can feel safe to come and to pray and to be with others,” he told The Post.

Rudy Giuliani is pulling out the big guns to hype hydroxychloroquine — his alleged mistress, to be precise. Beltway insiders were amused to hear the former NYC mayor interview Maria Ryan — the woman with whom Giuliani denied having an affair after ex-wife Judy claimed they were still married when Ryan and Giuliani got together — as a medical expert on his radio show, “Uncovering the Truth.” The insiders also noted with some glee that he framed her as a medical expert and kept calling her “doctor” — even though her doctorate is in hospital administration and came from an online university that shut down after a failed attempt to become accredited, according to reports. The pair didn’t mention their off-air relationship during the Memorial Day chat, in which they claimed that hydroxychloroquine is broadly safe and effective to fight COVID-19. “It’s pretty sad to see Rudy’s decline from ‘America’s mayor’ to hawking snake oil cures on a radio show that no one listens to,” said a DC insider. “At this rate, he’s going to be touting drinking bleach as a coronavirus cure on late-night infomercials before too long.” Page Six reached out to Dr. Ryan before this story was published, but we didn’t hear from Dr. Ryan until after it ran. “I am a Board Certified Advanced Practice Registered Nurse,” who “can independently treat patients like a doctor does,” Dr. Ryan said, listing her other degrees, including a Masters. “My PhD is from an online program that I completed in two years. Warren University was recognized by the State of New Hampshire. It ultimately closed after I received my degree,” she said. She said that Giuliani told listeners that her PhD was in healthcare management. Dr. Ryan told us she has “eight years of formal education,” that she’s also “had 30 years of practical experience working in hospitals,” including “leadership roles in all types of hospitals,” and has “received numerous awards” including “the prestigious Louis Gorman Award for Outstanding Achievement in Rural Health Care from the National Rural Health Association.” Dr. Ryan also denied that “I had any part in [Giuliani’s] divorce. That would be a surprise to me.”

New York City could be cleared to reopen as early as June 1 — then what? Mayor Bill de Blasio maintained Tuesday that the Big Apple remains on pace to begin its coronavirus comeback within weeks if not days, but kept tight-lipped on the details of what that looks like, to the frustration of both business owners and elected officials who aren’t sure he actually has a viable plan. “We’re going to be briefing all New Yorkers on each of these questions as we get closer,” de Blasio said when pressed by reporters in his daily City Hall briefing. “I’m feeling confident right now that phase one will begin by the first or second week of June. “That’s a lot that we have to put together and put on the table, but it’ll all be in place well before we announced the actual day for the restart.” And with “unquestionably several hundred thousand people” poised to teem out of their homes and return to work, de Blasio acknowledged that the city was still working with the MTA to hammer out the details of how to safely move all those people. “Obviously, a lot of them will be taking subways and buses, that’s a concern we’re going to be working with the MTA on that,” de Blasio answered vaguely. “So, the work of preparing for the restart is going on every single day.” City Council Speaker Corey Johnson (D-Manhattan) questioned exactly what de Blasio has been contemplating all this time under lockdown. “We should have spent the last two months planning for this,” Johnson, a presumptive 2021 mayoral candidate, told The Post. “Now we’re a few weeks away from hundreds of thousands — if not millions — of New Yorkers restarting their commutes and not knowing how to get to work safely. “We need clear guidelines on subway safety and protocols,” continued Johnson, also calling for pop-up protected bike lanes and an expanded network of open streets. “And we need it all ASAP.” Under the first phase of the state’s four-tier reopening plan, lower-risk industries including construction, manufacturing, landscaping and curbside pick-up retail can reopen once seven metrics are met on hospital admissions, deaths, available beds, testing and tracing. As of Tuesday, the city — the last of the state’s 10 economic regions to be cleared for reopening — had met five of the seven criteria and remained on track to clear the other hurdles by mid-June at the latest. But the lack of nitty-gritty details with June fast approaching left city business owners even beyond the scope of the first phase clamoring for answers. “I would like to be more informed, to have information on hand as to when my business would open,” said Lamont White, owner of El & John’s Barber Shop in East New York, Brooklyn. “I’m in limbo and I don’t really know.” White beseeched de Blasio to deliver clear, specific guidance to businesses on both when they can reopen, and what rules they’ll have to play by. “Give me more info as far as what’s the criteria for smaller businesses,” he said. “I just know I have to practice social distancing within the business but what will be the target for that and how should we implement that? There’s no information on it.” Julio Peña, who along with his wife owns Alphabet City Italian joint Il Posto Accanto, said that his patience has worn thin as the pandemic has wound on. “Listen, it was and is a fluid situation — that’s change — so you can’t put that much blame on them [City Hall] initially,” he said. “[But] I really feel that the city and the mayor and all the politicians around him have really done very little to help anyone who’s in our position.” As de Blasio remained mum on how the city would reopen, Gov. Andrew Cuomo detailed stock on the state’s overall battle. “[The] number of new COVID cases [is] down to the lowest level since this ever started, just about 200,” said Cuomo in a briefing at the New York Stock Exchange, referring to the three-day rolling average of new hospitalizations, at 201 through Monday. At the pandemic’s height in April, the daily rolling average of hospitalizations was over 3,000. Another 73 New Yorkers succumbed to the bug in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Tuesday, the lowest daily toll since 56 fatalities were reported on March 23. Cuomo called the daily tally — which raises the confirmed state death toll to 23,564 — a bittersweet figure. “In this absurd new reality, that is good news,” said Cuomo. “Any other time and place when we lose 73 New Yorkers, it’s tragic.” Additional reporting by Reuven Fenton and Bernadette Hogan

ALBANY — A group of state lawmakers were back in Albany Tuesday for the first time since April to work on passing a slew of coronavirus-related bills. They packed the afternoon with virtual Zoom hearings and sparsely attended committee meetings in the Capitol building, under the state’s 10-person gathering limitations. Lawmakers approved New York’s $177 billion state budget on April 3, including emergency measures changing state Senate and Assembly chamber rules to allow remote videoconferencing and voting. “We can check-in remotely now,” Manhattan Democratic Sen. Brad Hoylman explained to The Post after heading an in-person state Senate Judiciary committee meeting with around five socially distanced people in the room. “We’re permitted to do remote voting. A number of senators are here but it’s an option, especially if someone is concerned about travel.” Legislation passed through various committees and is expected to be voted on later this week including: Gov. Andrew Cuomo appeared to throw cold water on the city-backed bill, noting “borrowing for operating expenses is fiscally questionable” during his daily briefing Tuesday. “We don’t want to create more debt than the state can pay going forward, and we don’t want to create a situation for the state or any local government borrows so much money that they can’t repay it,” he said. “Then you have to start to cut services and now you’re in that vicious downward spiral. Right? We’ve been there before, New York City has been there before.” It harks back to the fiscal crisis of the 1970s, when the city was excessively borrowing to pay for basic operating expenses. The practices forced the state to create a separate agency to borrow long term bonds to cover the city’s spending habits. Andrew Rein of the Citizens Budget Commission told The Post that New York City needs to cut the fat elsewhere, and borrowing should be a last resort. “When you borrow for operating costs you’re basically telling your kids to pay for the cops, teacher and trash pick up today. It’s not only not fair to them, it also constrains their budget.” Big Apple budget officials are bracing for a potential $9.5 billion dip in tax revenues, fearing that could grow another $3 billion. The state faces a $13 billion hole thanks to the coronavirus’ hit on revenues, which Cuomo has repeatedly warned could translate to 20 percent cuts in aid to local governments, schools and the healthcare industry if the federal government doesn’t deliver funding. Critics say city spending under Mayor Bill de Blasio was out of control before the pandemic hit. Cuomo has balked at the possibility of raising taxes, and has warned the Democrat-led Legislature against passing bills that will require the state to shell out more. “We are simply asking for the same authority the Governor gave himself. We are spending every dollar we have to save lives and feed families — all while losing revenue every second. New Yorkers cannot cover the cost. While we wait for Senate Republicans to act on the federal stimulus package, we must explore every option possible,” said de Blasio spokeswoman Freddi Goldstein.

America hasn’t seen the last of killer coronaviruses. China’s “bat woman,” a Wuhan Institute of Virology scientist who handles bat viruses, is warning that the current pandemic is “just the tip of the iceberg.” Friendly advice from a researcher? Maybe, but America’s enemies are watching. They’ve seen the devastating impact of the coronavirus here and “just how disruptive” a bioterrorism attack could be, warns Thomas Mahnken, a defense expert at Johns Hopkins. Who needs intercontinental missiles when a highly contagious, untreatable virus can paralyze the American superpower? The untold story is that the United States is significantly more prepared than it was a mere three months ago for a germ attack. In that short time, even while marshaling resources to equip hospitals and treat patients, the Trump administration has set in motion major improvements in biodefense readiness, undoing two decades of neglect. The same improvements will enable the United States to defend against a second wave of the coronavirus or another naturally ­invading virus — without another shutdown. After all, the shutdown wasn’t caused by the coronavirus. It was a frantic response to America’s unpreparedness. The nation’s Strategic National Stockpile of medical equipment was nearly empty. Our medical supply chain put us at the mercy of China for masks, antibiotics and other supplies. Hospitals lacked enough beds and ventilators to care for the infected. The shutdown bought time. Here’s where we stand: Medical Supply Chain: When the pandemic began, China was the No. 1 supplier of imported surgical masks, protective goggles and generic antibiotics like tetracycline and the No. 2 source of imported mechanical ventilators, hand sanitizer and other essential supplies. In early February, China played hardball, seizing all production, even by American companies there like 3M and General Motors. In April, China held up the products again with export regulations. The lesson: No matter where a virus originates, the tools to fight it must be made in America. On May 19, the White House ­announced a contract with Virginia-based Phlow Corp. to make the raw pharmaceutical materials needed to produce drugs for COVID-19 patients, including antibiotics, sedatives for ventilator ­patients and pain meds. Three months ago, ventilators symbolized America’s lack of preparedness. Now, the nation is awash in ventilators and supplying Mexico and other countries. US Strategic National Stockpile: For more than a decade, through SARS, MERS, the avian flu and the swine flu, 10 federal reports warned about the stockpile’s inadequacy. But federal health administrators failed to even request the necessary funding. They ignored domestic preparedness, while boasting about conducting health programs in 49 other countries. The result? When the pandemic hit, the stockpile was almost out of masks and had only a quarter of the supplies needed to treat coronavirus patients. Many supplies were expired. Last week, President Trump announced a partnership with domestic manufacturers to keep the stockpile continuously supplied, with a target of 300 million masks by fall. Hospital Capacity: Before the pandemic, the shortage of hospital beds was “the weakest link” in the nation’s readiness, said former Centers for Disease Control and Prevention director of public-health preparedness Ali S. Khan. The nation couldn’t even handle a bad flu season, much less a biological attack. Yet nothing was done. When the pandemic hit, the US Army Corps of Engineers and many states erected surge capacity that will outlive the current crisis. Massachusetts hospitals announced last week they will keep their surge units. New York state officials say they can get their field hospitals running in 10 to 14 days if needed. Are there still biodefense gaps? Yes. America urgently needs more lab capacity to anonymously scan routine results for signs of an invading virus. That will be costly. Yet former CDC director Dr. Tom Frieden is urging American taxpayers to fund “thousands of life-threatening gaps in disease preparedness worldwide” and “commit to global solidarity.” No, thanks. That’s the thinking that made America vulnerable. Betsy McCaughey is a former lieutenant governor of New York, chairwoman of the Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths and author of the forthcoming book “The Next Pandemic.” 

All holds barred. There’s little hope for top ropes anytime soon, so these wrestling fans are trading leg drops for laptops while in quarantine. Unemployed bandmates Jimi Riddle and Casey Hopkins have been filling their time in coronavirus lockdown by running their Instagram-based Isolation Wrestling Federation, which bills itself as “the first ‘NO CONTACT’ wrestling federation.” The account features videos of costumed, wigged and mulleted characters colorfully self-promoting themselves in front of low-fi digital backgrounds or their living room walls, an ode to the glory days of the gaudy sport. The lifelong wrestling fans, both 30, were inspired by the iconic promo videos of the ‘80s and ‘90s. “There’s a history of doing green screen promos as vignettes that aren’t crowd-driven,” Casey tells The Post. “The beauty of what wrestling really was is just character-based storylines,” adds Riddle. A number of amateur characters have even been born via the IWF — there’s Quarantine Dream, the Jim Reaper and Daddy Deltoids — and some professional wrestlers have also gotten involved, including former WWE wrestler Konnor (Ryan Parmeter) as well as Casanova “King of No Ring Deathmatch” Valentine. The idea to create the contactless league came to Riddle in late March during “a moment of disturbed clarity,” he says, speaking from his hometown of Hastings, England, where he is currently stranded due to the pandemic. “I felt like I should start doing training montage videos, which led to becoming a no-contact wrestler and challenging friends and later took the form of IWF,” he says. Hopkins is in lockdown in Brooklyn, but despite being an ocean apart, they’ve been spending their every waking hour on the phone with each other curating the digital-only league. “If I’m not woken up by Jimi calling me, I’m not woken up,” says Hopkins. Johan Vipper Johan Vipper View Slideshow To join IWF, aspiring wrestlers post a promo-style video of themselves as a character of their making, tag the Federation and use the hashtag #IWFpros. “So basically people do call-outs — that’s someone initiating a battle — and when someone responds to it, we put it up in the Stories, and then we run a poll at the end of the promos, and at the end of the battle we put it in the Memories,” says Hopkins. Sometimes, the musicians post segments onto the Instagram account’s grid. So far, their internet league has only merited them positive feedback. “It’s obviously done by fans and people who love it,” says Casey. While WWE was deemed essential in Florida and resumed shows back in April, live fans are not allowed, making the socially distant federation a unique way to not just stream but safely participate in the famously interactive sport. Plus, being online-only means wrestlers can get creative while working under the single rule of no contact. “Anything can happen in the IWF,” says Hopkins.

You don’t need a college degree to smell a bait-and-switch. Students at SUNY’s Stony Brook University applied for what they thought were paid positions with the state Health Department as coronavirus contact tracers — only to be told after the fact that the gigs are uncompensated. “The New York State Department of Health is hiring for paid, remote job roles,” read a posting emailed to science majors at the school earlier this month. “All opportunities listed were created to help in the fight against COVID-19.” Among the listed positions was contact tracer, the crack detectives that the state is now recruiting in droves to track down previously unidentified coronavirus cases by retracing the steps of known patients. In fact, Gov. Andrew Cuomo places so much stock in contact tracing that a sufficient number of tracers is one of the seven criteria for a region of the state to be approved for reopening. In general, the state is paying contact tracers $27 per hour, the DOH has previously said. But the painstaking labor evidently isn’t so valuable that it’s worth paying college kids for, as several Stony Brook students who applied received an automated email reply indicating that the positions are actually unpaid. “You applied through Handshake for the NYS Contract Tracer program,” read the email from Marianna Savoca, Stony Brook’s assistant vice president for Career Development and Experiential Education. “The governor’s office is now asking for volunteers ASAP to help the State re-open.” The flip-flop left cash-strapped students — some of whom are trying to help support their families amid the economic turmoil — feeling betrayed. “Both my parents have lost their jobs and have not been able to go back to work for several of months,” said one biology major who applied, declining to be identified by name. “I applied to be a contact tracer to not only help the city during this pandemic but also help my family out in our current financial situation. “I don’t think this is fair to switch from a paid to a volunteer position as many people relied on this job to help pay for bills and essential groceries.” Added another applicant, “I feel completely shorted by this change. I was under the impression they wanted to give these opportunities to SUNY kids. “Now, they make it seem like they never wanted to pay us to begin with, which is just wrong,” continued the student, who also declined to be identified. “Under any other circumstances, it would be ridiculous to call people in for a job interview only to ask them to work for free.” Stony Brook officials responded to a request for comment with a statement that did not directly address the discrepancy. “Stony Brook University has worked closely with our state and local partners to manage the impact of COVID-19 on our region,” the statement read. “We responded once again last week when our government partners asked us to help to increase the number of tracers in an effort to allow the region to enter Phase 1 reopening. “In response, we put out the call to students whose internship or capstone projects had been impacted by the pandemic and students who had applied for tracer positions via our career services office.” “In an effort to assist the county in opening, Stony Brook sought to recruit additional tracers and erred in seeking volunteers,” the school added in a subsequent, separate statement. SUNY officials did not immediately respond to an inquiry as to whether the discrepancy was limited to Stony Brook, or if students systemwide were being asked to work for free. The state DOH pinned the misunderstanding squarely on SUNY, and insisted that students interested in being contact tracers could either get cold, hard cash, or be otherwise compensated. “The State is not recruiting volunteers for our contact tracing program,” said DOH spokesman Gary Holmes. “There are two options for SUNY students to be contact tracers: They can apply and get paid or SUNY is developing an option for students to receive internship credits for work as a contact tracer,” Holmes clarified. “The State never directed a solicitation for volunteers.” Additional reporting by Ebony Bowden

WASHINGTON — Joe Biden labeled President Trump “an absolute fool” for apparently poking fun at the presumptive Democratic nominee for wearing a mask at a Memorial Day service Monday. In an interview with CNN’s Dana Bash, the former veep was asked about Trump’s retweet of a Fox News commentator making fun of Biden’s decision to wear a mask at a service while he went without one. “He’s a fool, an absolute fool to talk that way,” Biden, 77, said in his first face-to-face interview since the coronavirus pandemic upended his presidential campaign. “I mean, every leading doctor in the world is saying we should wear a mask when you’re in a crowd, especially when you know you’re going to be in a position when you’re going to get inadvertently closer than 12-feet to somebody,” he said. Biden went on to accuse the Republican president of “stoking deaths.” “It just costs people’s lives. It’s cost peoples lives and we’re almost 100,000 dead today. 100,000 people,” he said, calling the death toll “a tragedy.” Bash asked the Democratic hopeful if he thought wearing a mask projected strength or weakness, to which Biden responded “leadership.” “What it presents and projects is leadership. Presidents are supposed to lead, not engage in folly and be falsely masculine,” he said. In the tweet shared by Trump, Fox News commentator Brit Hume shared a photo of Biden clad in a black mask and his trademark Aviator sunglasses, remarking: “This might help explain why Trump doesn’t like to wear a mask in public. Biden today.” Biden was also asked about controversial remarks he made last week when he told a popular radio host that African-American voters having a hard time choosing between him and Trump weren’t black. He called the comments a “mistake” but blamed host Charlamagne tha God — telling Bash, “He was being a wise guy and I responded in kind.” Biden demurred when pressed if he would commit to choosing a woman of color to be his vice president — with the race to join his ticket reaching a fever pitch and a vetting process now underway. “There are women of color under consideration and there are women from every part of country under consideration because there are a lot of women in this country that are ready, but I’m not ready to make that commitment,” he said.

Most coronavirus patients put on ventilators do not survive. For those that do, Maura Regan is there to guide them through the long and difficult journey to recovery. Regan, 28, is an acute care occupational therapist at NYU Langone’s Rusk Rehabilitation who went from having a full caseload of neurological patients to treating COVID-19 recoverees when the pandemic hit. The illness, which can take over a month to recover from, sometimes leaves patients unable to walk, talk and care for themselves. Some don’t even know what month it is, she said. “A lot of the patients that I’ve been seeing in the ICU have delirium once they’re more alert, and they also have very profound generalized weakness in their arms, their legs, their necks, all the muscles you can think of,” Regan told The Post. “It’s very easy [for healthy people] to get up out of bed, go to the bathroom, brush your teeth, get dressed, but for someone who’s recovering from COVID, that requires a lot of their energy and they might feel extremely fatigued after doing those basic tasks.” Regan’s work is painstaking. She teaches patients how to hold a spoon, how to groom themselves and, with the assistance of speech-language pathologists, how to communicate. It can take many sessions before they’re able to be discharged. When patients first come off of ventilators and are suffering from delirium, the work is particularly difficult, she said. “They’re usually disoriented, they have trouble following commands … a lot of my patients have also been confused as to why their husband or wife isn’t there with them or their kids are not there with them and they ask for their family a lot,” Regan recalled. “Reorienting them to where they are, what is going on, what the date is, you know, because for some of them who have been sedated for an extended period of time, they might still think it’s April so it’s definitely very disorienting when they start to be more alert.” Regan encourages her patients to participate in their own self-care, instead of having a nurse do everything, which is helpful in decreasing delirium and giving them a “sense of normalcy.” She recounted a “particularly amazing moment” with a patient in his 70s who was having serious trouble after being on a ventilator for “maybe a month or longer” and had been delirious for “days and days and days.” “He was finally able to learn how to use the alphabet board to start kind of communicating. One day I was working with him and I figured out that he likes Frank Sinatra music. So, you know, they have little tablets in their room, and I pulled up the radio, and I put on Frank Sinatra,” Regan said. “We just started dancing. He can barely move, but he started moving his arms and we were just dancing to Frank Sinatra. We were both laughing,” she added. “It was amazing after how sick he had been.” The man was recently discharged to a rehab facility — and Regan said moments like that keep her pushing through the difficult work. “When you’ve been working on one specific task or goal with somebody for multiple sessions over multiple days, and then you finally have that session where they’re able to meet the goal that you both had set or they’re able to accomplish the task that had been taking them a week to work up to, it’s such a joyful moment,” Regan said. Do you have a nominee for The Post’s Hero of the Day? E-mail heroes@nypost.com.

The NHL’s return-to-play format is set. Whether the 24 teams involved get to use it depends on how the next steps unfold. Commissioner Gary Bettman announced Tuesday that the NHL’s regular season is officially over and, if and when play resumes, it will be in a 24-team playoff in two hub cities, with dates and locations still to be determined. “We will not set dates, choose sites or begin to play until we know it is appropriate and prudent and are approved to do so,” Bettman said during his televised announcement. “As we seek some return to normalcy, this is an important day, particularly for NHL fans. Since March 12 [when the season was paused], we have been hopeful and optimistic that by developing all options and alternatives, we could get to this point.” Tuesday’s announcement marked another step towards hockey returning this summer, but there are still many more left to take before any puck is dropped in Las Vegas, Edmonton or whatever two hub cities are eventually selected. The league and players association must still work out health and safety protocols, and financial details, in the face of the coronavirus pandemic that is still plaguing parts of the country. Monday, the NHL outlined its protocol for players to begin returning to training facilities for voluntary, small-group workouts. Bettman said Tuesday this step, Phase 2, could start in “early June.” Phase 3 would be opening training camps, which will begin no earlier than “the first half of July,” the league said, with Phase 4 — the beginning of the tournament — to follow. Bettman called it “conceivable” that play could resume by the end of July, but did not offer specific dates. “Anybody who gives you a date is guessing,” Bettman said later on a Zoom call with reporters. Though teams would be responsible for testing players for COVID-19 at least twice weekly during Phase 2, that would ramp up during Phase 3. Once teams arrive in hub cities, the league would take over testing protocols, with players tested every night and the results available by the next morning, deputy commissioner Bill Daly said. That could mean 25,000-30,000 tests, according to Bettman. A single positive test would “not necessarily” shut the tournament down, Daly said. Under the agreed-upon playoff format, the Rangers would face the Hurricanes and the Islanders would meet the Panthers in the best-of-five play-in series that the league is calling a qualifying round. The top four teams in each conference, meanwhile, would play a round-robin format to determine their seeds. It remains to be determined whether the matchups for the official first round would be bracketed or re-seeded. The first and second rounds could either be best-of-five or best-of-seven, but the conference finals and Stanley Cup finals will still be best-of-seven. The 10 hub cities under consideration are Chicago, Columbus, Dallas, Edmonton, Las Vegas, Los Angeles, Minneapolis/St. Paul, Pittsburgh, Toronto and Vancouver. A decision on the two is expected to come in 3-4 weeks. The league is currently working with the Canadian government to try to relax a rule that mandates a 14-day quarantine for anybody entering the country. If those talks are unsuccessful, the Canadian cities would be ruled out as hosts. The seven teams that are not part of the return-to-play format, including the Devils, can begin focusing on the NHL draft. The complicated lottery process will include those seven teams, plus the eight teams who lose in the qualifying round. The seven teams left out of the tournament could be in for a long wait before they play again, as Bettman said the league is willing to delay the start of its 2021 season until November, December or early January if need be, depending on how late the 2020 Stanley Cup finals are played.

Aesthetically pleasing they are not, but there’s been a run on above-ground pools this summer as the coronavirus lockdown forces people to resign themselves to staycations rather than trips to cool off at the beach or lake. Retailers can barely keep up with demand now that most kids’ camps are canceled for safety reasons and entertainment needs to be available at home. Many pool-supply companies have the pools on backorder while stores such as Home Depot and Target are telling customers to keep checking back until the stock becomes available again. Contacted by The Post, an employee at Staten Island Pool & Spa said most of their pools were on backorder for between four and six weeks. Westchester resident Jennifer Jaicks Ciardullo counts herself lucky. She managed to score a $650 15-foot by 4-foot Intex pool from Walmart after weeks of searching online. “Everywhere was sold out, or they were advertised on Amazon for a huge markup to something like $2,000,” says the 49-year-old mom who picks up her pool Wednesday. “I can’t believe I managed to get one, but I found it by Googling like crazy one night.” She and her husband bought the pool for their 14-year-old daughter, who is likely going to be disappointed that the camp she has attended for 10 years is closed. They hope her friends will come over and play in it. But Ciardullo admits that the beauty of her backyard has had to be sacrificed for the “big blue monstrosity.” “I never imagined we’d have one of these, but desperate times call for desperate measures,” says the full-time human resources worker. “My sister-in-law calls it a ‘ghetto pool’ while I call it $650 of peace and happiness filled with laughing 14- and 15-year-olds.” As for the large patch of grass which will be destroyed by its footprint, she jokes: “Will that grass ever grow?” Meanwhile, another mom from Westchester, who asked not to be named for privacy reasons, turned to eBay to find her family’s $1,800 Intex pool which measures 24 feet by 12 feet. “We paid around $300 more than the recommended retail price, because I couldn’t buy it anywhere else,” she says. “We thought it was worth it for our 7-year-old twins who had a blast splashing around in it over Memorial Day weekend.” The 35-year-old describes the look compared to an in-ground pool as “awful” but, like Ciardullo, agrees it’s a case of “needs must.”

Social theorist: Back to the Future How will COVID-19 change the face of American society? “I hope to be proved wrong,” Michael Lind writes at Spectator USA, “but I suspect the trauma will endure long enough to effect lasting changes in lifestyles and business models” — returning us to the 1950s, with massive suburbanization to rival that of the postwar years. “A few elite neighborhoods in Paris, London and New York will always be fashionable, but others could ­undergo the kind of dystopian urban decay that was familiar as recently as the 1980s, inspiring movies like ‘Taxi Driver’ (1976).” Working-class America would get the drug- and crime-ridden urban peripheries. The middle class? “Larger firms may use worker-friendly policies and benefits as a way to discourage unionization, so that gains for workers may take the form of more corporate paternalism” — buttressed by delivery drones, home delivery of everything and streaming entertainment. But hey, at least “TV screens are much bigger now, and there are a lot more channels.” Campaign watch: Democrats’ Worst Nightmare In April, economist and ex-Obama adviser Jason Furman made the “startling claim,” Politico’s Ryan Lizza and Daniel Lippman report, that the United States may “see the best economic data” in its history right ­before the November election, with “the most explosive monthly employment numbers and GDP growth ever.” If this collapse is similar to “what happens to a thriving economy during and after a natural disaster,” Furman argues, that means “a quick and steep decline in economic activity followed by a quick and steep rebound.” His prediction has “spooked” top Democrats, since it means President Trump could boast “the best jobs and growth numbers ever” — a huge boon for his re-election chances. Foreign desk: A Calamity in Hong Kong China’s crackdown on Hong Kong, frets Minxin Pei at Project Syndicate, only begins with the new law that will let “Chinese security agents” engage in “surveillance, intimidation and arrest” of both Hong Kongers and “foreign nationals.” Expect “spiraling violence” and “an economic meltdown as capital and talent flee Asia’s global financial hub.” Washington will likely cut “almost all commercial and travel privileges” for Hong Kong, possibly “dealing a fatal blow to the city’s economy” — and triggering “another cold war.” China’s leaders must have decided the crackdown was worth “these calamitous consequences,” sighs Pei: “The international community must prove them wrong.” Conservative: Media’s Tara Reade Fail  “The emergence of Tara Reade’s story has . . . served as a kind of stress test for the fourth estate,” Commentary’s Christine Rosen observes. “Would they apply the same standards of credibility and proof to Reade’s allegations as they had for those made by Christine Blasey Ford against Supreme Court nominee Brett Kavanaugh, who was also accused of assault?” The answer: No. And the failure was “revelatory.” The New York Times “slow-walked” the story for at least three weeks, surprising, given that the Grey Lady “had been quick to publish every (often uncorroborated) detail as it emerged about” Kavanaugh, among other accused public figures. Meanwhile, “television producers, usually dogged in their pursuit of sexual and political controversy, seemed anesthetized” when it came to Reade. Bottom line: “The Tara Reade case provided media institutions with a major opportunity to establish some broad nonpartisan norms” for such stories — and they lost it. Libertarian: Child Care After Corona “Day care options are disappearing” in the pandemic, with even surviving centers operating at “limited capacity for a time” — the reason, Shoshana Weissmann argues at Reason, we have to remove regulations that are “nuisances in the best of times and deeply damaging in the worst.” Take Washington, DC, which has huge child-care costs but “decided to require college degrees for day-care workers, increasing costs further.” Wisconsin “imposes more than 400 requirements on licensed family child-care providers,” while Oklahoma specifies “the number of puppets that must be available per child.” It’s time to eliminate such senseless “barriers to work.” — Compiled by The Post Editorial Board

Congrats, grads! A Texas Chick-fil-A recently celebrated the high school graduation of five employees with a socially distanced commencement ceremony in the restaurant’s parking lot. Though the coronavirus health crisis has upended many events this spring, management at the chicken-centric chain’s Babcock Road location in San Antonio made lemons out of lemonade and surprised its 2020 grads with a small, outdoor ceremony on Friday. In the fight against the novel coronavirus, attendees wore masks and gloves throughout the commencement. “While this may not be how you guys pictured graduation a few years ago, months ago, or even days ago, we wanted to make sure that you guys were celebrated in a way that we could all be here and celebrate you guys for the accomplishment you have made,” a team member explained at the start of the convocation. “We know it took a lot of hard work and determination, so we did not want that to go uncelebrated.” After a few heartfelt speeches from teachers and Chick-fil-A staffers, each senior student walked down a red carpet, received a stole and gift basket, and posed for a photo with the chain’s cow mascot, who dressed for the occasion in robes and a mortarboard. Video footage of the heartfelt tribute has since gone viral with over 1,500 views on Facebook. “We are so proud of everything they have accomplished! Congratulations to our Class of 2020!!!” Chick-fil-A said.

A Brooklyn man is suing a borough nursing home for giving his dad a fatal case of coronavirus. Marc Dupervil claims that his already ailing father Frederic Dupervil contracted COVID-19 and died April 1 from it because of Linden Center For Nursing and Rehabilitation’s “failure to take measures to protect” his dad from the coronavirus, a Brooklyn Supreme Court lawsuit filed Tuesday alleges. The case comes on the second day that city courts have reopened for new non-emergency cases after a moratorium was put in place in March. The suit accuses the East New York nursing home of not following local, state and federal coronavirus guidelines — including failing to separate residents, failing to enforce social distancing, not canceling group activities and communal dining, not stopping visitors from coming into the facility in a “timely” manner and other measures. Marc’s lawyer, Joseph Ciaccio, told The Post that Frederic had dementia and was wheelchair-bound before the pandemic. After contracting the virus, the 78-year-old dad suffered “excruciating pain and agony, including fear of imminent death” the court papers allege. Frederic endured, “labored breathing, fever, mental confusion; respiratory failure; and death,” but his diagnosis, testing and treatment were “unreasonably delayed,” the court documents claim. Frederic also went through dramatic weight loss, worsening pressure ulcers and suffered sepsis, the court filings say. The suit cites media coverage of the nursing home’s morgue at full capacity and the facility choosing to hold dead bodies in “overflow rooms” that were only cooled by air conditioners. The home failed “to provide a clean nursing home” and employed, “inept, incompetent and/or skilled agents,” the suit charges. As of Monday, four residents were confirmed and 19 were presumed to have died from COVID-19 at the nursing home, according to state data. Marc has brought claims for wrongful death, gross negligence and medical malpractice and is seeking unspecified damages. “We haven’t yet seen the lawsuit nor do we comment on open litigation,” Linden Center general counsel Richard Brum told The Post. “Our hearts grieve for those we’ve lost and their families during this unprecedented public health crisis as we continue to do everything in our power to protect residents and our staff from the spread of COVID-19.” On Monday, The Post reported on the first wrongful death lawsuit to be filed in Manhattan Supreme Court against a nursing home amid the pandemic.

Burger King has launched giant social distancing crowns to make sure customers keep 6 feet apart. The fast food chain introduced the creative new way to keep customers socially distant as franchises began to reopen dine-in services in Germany. Restaurants now reopening their doors after weeks of lockdown are looking for ways to ensure customers maintain their distance. Burger King tweeted an image of two customers digging into a meal outside the store while using special “social distancing” crowns to stay safe. The post was captioned: “Distancing, but make it fashion”. The oversized headgear is meant to extend far enough off the wearer’s head to ensure they are 6 feet from other customers. When a Twitter user asked where they could get one, Burger King responded that the crowns were available to customers in Germany. “We wanted to reinforce the rules of high safety and hygiene standards that the BK restaurants are following,” a Burger King spokesperson told Business Insider. “The do-it-yourself social distance crown was a fun and playful way to remind our guests to practice social distancing while they are enjoying food in the restaurants.” GETTING CREATIVE Cafes and restaurants around the world are coming up with inventive ideas post-lockdown. Some establishments have reduced the amount of seating available, while others opt to paint markings on the floor to keep customers separated. In Maryland, Fish Tales Bar & Grill transformed inflatable inner tubes into portable tables to keep customers 6 feet apart. And, in Sweden, a restaurant called Bord för En, or Table for One, is serving a single person every day by delivering food to a table in the middle of a field via a basket on a rope pulley system. In Thailand, Maison Saigon is using stuffed panda bears to indicate where customers can and cannot sit. A Chinese national park began handing tourists 3-foot-wide social distancing hats as the country reopens and visitor numbers grow. The park was inspired by schoolchildren seen wearing similar headgear at the Yangzheng School in Hangzhou, capital of Zhejiang Province in east China. Children donned surgical masks and a “social distancing hat”, which has a 3-foot-long measuring tool jutting out the sides. A cafe in the German city of Schwerin was seen offering customers hats topped with pool noodles, but was later revealed as a prank. Jacqueline Rothe, the owner of Cafe Rothe, said the gag showed how difficult it is for restaurateurs to enforce social distancing. In Italy, Burger King is also selling a “Social Distancing Whopper,” which features three times the amount of raw onions usually found on the burger. The idea is that people’s onion-induced bad breath will keep them farther away from each other. “The triple onion Whopper that helps others stay away,” a commercial promoting the burger says. Back in the UK, Burger King has reopened around 50 restaurants – but only for drive-thru and delivery.

A California attorney and an Arizona businessman tried to broker the sale of millions of masks at a massive mark-up to exploit the shortage of personal protective equipment during the coronavirus pandemic, Brooklyn prosecutors alleged Tuesday. What’s more, their supposed supplier then tried to pass off empty packages as boxes of PPE for sale, the feds allege. William Young Sr., 64, and Kent Bulloch, 56, pleaded not guilty at their arraignment via telephone conference to one count each of conspiracy to price gouge in violation of the Defense Production Act. Both men, who were arrested last month on the misdemeanor charge, were released without bail. On March 26, Young allegedly called a potential investor in Brooklyn to ask if he was interested in 40 million N95 masks that could be sold at double or triple the purchase price, according to the criminal complaint. The investor alerted the feds. At the direction of the government, he introduced Young to a second “investor,” who was cooperating with the federal prosecutors in the hopes of getting a reduced sentence on his felony case, prosecutors say in court docs. Young and Bulloch then brokered a meeting between an associate of the second man — who was actually an undercover agent — and a supplier they said was looking to unload one million N95 masks for $3.80 each and 11 million 3-ply masks for 74 cents each, the feds allege. Before the health crisis created PPE shortages, N95 masks sold for 75 cents each and 3-ply masks for 14 to 18 cents, prosecutors said. But the supplier didn’t actually have the masks, prosecutors said. On April 14, the supplier’s associate showed the undercover agent boxes at their office that turned out to be empty, and stockpiles in Los Angeles warehouses that didn’t belong to them, according to the feds. “Most of the empty boxes had been resealed, shrink-wrapped and labeled, which created the impression that they were filled with protective masks,” the criminal complaint states. After the trip to the warehouses, the supplier emailed the investor an invoice requesting $4,838,000 in payment for 3.8 million 3-ply masks and 500,000 N95 masks. The invoice instructed the investor to make the payment through an account controlled by Bulloch, the complaint alleges. Young and Bulloch told the investor they’d charge a 10 percent commission for their role in brokering the deal, prosecutors allege. On April 17, the FBI executed a search warrant at the LA warehouses and learned that the masks that were there were owned by businessmen who had no connection to the supplier, court docs say. President Trump issued an executive order on March 18 criminalizing PPE hoarding and price gouging. “Mr. Bulloch maintains his innocence and intends to vigorously defend against the allegations,” said defense lawyer Jeremy Gutman. Young’s attorney didn’t immediately return a request for comment.

The Justice Department is ending its investigation of three senators who sold stocks early in the coronavirus pandemic, but is still investigating Sen. Richard Burr, according to a report. Defense attorneys for Sens. Kelly Loeffler (R-Ga.), Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) and James Inhofe (R-Okla.) were informed Tuesday of the decision, aides confirmed to The Post. The trio sold large amounts of stocks before the markets crashed, but denied wrongdoing. The FBI this month served a warrant on Burr, a retiring North Carolina Republican, and took his cellphone. Burr recently stepped down as chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, a perch from which he received COVID-19 reports from spy agencies. The Wall Street Journal reports that an investigation of Burr will continue. The stock sales of the four senators stoked public furore as ordinary Americans incurred steep drops in their accounts. Loeffler made large sales after she attended a private coronavirus briefing for senators on Jan. 24, but she insisted that third-party advisers handled stock sales for her and her husband, New York Stock Exchange chairman Jeffrey Sprecher. Feinstein and Inhofe protested that they didn’t even attend the Jan. 24 briefing. Loeffler and Feinstein acknowledged this month that they complied with federal requests for information. Feinstein’s office said she was questioned by the FBI and a Loeffler spokesperson said she “forwarded documents and information to DOJ, the [Securities and Exchange Commission], and the Senate Ethics Committee.” Loeffler spokesman Stephen Lawson said the investigation’s end was a “clear exoneration” of allegations from “the fake news media and her political opponents.” Loeffler, appointed to her post in January, is in a bitter reelection fight against challenger Rep. Doug Collins (R-Ga.). Spokespeople for Burr and the Justice Department declined to comment. According to mandatory Senate filings, Feinstein sold $500,001 to $1 million worth of stock in a company called Allogene Therapeutics on Jan. 31, less than a month before panic about the virus caused markets to plunge. Her husband sold $1,000,001 to $5 million worth of Allogene shares on Feb. 18, according to financial disclosures. Inhofe sold as much as $400,000 worth of stock on Jan. 27, including shares in five different companies including Apple, PayPal and Brookfield Asset Management, according to a disclosure report. Inhofe said he instructed brokers to sell all of his stocks shortly after he became chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee in September 2018 and that the process took time. Loeffler and her husband sold about $20 million in stock from Jan. 24, including major trades in her husband’s company’s stock and sales of retailers Lululemon, T.J. Maxx and Ross Stores. She reportedly bought shares in the tech firm Oracle and Citrix, which provides teleworking software. Burr publicly downplayed the threat of the virus while selling up to $1.7 million in stock.

Call it the corona sutra. Enterprising Swiss sex workers have devised some inventive ways for their colleagues to service clients sans spreading the coronavirus — by doing the deed “doggy style” and “reverse cowgirl.” The opportunistic courtesans drafted the guidelines in hopes that Switzerland will lift the temporary ban on prostitution enacted two months ago over COVID-19 concerns, reports Swiss media outlet Watson. Both aforementioned sexual positions allow for a safe distance between faces during hanky-panky, according to sex-worker advocacy group ProKoRe in Switzerland, where prostitution is legal. They claim that flesh peddlers can reduce the likelihood of contracting or transmitting the virus via water droplets that are inherent in going at it missionary style (face-to-face). In March, New York City officials released guidelines for pandemic sex, declaring masturbation is the safest way to avoid the coronavirus and denouncing sex acts like “rim jobs.” Healthline cautioned against hooking up with strangers in a recent article on making love in the time of corona. Currently, there’s no evidence that having sex in the “doggy style” or “reverse cowgirl” positions can mitigate the risk of contracting COVID-19, which can travel as far as 13 feet. Other proposed COVID-avoiding measures include airing out rooms for at least 15 minutes after each steamy session, washing bed sheets at a temperature of at least 60 degrees and requiring call girls to wear face masks while working. And if that wasn’t kinky enough, hookups should be limited to 15 minutes, and the brothel must keep a record of the customer’s contact info for a full month, per the guidelines. In the bill, ProKoRe implores Switzerland to lift lockdowns as a matter of emergency, citing that Switzerland’s prostitution hole is currently being filled by clandestine courtesan rings, reports Watson. Swiss skin merchants aren’t the only ones struggling to stay afloat during lockdown. Adult-content creators claim they’re getting booted from subscription platform OnlyFans as the site goes more mainstream. Meanwhile, non-essential business closures have forced one Nevada sex worker to offer her services as a virtual girlfriend in exchange for groceries and Amazon gift cards.

Paging Mr. Mannequin, party of two. Mannequins are the latest must-have customer as the coronavirus pandemic has forced restaurants to institute social distancing practices and limit capacity. One of these creative solutions utilizes mannequins to make restaurants seem fuller. Most recently, restaurants in Vilnius, Lithuania’s capital, have started to embrace the stiff trend — but with a fashionable twist. Dozens of restaurants and bars in the county, upon reopening, are now acting as displays for local designers to feature their fashions by adorning the sitting mannequins in the season’s latest looks. “Empty tables inside our restaurant look rather odd, and we don’t have any way to remove them,” explained Bernie Ter Braak, the owner of the Cosy restaurant, in a press release. Ter Braak is credited with creating the initiative with local designer Julija Janus. “Therefore, we decided to reach out to our neighbors, fashion boutique stores, and invited them to use our empty tables to showcase their newest collections,” Braak continued. “The news spread, and well-known designers joined this project, which keeps gaining interest across the city.” More than 60 mannequins modeling local designer’s clothes from 19 boutiques are featured in dozens of restaurants and cafés in the city’s Old Town Glass Quarter, according to the release. The mayor, Remigijus Šimašius, called the idea “a perfect match of communal spirit and creativity.” Patrons of the restaurants can do more than just window shop, though. Each mannequin is seated at a table which has information about where each outfit can be purchased. The trendy social-distancing stunt has been embraced by the city, and IDW, one of Europe’s leading high-quality mannequin manufacturers, which has provided the mannequins for free, the release shared. “The fashion industry is particularly affected by the lockdown,” said Julia Janus. “Local boutiques used to sell the niche, original pieces created by local designers. As they are currently closed due to the quarantine, designers do not have many opportunities to showcase their latest collections, and in general, the consumption is down. We hope that this campaign will move the waters and local designers will gain some visibility.” The fashion displays will continue through May. In Virginia, a Michelin-starred restaurant began taking a similar approach earlier this month, using mannequins in period costume to liven-up his dining room when reopening rules dictated that customers can only be seated outside as eateries were opening back up.

Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer claimed her husband was just kidding when he dropped her name in an attempt to speed up the installation of his boat ahead of Memorial Day. “Knowing it wouldn’t make a difference, he jokingly asked if being married to me might move him up,” Whitmer said of her husband, Marc Mallory, during a press conference Tuesday. “He regrets it. I wish it wouldn’t have happened. And that’s really all we have to say about it,” she added. The comments came after Whitmer — whose strict coronavirus lockdown policies have caused infamous revolts in the state — took heat when it appeared her husband was trying to flout the rules. Three days after Whitmer announced that she was lifting some restrictions in areas before Memorial Day weekend, her hubby apparently tried to cut the queue at a marina so his boat would be in the waters by the holiday. “Being Memorial weekend and the fact that we started working three weeks late means there is no chance this is going to happen,” NorthShore Dock LLC owner Tad Dowker wrote last week in a Facebook post about the incident. REUTERS/Rebecca Cook AP Photo/Al Goldis, File View Slideshow “Well our office personnel had explained this to the man and he replied, ‘I am the husband to the governor, will this make a difference?,’” Dowker wrote in the post, that has since been made private, according to the Detroit News. Her husband’s request also came after Whitmer had asked residents to “think long and hard” before traveling to second homes for the holiday. She and her husband own a vacation home about 25 minutes from Traverse City. Whitmer told reporters this was just her husband’s “failed attempt at humor.” “He thought it might get a laugh. It didn’t,” she said, shaking her head. “And to be honest, I wasn’t laughing either when it was relayed to me, because I knew how it would be perceived.”

A New Jersey used car salesman and an allegedly corrupt New York City pharmacist dubbed “the Mask Man” were arrested in separate coronavirus price-gouging and fraud schemes, federal authorities said Tuesday. In the first bust, car salesman Ronald Romano attempted to sell New York City about $45 million worth of personal protective equipment for front-line workers — including N95 masks — that he didn’t even have, prosecutors said. As Romano and his co-conspirators tried to close the deal, they allegedly made false statements and offered fake references to show they could provide the gear that was supposedly manufactured in the United States. As part of the ruse, Romano said he had previously sold protective equipment to a state agency in Florida — a sale that had never taken place, according to prosecutors, who said he listed a co-conspirator as a reference on the paperwork he submitted to the city of New York. “I’m working on a few deals that if I get any of them you might be buying a Ferrari,” he allegedly told his co-conspirator in a message during the scheme. Romano was busted when skeptical city employees called the supposed manufacturer and unraveled the lie. He was hit with conspiring to commit wire fraud and one count of wire fraud charges. “Ronald Romano’s short-lived second career as a purveyor of vital protective gear is over,” US Attorney Geoffrey Berman said in a statement Tuesday. In the second bust, licensed pharmacist Richard Schirripa spent about $200,000 on N95 masks and sold some of them at an enormous markup to undercover agents on the Upper East Side. “I feel like a drug dealer,” Schirripa allegedly told the agents while making the deal from his car. In an interview with federal authorities, Schirripa said he’d been given the name the “Mask Man” after he started stockpiling the protective gear when the coronavirus first hit China. In a recorded call with an undercover agent, he boasted about price-gouging, saying: “When you have something no one else has, it’s not a high price.” Schirripa also allegedly used his pharmacy business to fill prescriptions for drugs that he took to his home in Long Island. He was hit with a slew of charges including making false statements to law enforcement, health care fraud, and aggravated identity theft.

Kelly Dodd took to Instagram to “clarify” comments she made about the coronavirus pandemic — again. The “Real Housewives of Orange County” star took aim at Page Six on Tuesday after we reported her claims that “no one is dying” of coronavirus in Orange County, Calif., were incorrect. The reality star said on her Instagram Story Monday, “No one is wearing masks here in Orange County. Yup, because nobody is dying here of the virus.” However, the county’s death toll was more than 130 as of Monday. “I was by no means minimizing deaths that have been caused by this virus, and I feel for their loved ones,” Dodd, 44, said in response to our report. “However, Orange County has 133 deaths out of 3 million people — much lower than most.” Addressing her celebratory remarks about people not wearing masks, she added, “I felt encouraged and excited that people were out and about and there was some semblance of normalcy.” The “RHOC” star also blasted Us Weekly for accusing Dodd in a now-revised story of not wearing a mask herself in the video she recorded on Memorial Day. “I was wearing a mask,” she said before pointing to her mom in the clip. “This lady right here was not wearing the mask, and no patrons when we were eating were wearing the mask. The servers were, but you can’t eat with a mask on, so get your facts straight.” This is not the first time Dodd has had to “clarify” her remarks about the pandemic. In April, she apologized repeatedly for saying COVID-19 is “God’s way of thinning the herd.” Two weeks later, she then came under fire again for saying, “Well, people are going to die! I’m sorry to tell ya.”

Cleaner subways and nightly sweeps of the homeless from the system are the “silver linings” of the coronavirus pandemic, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday. “I’ll tell you one of the silver linings here: The subways have never been as clean as they are now, and we’re helping more homeless people than ever before,” Cuomo said during a press conference as the state’s death toll hit 23,561. The governor ordered the unprecedented nightly closure of the subways in early May to both boot vagrants from the system and deep-clean trains and stations. Cuomo criticized the view that homeless living in the subways should be left alone. “That was a misguided theory. Well, we respect your civil rights and civil liberties, we’re going to let you sleep on a subway car, and risk getting molested or hurt during the night. No! They deserved better,” he continued. “And now because we close the subway to clean the cars, the homeless have to be off the subway, otherwise you can’t clean the car, and it’s the first time you’ve actually had a real outreach program. So, out of crisis comes positivity.” City outreach workers have been directing homeless people kicked off the subways to shelters — though many have turned them down and returned to the rails the next day. Photos showed some who did accept shelter sleeping on the staircase of one facility. Matthew McDermott Matthew McDermott View Slideshow Cuomo would not say when the nightly closures will end and normal service will resume. And he advised New Yorkers not to get “tough” with fellow straphangers who refuse to wear masks on transit. “There is a social responsibility, I believe, for people to wear masks. I believe it should be part of our culture,” he said. “You can have conversations with people and point it out, but keep it friendly and helpful and constructive.”

MLB made a financial offer Tuesday that the union dismissed as discouraging. What will be determined in the coming days is whether this was an initial financial step toward a contentious give-and-take that will result in a deal in time to restart the season or whether this is 1994 again with each side waiting for a blink from the other that never came that year and resulted in the cancellation of the World Series. MLB’s plan called for those making the least, to be made close to whole on the prorated basis for games played. Thus, if someone were making the MLB 2020 minimum of $563,500 and 82 regular season games (almost exactly half a season) were played, they would receive around 93 percent of the prorated amount or $262,000. But players at the top of the pay scale such as Gerrit Cole and Mike Trout would be asked to take a cut of more than 50 percent of their already pro-rated salaries. Cole, for example, was scheduled to earn $36 million this season, but his pro-rated salary of around $18 million for 82 games, under the proposal, would be reduced to roughly $8 million. The proposal called for many tiers between the lowest salaries and richest contracts, with the sliding scale impacting each tier. The proposal also called for players to receive a financial bump if the postseason were played to conclusion, since MLB receives its largest share of national TV money from the playoffs. The players association described the proposal as requiring massive pay cuts on what already is going to be the loss of a half season of pay if the sides agree to an 82-game season and comes at a time when the players — not owners — would be taking risk of exposure to coronavirus by returning to play. To that end, the union also indicated the sides had sizable differences on health and safety matters. MLB responded, “We made a proposal based to the union that is completely consistent with the economic realities facing our sport. We look forward to a responsive proposal from the [union].” However, the sides left a tele-meeting that began at 2 p.m. Tuesday without a scheduled next meeting. The union planned to discuss the proposal with players. Do the players come back with a counterproposal? A different structure? Nothing? Does MLB budge? Is this standard rhetoric or locked-in positions? The players association had maintained the contract matter was decided in a March 26 agreement with MLB that called for players to receive their 2020 salaries on a prorated basis with a resumption of play. Union executive director Tony Clark had publicly said negotiation over salaries for this year “is over.” That the union agreed to take a proposal suggested flexibility — but does it? MLB has pointed to the portion of the March 26 agreement that stated further negotiations about financial feasibility needed to be had if games were not played with paid attendance — which is the status now. MLB has also insisted the union understood those parameters when the March 26 agreement went into effect. The union already was annoyed that it had been two weeks since a financial proposal was expected and the players were only receiving a concept Tuesday. As a player representative said, “Time is on no one’s side.” The expectation is that to begin spring training by mid-June and restart the season the first week of July, the sides would have to agree by around June 1. The union is concerned the delay was an MLB tactic to create public pressure on the players — amid so much financial hardship in the country — to accept reduced pay or look ungrateful and spoiled. MLB had floated the idea of splitting 2020 revenues 50-50 with the players, which the union made clear was a non-starter. The union has viewed a revenue-sharing concept as a slippery slope to a salary cap. So MLB changed its concept — but that has not changed the union’s mind, at least not yet. The union could worry, for example, that this proposal is designed to split the player ranks. For while the salaries to players such as Cole and Trout are what garner news, they are the exceptions. The Yankees were projected to have the largest payroll in 2020, but even they were going to have at least 10 and probably more players make $1 million or less. Every other team would have at least that many and often more. Plus, in 2020, if games are played rosters are going to be expanded, almost certainly with low-cost players. Thus, the union could be facing 50 percent or more of its membership being made close to whole while the richer players would be asked to subsidize that to some degree. Generally, veteran players who make the most are in leadership positions in the union. Will they decide to take less? If the union agreed to this kind of proposal, would some of those players who make the most — especially if they have multiyear contracts into the future — refuse to play? Pressure to find a solution goes both ways, but certainly is felt strongly by owners. But there are owners who are saying that they are going to lose substantial amounts even with reduced pay and they are not going to agree to play under a system that guarantees even greater losses if the players do not take a significant cut in pay. Owners might be positioning themselves to say to someone such as Cole, would you like to make $9 million this year or nothing else without games played? Both sides are trying to show resolve, protect as much money as possible. Will they find a way to divide the finances in such a way as to have a season?

This is what churches look like in the age of social distancing. A Catholic church in Brooklyn reopened its doors Tuesday — but had to be decked out like a “crime scene” with police tape cordoning off pews and warning signs everywhere. “I know it may look like a crime scene, or a construction site … but, it is a sign that light is at the end of the tunnel!” Immaculate Heart of Mary said of photos posted to its Facebook page before the grand opening. The Kensington church — forced to shutter since March 20 amid the coronavirus crisis — was finally allowed to open for private prayer on Tuesday after getting the go-ahead from Brooklyn Bishop Nicholas DiMarzio. Photos showed the house of worship plastered with bright yellow police-style “CAUTION” tape, sealing off pews and chapels so that the maximum of 10 worshippers allowed in at any one time can be kept safely apart. “No mask, no entry,” other signs cautioned, with numerous yellow warnings reminding parishioners to “maintain social distancing” of at least 6 feet. “Social Distancing is a MUST!” the church stressed in a series of strict rules, adding that “only 10 people at a time permitted.” Other rules were to “sanitize your hands frequently” and “No Touching the Statues!” Tuesday’s opening for Catholic churches in Brooklyn and Queens is just for private prayer and devotion, with Mass still streamed online. DiMarzio also granted permission to start holding funerals, baptisms and weddings — still with a strict maximum of 10 people, all in masks. While the safety measures seemed well-received, at least one of Immaculate Heart’s signs was not —  “Bathroom closed sorry!” “Lack of bathroom means opening is useless for many seniors,” Florence Weintraub said in the comments. The church’s youth minister, John Mancuso, pointed out, however, that it was only open for “short private prayer” with “no mass or sacraments yet” — with others suggesting seniors should still stay isolated at home. Immaculate Heart asked worshipers to follow its strict rules “so that we can re-open fully sooner rather than later!” DiMarzio has warned Catholics not to expect to “resume church life as we enjoyed it before.” “There will be a series of changes designed to keep everyone healthy and safe during prayer and worship,” he said in a statement. “I am confident that we will respond, as faithful People of God, to the challenges placed before us,” he said.

Nearly one-third of New York’s workforce is considered essential during the coronavirus crisis — and is among the best-paid in the nation, a new study says. The new survey by Joblist found 31.5 percent of the Empire State’s workers are considered essential employees — the 10th-highest share in the nation — and they are the fifth-best-paid in the country with an average annual salary of $53,522. Massachusetts came in at No. 1 for best-paid essential workers, with an average salary of $56,229, followed by Washington, Hawaii and Connecticut. Researchers used data from the US Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics to conduct the survey. They noted that “essential” workers aren’t just hospital employees. “The terms ‘frontline worker’ or ‘essential employee’ may conjure images of doctors, nurses, or other medical professionals directly engaging the global health crisis,” the Joblist report says. “But that doesn’t paint the entire picture.” “Many forget essential members of the workforce include bus drivers keeping public transportation in motion, restaurant workers preparing our delivery meals, and grocery store clerks helping ensure everyone gets their toilet paper and sanitary wipes.” The numbers show that most workers deemed essential during the virus crisis are in lower-paying industries, with a national average salary of $46,639 for front-line workers compared to an average of $55,990 for employees in other industries. Almost 5 percent of New York essential workers live beneath the poverty line, the study said. Nationwide, nearly 57 percent of essential workers are women, but they are paid on average almost $12,000 less than men in front-line jobs, the study found. The majority of front-line workers, 62.4 percent, are white, while 20.6 percent are black and 13.6 percent are Asian.

US stocks surged Tuesday as investors latched onto signs that the economy is thawing out after being frozen by the coronavirus. The Dow Jones industrial average soared as much as 694.97 points, or 2.8 percent, to 25,160.13, trading above 25,000 for the first time since March 10. The S&P 500 also broke through its key ceiling of 3,000 after nearly three months, climbing as much as 2.2 percent to 3,021.72. And the tech-heavy Nasdaq gained as much as roughly 1.9 percent to trade just 3.4 percent below its all-time high. Slight improvements in economic data after weeks of coronavirus lockdowns excited Wall Street as brokers returned to the New York Stock Exchange trading floor after a two-month closure. Efforts toward a COVID-19 vaccine from Novavax and Merck also encouraged investors, who have been closely watching the medical race against the deadly bug. “The more that the economy can open without spikes in the virus … the more you can expect the continuation of lifting of restrictions, even in the states that have been most careful,” said Quincy Krosby, chief market strategist for Prudential Financial. But the rally seemed blind to the unprecedented damage the pandemic has done to the global economy — and the looming uncertainty about how long the recovery will take, according to Lamar Villere, portfolio manager of the Villere Balanced Fund. “The fundamental problem is we still have no idea what the real ramifications of the economic shocks that have just gone through the economy are,” Villere said. “There’s just a lot of things that changed radically in the short term that I think the market’s assuming are just going to unwind.” Economic activity has reportedly started to pick up after the virus brought it to a virtual halt. For instance, customers are returning to restaurants in some states and passenger traffic at US airports has more than tripled since mid-April, though it remains far below last year’s levels, according to the Wall Street Journal. More signs of hope came Tuesday as the feds reported an unexpected 0.6 percent increase in new home sales following a 13.7 percent tumble in March. The Conference Board’s consumer confidence index also ticked up to 86.6 in May from 85.7 in April. “The economic data have been so darn grim lately with job losses in the tens of millions that the green shoots of optimism from better consumer confidence and new home sales are welcome,” said Chris Rupkey, chief financial economist at MUFG Union Bank. At their Tuesday highs, the Dow and S&P were more than 35 percent above the lows they hit in March as the pandemic roiled global markets. The milestones they reached Tuesday may spur even more buying among investors despite lingering risks, according to Villere. “Every one of those just tells you if the rest of the world, collective wisdom, says that things are back to normal, well, let’s buy,” he said. With Post wires

Sahina Islam’s daughters — 7-year-old twins and a 4-year-old who attend PS 24 in Flushing — would normally be cheerfully looking forward to starting new grades and throwing themselves into their favorite art and music classes in the fall, but their mother isn’t taking any chances. The 30-year-old biochemist-turned-stay-at-home-mom is joining an increasing number of parents rethinking their back-to-school strategy until a safe and proven vaccine is found for the coronavirus. Even if Gov. Andrew Cuomo reopens schools as hoped in September, Islam won’t return her girls to PS 24, opting instead to teach the children herself after enrolling them in homeschooling. “It seems the safest thing to do until the vaccine is out and shown to be effective for kids,” she tells The Post. “With the rate of infection and the ability for folks to be re-infected, we don’t want to take the risk.” Islam and her husband, Dr. Choudhury Hasan, 34, a front-line physician, even have plans to build a swimming pool in their backyard so they can more easily check off the physical education component of homeschooling. Legal requirements for homeschooling vary from state to state, but in New York, among other strict rules, parents must notify the superintendent of their school district, compose and file individualized instruction plans, and turn in quarterly progress reports. By comparison, New Jersey takes a much more hands-off approach. Those who keep their kids out of school must provide “equivalent instruction,” but there are no regulations regarding parent qualifications, time spent teaching, testing or bookkeeping. Asha Abraham, 43, of Old Bridge, NJ, is another parent strongly considering keeping her sons, Nathanial, 13, and 11-year-old Daniel, away from the town’s Carl Sandburg MS until a vaccine is available. “How do you prevent infection in the close environs of a school?” says Abraham, the owner of a Manhattan-based cybersecurity firm who hopes to juggle the demands of her job with homeschooling. “We are from South India, where there is a huge emphasis on academics and education. But I would rather have my kids alive than educated at this point.” Abraham and her husband, Thomas, 46, are particularly worried about recent news concerning the spread of the mysterious Kawasaki-like condition affecting children. It is known as multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children, or MIS-C, and has been linked to the coronavirus. “It’s scary because they are still figuring out what’s going on with that,” says Abraham, who notes that both her boys have allergies and asthma and are “considered high-risk for COVID-19.” Epidemiologist Kumi Smith, of the School of Public Health at the University of Minnesota, agrees there is uncertainty over MIS-C, but points out that the condition is rare. “Even though there have been reports of pretty severe illness among kids related to COVID-19, the morbidity rate is really a low number,” says the expert. As for parents considering homeschooling, Smith sounds a note of caution. “Kids’ safety is important,” she says, “but you also have to balance that with the family’s well-being, mental health and working parents’ ability to multitask.” That’s especially important since the FDA approval of a vaccine could be a long way off. “Even a 12- to 18-month timeline is highly accelerated and unprecedented,” says Smith. She knows it’s not a panacea, but a vaccine would do much to quell the fears of Ceceilia Parnther, of Jamaica, Queens, who is also considering home-schooling her older daughters, Leila, 10, and 8-year-old Maya. “I can’t help but worry about the critical mass of children at Leila and Maya’s school, because there is a high ratio of students to teachers,” says the 39-year-old assistant professor, who also has a 2-year-old named Norah. Together with her engineer husband, Anthony, 40, Parnther has been researching home-schooling options as an alternative to sending their older girls back to PS 131 in Jamaica Hills for the new academic year. For her, the ideal solution could be a “hybrid model” of education in which some classes are taught in-person and others employ the same distance-learning plans used since New York City schools were closed on March 17. “Maybe there could be some kind of compromise, with staggered start times and other efforts to lower numbers in the classrooms,” suggests Parnther. Indeed, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention last week issued guidelines for schools reopening, which include the wearing of masks, closing playgrounds and having one-way signs in the hallways to enable some measure of social distancing. But Parnther can’t imagine how the guidelines can be effectively implemented, “especially at high-density schools like the one my children attend.” For many parents, however, the thought of home-schooling until a vaccine becomes available is anathema. Among them is White Plains, NY-based businesswoman Kristen Ritvanen, who is keen to see her three children back within the four walls of school this fall. “I am not interested in home-schooling them if they have the opportunity to go back [when] school reopenings have been agreed [on] and sanctioned by the government and health officials,” says the 51-year-old. She claims her older son, Sean, 18, and 16-year-old daughter, Shannon, need to attend a physical location for their “mental, physical and social health.” Meanwhile, her 3 ½-year-old son, Zane, who has an individualized education plan, requires face-to-face interaction for sessions such as speech and occupational therapy. But she doesn’t blame parents like Parnther, Abraham and Islam for their plans to home-school this September. “I’m not a rush-back-to-normal person,” Ritvanen says. “I appreciate that it comes down to personal choice.”

As summer approaches and our time in lockdown starts to be measured in months, people are understandably yearning to get away. But should you travel? And is it safe? After all, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention still recommends nixing all nonessential travel, reiterating on its site that all 50 states have cases of COVID-19, and traveling increases your chance of getting and spreading the virus. So for the stir-crazy, barring using private jets and renting a whole hotel to yourself, what can you do to stay guarded and not contribute to the spread of the virus? We’ve answered some of the most pressing questions below. But before you do anything, remember to comply with the shelter-in-place rules of your state. Let’s get this out of the way: Until a vaccine is developed, it will never be 100% safe to fly. But there are some things to do to protect yourself. If a flight is unavoidable, Dr. Sanjay Gupta recommends packing hand sanitizer and using it as often as possible throughout the journey. Most major domestic airlines require the use of masks during check-in, boarding, in-flight and deplaning — and can deny you access to a flight without one — but he recommends wearing your mask the entire time you’re at the airport, as well as touching as few surfaces as possible. “You wear the mask, again, to protect other people,” he said in a video for CNN. “The front-line workers are there all day. Another reason to try and be as safe as possible.” In the airport, avoid crowded areas, and when on the plane, choose a window seat to avoid exposure to passengers traveling in the aisles. And turn on the air vents (called gaspers) as high as possible. “That’s going to cause turbulent air in front of you and break up any clouds of virus,” says Gupta. In the future, you may see new amenity kits on flights including a mask, gloves, hand sanitizer and alcohol wipes. But for now, besides the mask requirements, US airlines including Alaska Airlines and Delta have blocked the sale of middle seats. Southwest, which doesn’t give seat assignments, has restricted the amount of bookings so that no middle seats will be taken. Through July 6, JetBlue will be restricting the sale of seats. JetBlue has also announced that beginning in June, they will be checking the temperature of pilots and in-flight crew members. The CDC has not relaxed its travel criteria and still recommends you avoid all nonessential international travel. Individual countries are taking their own approaches to lifting bans and reopening, so if you’re able to get a flight (where you will be required to wear a mask the whole time), be sure to research the quarantine rules and check the travel advisories of your destination. Canada had originally planned to reopen their land borders on May 21, but recently extended the closure, remaining blocked to nonessential travel until at least June 21. This does not affect sea and air travel. Most of Canada’s wilderness lodges are already open, Marc Télio of Entrée Destinations tells Town & Country. “The first people coming in are on private jets and yachts.” The land border with Mexico is closed to nonessential travel until June 22, but again, Mexico’s airports never shut down. Popular tourist destinations such as Cancun and Los Cabos are aiming to open up in the beginning of June. Europe’s borders remain closed until June 15 and internal EU border controls will first need to be lifted before allowing others in. But within countries, some things are opening up, like museums in Germany, Italy and Belgium. And countries have already begun laying out individual reopening measures. Greece hopes to welcome tourists back by July, and France recently introduced a bill that whenever visitors are allowed in, far down the line, they’ll need to self-quarantine for 14 days. That’s the case in Puerto Rico, where tourists are already welcome — with a health screening and temperature check upon arrival. Visitors are then required to self-quarantine for 14 days (the same goes for Hawaii). An island-wide curfew also remains in effect until May 25. Elsewhere in the tropics, Aruba is tentatively opening its borders between June 15 and July 1, while the Bahamas is targeting July 1. St. Lucia has already laid out a phased reopening approach, allowing tourists from only the United States beginning on June 4. Visitors must present certified proof of a negative coronavirus test taken within 48 hours of boarding their flights when arriving on the island. Travelers will also be subject to screening and temperature checks by port health authorities. Sure, the lure of cheap flight deals is undeniable right now, but should you pounce on them? The answer isn’t strictly yes or no. Condé Nast Traveler spoke with three experts on the topic who say: First, be realistic about the dates. Jesse Neugarten of Dollar Flight Club recommends waiting until June or after, while Scott Keyes of Scott’s Cheap Flights goes one month further. “The only flight deals we’re sending [to Scott’s Cheap Flights subscribers] are . . . July, August, and further out,” he tells CNT. “But it’s not only fares in the next month or two [that are cheap], but also those well into the fall and winter.” Next, make sure you know the cancellation policy in the event you have to cancel. And third, keep an eye out — the deals will be there into 2021 and perhaps beyond — and the longer you comb, the more likely you are to find an incredibly low mistake fare, which according to Scott’s Cheap Flights, are up 40 percent (likely because airlines aren’t paying attention). Some Amtrak routes have been suspended or reduced, but for the ones that are operating based on demand, the number of tickets sold have been cut in half to allow for physical distancing. Private rooms are also offered when available. Northeast Corridor routes will resume on a reduced schedule beginning June 1, working in conjunction with state partners to ensure that they’re staying within local restrictions. While on the train, all customers and employees are required to wear face masks — a regulation that is strictly enforced — the masks can be removed when they are seated alone or in private rooms. Food from cafes are takeout only. And if you make a reservation, then change you mind, Amtrak is waiving all change and cancellation fees for reservations made by Aug. 31, 2020. Taking to the wide open road seems like a perfect solution for wanderlust, but before you go long distances, take into account the risk. Some cities still have active shelter-in-place or stay-at-home orders and some just aren’t ready to welcome travelers. “I would just be cautious and careful,” says Bonnie Knutson, professor at Michigan State University’s School of Hospitality Business. Even though remote communities may seem open, should you or a  companion get sick, hospital capacity and function will be limited. And as a traveler using grocery stores and highly trafficked public bathrooms along the way, you could end up unwittingly spreading the coronavirus through communities. Should you feel the urge for a road trip, consider instead investing in a bike and exploring new neighborhoods, taking a shorter trip close to home or a day trip for hiking and other outdoor activities. The majority of urban-dwellers don’t own a vehicle, which means that if they want to drive anywhere, they’ll have to rent one. Car rental companies are still operating, with enhanced cleaning measures like sanitizing key areas taking place in between every rental. See, for instance, Enterprise’s Complete Clean Pledge. For extra precaution, wipe down high-touch areas such as the steering wheel, knobs, armrests, dashboard and gear shifts yourself. The car-rental processes have also been updated to limit person-to-person contact, with locations centralized. That is important because the novel coronavirus is most likely to be transmitted between people, so it’s also important to know with whom you’ll be in the car. “Remember that most of the transmission of the coronavirus is respiratory — it’s not through inanimate objects,” Dr. Thomas Russo, chief of the division of infectious disease at the University at Buffalo, tells Business Insider. “When you’re in a rental car, the greatest risk is if you happen to be in the car with someone else and they could be infected.” He also notes that the virus has shown itself to settle out of the air within one to three hours under experimental conditions, which means it shouldn’t be a concern by the time you get the car. The short answer: It’s not recommended. With hotels — known as gathering places — there are plenty of concerns: the amount of people you come into contact with, how many times housekeeping will come into your room and their cleaning regimen are examples. Many hotels are transparent with this information and the things they are doing to mitigate risk. Earlier this month, the American Hotel & Lodging Association released industry-wide Safe Stay protocols. Large chains are also implementing cleaning standards, such as Marriott’s hospital-grade disinfectant to sanitize hotel surfaces, a mobile app for check-in and ultraviolet-light technology to sanitize room keys, among other procedures. If a hotel’s cleaning regimen is not apparent, make sure you ask. And either way, come armed with your own cleaning products and wipe down high-traffic areas: television remotes, door handles, toilet handles, in addition to horizontal surfaces. Outside of your room is also a minefield. Room service tends to be safer than a hotel restaurant, and whatever you do, avoid any buffets. The same goes for gyms. There are unavoidable surfaces you have to touch, like elevator buttons, so consider taking the stairs instead and wash your hands immediately after getting back to your room. And always wear a mask when in public. In the future, we may see more key-less entry, one-on-one personal training sessions and temperature screening through thermal scanners, as will be implemented in the Venetian in Las Vegas once it reopens on June 1. But for now, the bottom line is if you absolutely have to book a hotel, make sure you’re aware of all the risks — and know their cancellation policy. While Airbnb rentals understandably plummeted in the beginning of the pandemic, they’re beginning to bounce back, in some cases, despite orders to quarantine. (Many listings now tout themselves as ideal places to shelter in place.) For some, it’s a safer option than staying in a hotel, with limited interaction with people and staff. On a video on the company website, CEO Brian Chesky notes that bookings are trending more local, with almost a third of guests booking within 50 miles of their home. According to Condé Nast Traveler, out of concern for the pandemic this summer, people are opting to book more isolated and outdoorsy locations, like cabins in the woods, as well as large spaces for a family to spread out. They’re also opting for longer durations, thanks to the new flexibility of working from home. On its website, the company has also posted information about a new “Enhanced Cleaning Initiative,” step-by-step cleaning guidelines for hosts informed by CDC recommendations and the former US Surgeon General Dr. Vivek Murthy, which rolled out this month. The program is opt-in for hosts, and hosts will not be penalized if they don’t participate, but guests will be able to see on their listing if they’re following the new protocols. As part of the protocol, hosts will need to include a minimum 24-hour buffer after a guest checks out, which the platform automatically adds. And for added protection it doesn’t hurt to do a once-over yourself, cleaning dishes and utensils and disinfecting flat surfaces as well as remote controls, phones, toilet handles and all faucets.

Well, now it’s official! Wearing a mask to prevent the spread of the coronavirus is “cool,” noted tastemaker Gov. Andrew Cuomo decreed Tuesday. “This is almost a point of cultural communication,” said Cuomo, who entered his press briefing at the newly reopened New York Stock Exchange sporting a standard, light-blue medical mask. “Wearing a mask is now cool. “I believe it’s cool.” Cuomo suggested that, if he could, he would take the trendiest step possible by issuing a government proclamation on the matter. “If I could sign an executive order that says, ‘Wearing a mask is officially cool,'” said Cuomo, trailing off before finishing the thought. “New Yorkers want to reinforce it for other New Yorkers: This is cool,” Cuomo continued to gush. “You want to encourage people to do this.” Still, Cuomo admitted that his mask game was lacking compared to some more imaginative New Yorkers. “You don’t have to [use a] boring mask like my mask. I’m a boring guy,” said Cuomo, despite what other alleged fashion choices would have you believe. “They have color masks. They have masks that say things,” the governor continued. “Some people coordinate their outfit with the color of their mask.” Cuomo’s embrace of masks as the life-saving fashion statement of 2020 marks a sharp departure from his stance earlier in the pandemic, when he questioned New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio for advising that all Big Apple residents wear some sort of face covering when going outside. But nearly two weeks after those remarks, Cuomo mandated that all New Yorkers must mask up when heading into situations where social distancing was difficult to maintain. By Tuesday, Cuomo had come around to masks as a way of New York life. “This has to be part of literally who we are and what we do every day,” Cuomo said. “That does not mean when someone doesn’t wear a mask, we should be rude to that person or be obnoxious to that person. “But, this has got to be part of every New Yorker’s fashion and design and clothing and outfit. It makes a real difference.”

Silicon Valley-based software company Palantir is following Tesla CEO Elon Musk’s lead and openly considering leaving the “increasing intolerance and monoculture” of California, its co-founder said. Speaking during an appearance Monday on “Axios on HBO,” CEO Alex Karp said the company was “getting close” to deciding whether it would leave the Golden State. Karp was interviewed via teleconference from a home he was quarantining at in New Hampshire, during which he said that while the company hasn’t picked a new location for its headquarters, “it’s going to be closer to the East Coast than the West Coast … If I had to guess, I would guess something like Colorado.” “I’ve been distanced [from Silicon Valley] for the last 15 years. And so I’m used to being social distanced in the Valley. And now social distancing has become a way of life,” Karp continued. Palantir is a data-mining firm whose software collects and synthesizes data to help governments thwart terror plots before they are carried out. It was co-founded by Karp and Peter Thiel, a major ally of President Trump who was an angel investor in the company. The company currently has a contract with the Department of Health and Human Services to help the federal government create a new data platform that will be called “HHS Protect Now,” according to the Daily Beast. The platform will play a major role in helping the federal government track the spread of the novel coronavirus by pulling intelligence used by top administration officials, including Trump himself. Palantir also picked up a contract with the Pentagon earlier this year to develop targeting artificial intelligence for military drones. The contract was initially with Google, but the conglomerate abandoned the deal after employees protested it, questioning the ethics of providing the American military with technology. Karp complained in the interview how some companies in Silicon Valley avoided business that could upset staffers, something else he blamed on the “monoculture” of Palo Alto. Karp’s comments come just weeks after Musk threatened to move his electric car company’s California headquarters to Texas or Nevada. Musk made the pledge amid a heated spat with California Gov. Gavin Newsom after Alameda County officials blocked him from reopening his car factory in Fremont. The plant had been shut down since late March as a result of the coronavirus pandemic. The Palo Alto-based company restarted production at the factory in defiance of an order by officials, with Musk effectively daring local authorities to arrest him. The company also sued to block Alameda County from enforcing the order before officials agreed to let the plant reopen as long as it sufficiently protected workers from the virus. Trump tweeted his support for Musk’s efforts to get his employees back to work, writing in mid-May, “California should let Tesla & @elonmusk open the plant, NOW. It can be done Fast & Safely!” Musk thanked the commander-in-chief for his support in a follow-up message.

Well this is going to sound familiar … The winner of the state’s “wear a mask” video contest, announced Tuesday by one of Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s daughter’s, is a play on an ad slogan dating back to when Mariah Kennedy Cuomo’s dad was still a teenager. The most votes were cast for the “We Love NY” ad — which uses a heart icon in replace of the word love — by Brooklyn production company Bunny Lake Films, Kennedy Cuomo said during her father’s daily coronavirus press briefing in Manhattan. “Congratulations to Bunny Lake Films, a female-founded boutique production company based in Brooklyn, New York who created that incredible ad,” Kennedy Cuomo said. The contest called on New Yorkers to submit 30-second videos communicating why it is so important to wear a mask to stop the spread of coronavirus. The winning ad is a new twist on the very old “I Love NY” state ad campaign, launched in July 1977, when the governor was 19 and his dad, the late Mario Cuomo, had yet to start the first of his three terms as the state’s chief executive. And proving that close doesn’t just count in horseshoes and hand grenades, the governor said the state will air both the first place “We ❤ NY” and second place “You Can Still Smile” ads as public service announcements due to what he called a neck-and-neck finish in the public voting. The runner up was made by Blue Slate Films. There were 96,332 votes cast between the two videos with a 502 vote difference, so Cuomo said he’s made the “executive decision” that the state will run both ads as PSAs instead of the just the first place ad. “If it was a normal election it would trigger an automatic recount — alright it’s that close,” Cuomo said, explaining, there’s “an issue with this election that we never really define an eligible voter and we have people who voted in this competition all across the state, all across the country, all across the world.” Cuomo added, “They’re both great and, obviously yes, one won by 500 votes, but it was a tremendous turnout. People loved both.” The competition was announced earlier this month and the state received more than 600 video submissions. People voted on five finalist videos and cast a total of 186,117 votes, Kennedy Cuomo said. However, not everyone thought it was fair that the governor decided to give the runner-up video first place glory. “If these the rules then @tiffany_caban should be sharing DA office w Melinda [Katz],” Monica Klein, a former spokeswoman for Tiffany Cabán, tweeted shortly after the announcement that the state will run both ads as PSAs. Klein was referring to last year’s Queens District Attorney Democratic Primary race in which candidate Cabán lost to Katz by a mere 60 votes.

Classrooms across the country may look drastically different upon reopening, as nearly 1 in 5 teachers say they’re unlikely to return to the classroom if schools reopen in the fall, a new poll found. The concerning figure is even higher among teachers 55 and older, with one in four saying they don’t foresee themselves back in front of young minds in the coming months, according to a USA Today/Ipsos poll released Tuesday that polled 505 teachers from kindergarten through high school. “As our world has changed, almost everything we do has changed, including how we view and approach education,” Ipsos president Chris Young said. “Though Americans are optimistic about a return to in-person learning, there is angst among teachers, parents, and America at large about how to keep our schools safe if the virus isn’t fully contained.” In addition, 83 percent of teachers polled said they’re having more difficulty in their current jobs and two-thirds said they’ve been unable to work properly since starting to teach remotely. “For the first time … these last three months have felt like I’ve been doing a job, doing this to earn a paycheck,” Ohio high school teacher Andy Brown, 43, told the newspaper. “The engagement level with the students hasn’t been there, and that’s the reason I got into this career — the interaction and the engagement and the seeing and feeling their excitement.” Newer teachers reported having a tougher time with remote education than their more experienced counterparts — with 60 percent of those with less than five years on the job saying they weren’t trained well for their new reality, the poll found. A parallel poll of 403 parents of students from kindergarten through high school also found that 52 percent of parents felt teachers have struggled with remote learning. However, a “significant share” of both teachers and parents polled — about 40 percent — said they’re against returning to classrooms before a coronavirus vaccine is discovered, USA Today reports. And nearly one-third of parents, according to the poll, said they’re “very likely” to consider at-home options instead of sending their kids back to reopened classrooms. Among possible solutions, about two-thirds of teachers and parents back the idea of in-class instruction up to three days a week. The same portion of both groups also support the idea of having teachers at high risk of contracting COVID-19 to keep teaching online, the survey found. The survey of teachers and parents had credibility intervals — similar to a margin of error — of plus or minus 5 and 5.6 percentage points, respectively. Some teachers also expressed concern about children exercising proper social distancing and wearing masks while in school, which nearly 8 in 10 educators said they expect to wear once they return. “Having to be 6 feet apart is difficult for adults, and it’s even more difficult for kids,” Pennsylvania elementary school teacher Andrea Rodriquez, 23, told USA Today.

Ireland’s prime minister has been accused of breaking his own social distancing rules after being snapped topless while picnicking with pals in a packed park. Taoiseach Leo Varadkar stripped off with partner Matthew Barrett and two friends in Dublin on Sunday — just days after one of his senior officials warned against picnics or staying outside longer than necessary. The photos sparked outrage, with the Irish Independent accusing him of being like other politicians “simply making things up as they go along” while others called for his resignation on Twitter. “He’s telling all of us to stay at home!!! My mother hasn’t hugged my son in 9 weeks but he can play with his buddies????” one person complained, according to Dublin Live. “If this pandemic was as serious as Leo was making it out to be he wouldn’t be topless, and laughing in the Phoenix park. It’s a total joke,” another complained online, the site said. Varadkar’s spokesman insisted Monday that the leader had been “in line with public health guidance” because he was in a group of just four people and within three miles of where he was staying. The leader “broke no laws, breached no regulations and observed public health guidance,” his spokesman said, according to the Independent. Liz Canavan, the official who last week told the Irish not to go on picnics, refused to discuss the photos but said to the Irish Independent that her earlier remarks were just “guidance.” “We’re asking people to use their head,” she said, while refusing to say whether she felt her boss had used his.

A top official with the World Health Organization is heaping renewed praise on China for its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, saying the organization appreciates the Communist country’s “openness” to international efforts to probe the origin of the virus. Speaking at a news conference Monday in Geneva, Switzerland, Dr. Michael Ryan, the WHO’s health emergencies chief, praised what he described as China’s “consistent message” of willingness to help the international community understand the origins of the virus. Ryan said any scientific mission to identify the source of the global health emergency should include “the right mix of scientific experts from a multinational perspective.” “We’ve been in discussions day to day with our colleagues in China about putting together the necessary scientific inquiries into the origin of the virus,” he said of efforts to organize the investigation. “I think the authorities in China, governments around the world and ourselves are very keen to understand the animal origin of the virus itself. And I am very pleased to hear a very consistent message coming from China, which is one of openness to such an approach,” he continued. The health emergency chief’s comments come as the agency hopes to quell an outpouring of criticism over its handling of the pandemic and its relationship with China. In mid-April, President Trump announced a cut to US funding for the WHO until a review was completed into its relationship with China and the early days of the outbreak. In May, he agreed to resume partial payments to the embattled organization, but said the US would only match what China currently pays in contributions. Last Monday, he revealed a letter he sent to the director-general threatening to permanently cease US funding to the agency if it did not commit to “substantive improvements” within the next 30 days. “I cannot allow American taxpayer dollars to continue to finance an organization that, in its present state, is so clearly not serving America’s interests,” the commander-in-chief wrote in his letter. Since then, the WHO has pledged to conduct an investigation into “lessons learned” about its response to the global pandemic. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus promised during the World Health Assembly this month that an “impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation,” by the agency itself, would take place “at the earliest appropriate moment.” The move was a partial nod to the calls by over 100 countries for an independent probe of the origins of and response to the pandemic. With the WHO running the investigation, however, the move will not address the calls for the embattled agency to be probed as part of the inquiry. China, which had spent weeks rejecting calls for an inquiry into the virus’s origins, came around after the idea of an inquiry focused on “global response” in fighting COVID-19, instead of questioning its source.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo and President Trump will meet Wednesday at the White House to discuss what role a fierce focus on revitalizing New York’s infrastructure can have in jump-starting the state’s coronavirus-battered economy. “This is one of the things I want to talk to the president about,” Cuomo said during his Tuesday press briefing at the New York Stock Exchange in Lower Manhattan. “You want to restart the economy, you want to reopen the economy? Let’s do something creative,” continued Cuomo. “Let’s do it fast, let’s put Americans back to work, and let’s make America better. It is common sense.” Cuomo earlier in the briefing cast the focus as a way to kill two birds with one stone: finally tackling long-delayed infrastructure projects at a time when many are clamoring to get back to work. The governor specifically highlighted the massive Penn Station overhaul, the transformative reconfiguration of LaGuardia Airport, the revitalization of the rail tunnels beneath the Hudson River and the expansion of the Second Avenue subway line as projects on his wish list. “The time to fix the hole in the roof, we have a saying in Queens, is when the sun is shining,” said Cuomo. “The time to do this work is now, when you need the jobs and the volume is low. “That’s one of the things I’m going to talk to the president about tomorrow.” The White House summit will mark the second meeting between Cuomo and Trump amid the pandemic, which has alternately cast them as political rivals and unlikely allies. But since the first meeting last month — which Cuomo labeled “productive” — the relationship has hit a pair of bumps, with Trump telling The Post that “bailouts” to “blue state” governments like New York’s were unfair, and Cuomo pinning responsibility for a widely criticized nursing home policy on Trump. Critics of Cuomo’s policy that ordered New York nursing homes to take in COVID-19 infected patients — which has been blamed for leading to as many as 5,000 deaths — should “ask President Trump” about it, the governor said last week. “Anyone who wants to ask, ‘Why did the state do that with COVID patients in nursing homes,’ it’s because the state followed President Trump’s CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] guidance,” Cuomo insisted to reporters. Trump official Michael Caputo shot back on Friday, “Leadership is about good and sound judgment. Gov. Cuomo exercised misguided leadership. He’s responsible for this nursing home problem, and the deaths are on his hands.”

Colombian seamstress Nazly Penagos got an unusual offer from her boss: Come live inside the Bogota factory to reduce the chance of getting sick with the novel coronavirus. The owner of the Hechizoo factory, which normally employs 70 to produce high-end upholstery, has installed bathrooms, a kitchen and beds to house eight of the 17 employees who have returned to work, as Colombia gradually reopens its economy after two months of quarantine. “It’s been good, because I don’t go out onto the street,” said Penagos, who only goes home on weekends. “I have a small daughter and I wouldn’t like to be coming and going and — you never know — take the infection home.” While installing living quarters is a rare measure, thousands of Colombian factories and businesses are restarting operations. They are grappling with government delays in granting permission to reopen and worries about how to sell products to still-quarantined consumers in Latin America’s fourth-largest economy. Sectors like construction, manufacturing and some retail have been allowed to gradually reopen by the government of President Ivan Duque, with limits on the numbers of employees. The country’s lockdown — extended four times and set to last until May 31 — has also forced reinventions like the one at Hechizoo. The factory’s managers are hopeful the addition of living quarters will keep the business afloat and prevent employee infections. The company is getting about 15 percent of its regular orders. “We decided to stay here permanently until we know what will happen,” said creative director Jorge Lizarazo, who is also living at the factory and complained of unclear government instructions. “The uncertainty worries me…uncertainty is fatal for any business.” Colombia’s gradual reopening is similar to those taking place in Mexico, Argentina, Peru and Chile. South America is coronavirus’ new epicenter, with Brazil the hardest hit. Europe, walloped by cases in recent months, has also begun reopening. “Thank God the company called us in to work,” said construction manager Luis Alfonso Carranza at the site of a new apartment-office building in Bogota. “It affected us a lot. Our company didn’t pay us, so economically it was really hard.” Carranza said he had not been paid for nearly two months and that his wife had also lost her job. Businesses told Reuters government authorizations to restart work have come slowly amid contradictory official announcements and their fears customers will purchase little while they remain largely stuck at home and restricted to buying basics. Another group of businesses — including beauty salons — can reopen from June 1 only with reduced capacity and masks. “It doesn’t mean in any way that these sectors can operate from June 1 — no, it’s not like that. They have to comply with and validate the bio-safety protocols,” Commerce Minister Jose Manuel Restrepo said last week. Frustrated manufacturers say their funds will soon run out. “The mayor’s office gave us thumbs-up to open the factory, with just 20 of the 60 people, but why should we make things if there’s no one to sell them to?” said Elsa Zarate, manager of clothing factory Francotex. “At this pace we can’t keep the employees. We only have funds through May 30.” Around 1.6 million Colombians lost their jobs in March and the country’s economy — usually one of the region’s healthiest — is likely to contradict 5.5 percent this year, according to the government. More unemployment and less demand will exacerbate the recession, analysts including economic think tank ANIF say, a prediction reflected in consumer confidence numbers that recently hit an all-time low. Leather fashion brand Mario Hernandez is turning to online shopping to try and alleviate store closures in Colombia, Venezuela, Panama and Costa Rica as its factory restarts work. “The big opportunity that we have is via the Web page,” said factory operations director Alba Luz Angarita. “People still have things to celebrate, even if families can’t get together. They will always need a gift for someone.”

Damian Lillard needs a reason to play. Love of the game isn’t enough in the middle of a pandemic. Though the NBA appears set to resume play in July — likely at ESPN Wide World of Sports at the Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando — specifics for the season remain murky. It’s unclear whether the regular season will be completed, an abbreviated season would take place or the playoffs would kick off immediately. If the Trail Blazers (29-37), currently sitting ninth in the Western Conference, have no path to the playoffs, their biggest star said he has no plans to play again this season. “If we come back and they’re just like, ‘We’re adding a few games to finish the regular season,’ and they’re throwing us out there for meaningless games and we don’t have a true opportunity to get into the playoffs, I’m going to be with my team because I’m a part of the team,” Lillard told Yahoo Sports. “But I’m not going to be participating. I’m telling you that right now. And you can put that [expletive] in there. If we come back and I don’t have an opportunity to make the playoffs, I will show up to work, I’ll be at practice and I’ll be with my team. I’m going to do all that [expletive] and then I’m going to be sitting right on that bench during the games.” Because of the unique nature of the suspended season, one potential option for resuming play includes a play-in tournament, which would give teams outside the top eight in each conference a chance to qualify for the postseason of a shortened season. “If they come back and say it’s something like a tournament, play-in style, between the No. 7 and No. 12 seeds, if we’re playing for playoff spots, then I think that’s perfect,” Lillard said. Lillard, 29, has led the Blazers to the playoffs the past six seasons, including a personal-best run to the Western Conference Finals last season. Currently, the Blazers are 3.5 games behind the Ja Morant-led Grizzlies for the final playoff spot in the West. Teams would receive millions in additional local TV money if they can get to the 70-game threshold, which would fulfill their regional television deals. In the unlikely event that a full 82-game schedule is completed, Lillard believes the Blazers would earn the right to face the first-place Lakers. A play-in tournament could provide that intriguing series, too, he hopes. “I just feel like that would be the matchup people want to see,” Lillard said. “And not to say nobody wants to see Memphis, because they’re in the eighth and they’ve been in the eighth spot for a while. They’ve earned that. You can’t take anything away from Memphis. They play hard, they’re exciting and they’ve got a lot of young talent. The Lakers would have their hands full playing against them. Memphis beat the Lakers this year. Memphis would have nothing to lose. “I feel like both series could be a little bit hectic for the Lakers, but I think more so us, because of the experience and where we are in our careers. Not too long ago, we played them in L.A. and obviously I had a great game and we won a close one, and in the playoffs, I’m sure they would come up with some type of game plan to not allow that to happen. But I want to compete. That’s what we want.”

This is the spectacular moment thousands of flamingos gather on a lake in Mumbai that has become cleaner during the coronavirus lockdown. Footage from an apartment in the Seawoods Complex in Nerul overlooking the creek in Navi Mumbai shows the beautiful birds gathering. Environmentalists pointed out that although flamingos migrate to the area each year, this year has seen unusually high numbers. They believe that cleaner air and water – one of the positive side effects of the Covid-19 restrictions – has allowed more birds to make the journey. According to Nathuram Kokare of Thane Creek Flamingo Sanctuary, residents are seeing an unusually large number of flamingos around Mumbai because of “less polluted water and air” and “improvement in the quality of the algae,” their primary food. One Indian news publication, The Print, reported that the Bombay Natural History Society has predicted as many as 25 percent more had migrated than last year and said that as many as 150,000 may have made the journey to the wetlands. Some residents have even used their arrival to approach the authorities and argue for more work to be done to provide a healthier environment for the flamingos every year. Areas, such as this wetland, would typically see lots of construction, but this has come to a halt during the coronavirus crisis as all of India’s 1.3 billion population remains under lockdown and have been since March 24. Harsh Goenka, who lives near the Navi Mumbai water, tweeted his delight at seeing the flamingos. He wrote: “While humans are locked inside, flamingos are putting on quite a spectacular show for the residents of Seawoods Complex in Nerul, Navi Mumbai!” The flamingos migrate to Mumbai in October to March from Rann of Kutch in Gujarat and Sambhar Lake in Rajasthan – sometimes even as far away as Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran and Israel. They then fly out in June.

Katie Miller, the spokeswoman for Vice President Mike Pence and the White House coronavirus task force, announced on Twitter Tuesday that she returned to work after a bout of COVID-19 and that she is pregnant. “Back at work today after three NEGATIVE COVID tests. Thank you to all my amazing doctors and everyone who reached out with support. I couldn’t have done it without my amazing husband who took great care of his pregnant wife. #TransitionToGreatness,” Miller posted. Miller, who is married to top White House adviser Stephen Miller, tested positive for the coronavirus on May 8. AP AP View Slideshow Earlier the same week, a military valet for President Trump was diagnosed with the disease — the first case inside the White House. Miller, 25, often sat close to the president during the task force briefings. “She’s a wonderful young woman, Katie, she tested very good for a long period of time, then all of a sudden today she tested positive,” Trump told reporters after news broke that Miller had coronavirus, saying he wasn’t worried. “She hasn’t come into contact with me. She’s spent some time with the vice president.” Her diagnosis led more White House staffers and reporters to wear masks. The White House also tracked people with whom Miller came in contact before getting sick.

DAEJEON, South Korea – The new robot barista at the cafe in Daejeon, South Korea, is courteous and swift as it seamlessly makes its way towards customers. “Here is your Rooibos almonds tea latte, please enjoy. It’s even better if you stir it,” it says, as a customer reaches for her drink on a tray installed within the large, gleaming white capsule-shaped computer. After managing to contain an outbreak of the new coronavirus which infected more than 11,000 people and killed 267, South Korea is slowly transitioning from intensive social distancing rules towards what the government calls “distancing in daily life”. Robots could help people observe social distancing in public, said Lee Dong-bae, director of research at Vision Semicon, a smart factory solution provider which developed the barista robot together with a state-run science institute. “Our system needs no input from people from order to delivery, and tables were sparsely arranged to ensure smooth movements of the robots, which fits will with the current ‘untact’ and distancing campaign,” he said. The system, which uses a coffee-making robotic arm and a serving robot, can make 60 different types of coffee and serves the drinks to customers at their seats. It can also communicate and transmit data to other devices and contains self-driving technology to calculate the best routes around the cafe. An order of six drinks, processed through a kiosk, took just seven minutes. The only human employee at the two-storey cafe was a patissier who also has some cleaning duties and refills ingredients. The manufacturer and the scientific institute aim to supply at least 30 cafes with robots this year. “Robots are fun and it was easy because you don’t have to pick up your order,” said student Lee Chae-mi, 23. “But I’m also a bit of worried about the job market as many of my friends are doing part-time jobs at cafes and these robots would replace humans.”

Researchers theorized in a recent study that vitamin D might help save the lives of patients infected with the novel coronavirus. At the time, we warned that the study had not been reviewed by other researchers and that it didn’t propose conclusions of an actual clinical trial where vitamin D would have been compared to a placebo. The researches didn’t measure vitamin D levels in COVID-19 patients either, looking instead at other patient data and using other health parameters to determine the expected levels of vitamin D. We also told you that you shouldn’t attempt to prevent or treat COVID-19 at home with vitamins or other health supplements that go viral on social media and to follow guidelines from your doctor. Fast forward a few weeks and a new study warns that high doses of vitamin D can’t prevent or treat COVID-19. Scientists from several UK and US medical universities and institutions penned a paper in BMJ Nutrition, Prevention and Health that explains there’s not enough scientific evidence to prove beneficial effects of vitamin D in COVID-19 therapy. “The continued spread of the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus and the disease COVID-19 that is caused by SARS-CoV-2, has led to calls for widespread high-dose vitamin D supplementation,” the researchers write. “These calls are without support from pertinent studies in humans at this time, but rather based on speculations about presumed [emphasis theirs] mechanisms.” The researchers explain that more studies are underway that could provide answers about the effect of vitamin D on COVID-19. Until then, vitamin-D supplementation isn’t advised. “We recommend appropriate vitamin D RCTs to evaluate the effects of vitamin D supplementation on COVID-19 infections. Until there is more robust scientific evidence for vitamin D, we strongly caution against the use of high vitamin D supplementation (greater than the upper limit of 4000 IU/day (100 µg/day)),” they say. That’s not to say vitamin D deficiency is something that should be taken lightly. However, that doesn’t mean that addressing vitamin D deficiencies or boosting intake has any effect on the novel coronavirus. “Most of our vitamin D comes from exposure to sunlight, however for many people, particularly those who are self-isolating with limited access to sunlight during the current pandemic, getting enough vitamin D may be a real challenge,” Birmingham University’s Carolyn Greig told Times of India. “Although there is some evidence that low vitamin D is associated with acute respiratory tract infections, there is currently insufficient evidence for vitamin D as a treatment for COVID-19 and over-supplementing must be avoided as it could be harmful.” The researchers noted that a balanced diet offers plenty of vitamin D, with “oily fish, red meat, egg yolk and fortified foods, such as breakfast cereals in the UK, as well as fortified milk in the USA and Canada.” Safe sunlight exposure is also advised to boost vitamin D levels. Patients should seek the help of medical professionals if they need to address any potential vitamin D deficiencies.

The Chinese Communist Party is readying two new aircraft carriers for deployment off the coast of Taiwan that could lead to a military confrontation with the US ships in the region, as the relationship between the two global powers has become strained by trade issues and the coronavirus pandemic, according to a report. The ships Liaoning and Shandong, part of the People’s Liberation Army navy, are conducting military readiness drills in the Yellow Sea but are expected to move into the South China Sea to Pratas Island for invasion mock battles, CCP-controlled Global Times reported. Noting Chinese President Xi Jinping’s assertions of territorial control over most of the waterway and lack of respect for the sovereignty of countries in the region, like Taiwan, the “risk of a military confrontation in the South China Sea involving the United States and China could rise significantly in the next eighteen months,” the Council on Foreign Relations said in a report issued last week. The think tank said the US has a “strong interest” in stopping China from taking control over the South China Sea to keep the waterway open for navigation and secure international supply chains. “The United States is also at risk of being drawn into a military conflict with China in this region as a result of U.S. defense treaty obligations to at least one of the claimants to the contested territory, the Philippines,” the council said. President Trump, who has accused Beijing of misleading the world on the coronavirus pandemic, has been sparring with Xi over China’s trade policies, which he said are stacked against US corporations. “We could cut off the whole relationship” with China, Trump told “Fox Business” earlier this month. Those comments led to Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi accusing the US of pushing the two countries to the “brink of a new Cold War.” “China has no intention to change, still less replace, the United States,” Wang said. “It’s time for the United States to give up its wishful thinking of changing China and stopping 1.4 billion people in their historic march toward modernization.”

Longtime outfielder Eric Byrnes has had enough of the MLB’s collective bargaining agreement feud between players and owners. Byrnes, who enjoyed a 10-year career in the MLB before retiring in 2010, told TMZ Sports he believes that both parties should just bite the bullet in order to get the 2020 season back on track. “I don’t give two s–ts about your collective bargaining agreement and neither does anybody else right now!” Byrnes, now an analyst for MLB Network, told the gossip site. “I don’t think anyone in our society right now wants to hear about the bickering between billionaires and millionaires. No one wants to hear your petty arguments between ownership and players right now.” The global coronavirus pandemic postponed the 2020 season and any official return plans are on hold as MLB owners and players dispute how they’d split league revenue in a shortened and potentially fan-less season. The owners have proposed a 50-50 split, while the players wish to be paid the salary they were guaranteed by contracts they signed prior to the pandemic. Prominent players like Blake Snell, Bryce Harper and Trevor Bauer have taken to social media recently to voice their opinion on the matter. Byrnes isn’t too keen on how these players have handled the situation. “At this point, if you have an opportunity to potentially bring the world this amazing content that we’re all starving for, why not be that person?!” Byrnes said. “Sometimes in life — they say this a lot in sports, too — it’s bigger than you.” “And, so I would advise to any athlete or any owner in this situation, it’s bigger than you guys right now.” Byrnes is confident that there will be a 2020 MLB season because he believes that players just “want to get back out there, they miss playing the game.”

It wasn’t exactly the finish line Ali Riecke had in mind. The 27-year-old had envisioned something more tropical when she signed up to participate in her second “Run Across Haiti,” an ambitious eight-day, 200-mile tour of the impoverished Caribbean nation sponsored by the nonprofit organization WORK. Instead of celebrating with more than 30 others from across North America who raised north of $200,000 to make the journey to run and to get a first-hand look at WORK’s mission, the end for Riecke came as she neared her house in decidedly non-tropical Bellingham, Washington, on May 13. Her boyfriend blasted an air horn as she hit the wire, her run over. Then she joined a Google Hangout so other members of the far-flung group could join in the party after the trip to Haiti was called off due to the COVID-19 pandemic. “It was definitely bittersweet,” said Rieke, who stressed it was still “very special in its own way.” And maybe a new normal. There are other complications for nonprofits and charities beyond stay-at-home orders and travel issues. For organizations that rely on participatory recreation events like the “Run Across Haiti” or the 5K at your local park, the concern is two-fold: How do you safely conduct these events in the era of social distancing? And how do you go about seeking money for a cause, any cause, when millions are out of work and people are literally dying by the thousands? Riecke has collected more than $4,000 this spring to help WORK, which is focused on helping Haitian families emerge from poverty in a sustainable way. That effort that isn’t going away anytime soon regardless, virus or no virus. It is something Riecke, a business intelligence developer at a local credit union, tried to keep in mind as she went through the admittedly uncomfortable task of soliciting contributions. “It’s harder for those people to give obviously but it also feels harder to ask,” she said. Charitable giving by individuals has dipped in recent years even during a boom economy thanks in part to a change in the tax code. While the stimulus package Congress passed in March created a $300 tax break for charitable giving, nonprofits of all sizes are anticipating a hit at the same time the need for aid is becoming greater than ever. “I keep thinking of ‘Rocky,’ where he takes the hits and keeps moving forward,” said James Kane, a senior manager of community development for the American Cancer Society’s Northeast Region. “Some days it’s going to be a step forward and two steps backward (but) at the end of the day the work we do hasn’t become less important. Our mission hasn’t stopped because cancer hasn’t stopped.” In response to the pandemic, the American Cancer Society established the first “Lakes to Bay 5K.” The virtual run is a relay that started around the Finger Lakes in New York on May 11 and will wrap up on the Chesapeake Bay in Maryland on May 31. Runners who paid the $20 registration fee are encouraged to take a picture during their respective legs and share it on social media as a way to replicate in some small way the sweaty, giddy camaraderie of an actual road race. Proceeds will help the society’s COVID-19 Response Fund, which is focused on operational expenses like keeping a 24/7 cancer help line active. Kane is heartened by the initial response but also wary of the bumpy path ahead. “How do you keep people motivated when they are wondering what’s going to happen with their job, their family?” he said. WORK applied for and received federal aid from the Paycheck Protection Program so its staff of nine could keep at it while fearing a COVID-19 spike in Haiti over the summer. The Susan G. Komen Foundation — which raises tens of millions annually for the fight against breast cancer through events like the 3-Day walk and various Races for the Cure across the country — is considering taking some of its 60 affiliates “in house” in an attempt to cut expenses. “There’s pain involved, there’s job loss,” foundation President and CEO Paula Schneider said. “But we have to put Komen first.” Schneider described the 3-Day event as the “heart and soul” of the organization and it has been canceled this year, a huge blow to peer-to-peer fundraising. Schneider said she is confident that because of the often personal relationship between participants and breast cancer — be they survivors or caregivers or family members — the support will return. Still, even as parts of the nation open back up, she is unsure whether the 30 spring fundraising events that were pushed to this fall will actually take place. “Who knows what will happen 120 days from now?” she said. Riecke plans to be there whenever WORK returns to Haiti. If it’s next year, fine. If it’s not, she plans to bring attention to the organization’s mission in whatever small way she can. While she didn’t get to spend eight days on the island meeting the families WORK is helping, she did get to run 20 of the 200 miles with her dog Reese. She did get to hug her boyfriend at the end. She still raised money for something that has come to mean a great deal. Maybe there’s a metaphor in there between the training required to complete the “Run Across Haiti” — or any race for that matter — and what the nation is currently going through. “We run long distances because we’re good being at uncomfortable for awhile,” Riecke said. “Being uncomfortable is OK. That’s how you break through barriers. … Anything I can do, I’m going to continue to do.”

A fourth coronavirus stimulus package could pass Congress next month but will be significantly smaller than the historic spending measures seen so far, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said Tuesday. Critical funds for struggling businesses, the newly unemployed and hard-hit state government remain in limbo after the Senate rejected a broad $3 trillion coronavirus package passed by the House of Representatives that Republicans described as a “left-wing wish list.” “Many of you are asking, what next? I think there’s likely to be another bill. It will not be the $3 trillion bill the House passed the other day, but there’s still a likelihood that more will be needed,” McConnell said at an event in his native Kentucky, according to a Hill report. “In the next month or so, we’ll be talking about possibly another bill,” he added. The Republican Senate leader has been trying to pump the brakes on another costly bailout and has reportedly warned President Trump that the measure should be no larger than $1 trillion. But the Republican conference is divided over how much money should be spent on unemployment, payroll protection programs and bailouts for states that face massive black holes in their budgets from the cost of responding to COVID-19. Some conservatives have also asked whether a fourth round of funding is needed at all as the president pushes for the nation’s shuttered economy to reopen. On Tuesday, McConnell signaled another bill would be in the works, with pressure on the nation’s lawmakers to act growing with the $600 boost to unemployment running out at the end of July. “It ought to be very carefully targeted to correct the mistakes that we certainly made in passing a multitrillion-dollar bill in one week,” McConnell said Tuesday, though he conceded that “there are some other needs that need to be met.” “We may need, as I said, one more plug here at the federal level to help us get through this period, but it will be very carefully crafted. It won’t be [a] $3 trillion left-wing wish list,” he added, per the Hill report. “We’re not going to be doing a $3 trillion bill. That won’t happen. That isn’t going to happen,” he said.

JAKARTA – As Indonesia’s most populous province weighed tough movement restrictions to stop the new coronavirus, it turned to a loosely-knit volunteer group of data scientists and health experts. The Kawal COVID-19 (Guard against COVID-19) group organized a data model presented to the provincial governor that showed there could be 70,000 deaths by July in West Java if no restrictions were imposed compared with only 20,000 if it took tough action. West Java province locked down. “They were keen to provide help and we accepted it,” said Ridwansyah Yusuf Achmad, an adviser to the West Java governor who organized the online meetings with Kawal volunteers and praised the group as patriotic for donating its expertise. He and other West Java officials said the modeling from Kawal had swung the argument. In the face of patchy data and conflicting advice from Indonesia’s central government over measures to fight coronavirus, Kawal’s 800 volunteers have emerged as an increasingly important source of information and guidance. President Joko Widodo’s government has been reluctant to impose travel bans and other measures that could damage the economy in the world’s fourth-most populous country, a 5,000-km (3,100-mile) wide archipelago. Kawal has set out a clear argument for tougher action in the Southeast Asian country with the biggest death toll in the region by far. Pandu Riono, an epidemiologist at the University of Indonesia who is part of Kawal, presented the data to officials in West Java, home to over 50 million of Indonesia’s 270 million people. “West Java had the highest risk of transmission among Indonesian provinces,” he said. “We recommended a wider lockdown.” On May 20, West Java Governor Ridwan Kamil proclaimed the speed of transmission had been cut to a third and that the “curve had flattened”. The president’s office, the health ministry and the communications ministry referred questions on Kawal to the presidential task force on COVID-19. However, Achmad Yurianto, the spokesman for the task force, told Reuters he had never heard of the group. The government, he said, has taken appropriate measures in fighting the virus. “This is learning by doing. We’ve never had an experience in handling COVID, right?” Yurianto said. No complacency
Kawal’s origins lie in volunteer groups that were set up to monitor 2014 and 2019 elections and which published crowd-sourced results to try to prevent manipulation. It was launched on March 1, a day before Indonesia declared its first cases. Until then, the health minister had declared it was a “blessing from God” that Indonesia had no infections, although doctors feared that was more due to a lack of testing. “We want to prevent Indonesia from being complacent,” said Kawal co-founder Ainun Najib, adding that the key to saving lives was implementing clear policies. “The people who were supposed to take care of it didn’t”. It is not the only initiative in the field in Indonesia’s booming technology sector. Another one, Lapor COVID-19 (Report COVID-19) seeks to crowdsource coronavirus information. Other healthtech startups provide free online consultations, which the government itself has urged people to use. “Kawal COVID definitely came about because of distrust towards the information provided by the government, at least in the initial stages,” said Charlotte Setijadi, an anthropologist at Singapore Management University. “Generally, people don’t believe the data that the government provides, even now, so this is why we see grassroots efforts to filter out the fake news from reliable information.” Kawal’s online chat groups connect officials and civil servants across Indonesia. It also counters rampant online misinformation – such as that smelling red onions is effective against coronavirus – and uses crowdsourcing to help hospitals find protective gear. A bigger function is to give a more realistic picture of the extent of infections and deaths in Indonesia than the official version. Some data was withheld early in the epidemic to avoid panic, President Widodo has said. But a promise of a new website to share all data transparently has yet to be realised. Indonesia’s official figures show 23,165 infections and 1,418 dead, but officials have said the deaths only include those who have tested positive for the virus. The main doctors’ association says the figures could be higher because Indonesia has among the world’s lowest rates of testing. Kawal compiles raw data from provincial governments and hospitals that also shows those cases and deaths for which doctors can see no reason other than coronavirus – but which were never tested. According to Kawal’s calculations for 22 of Indonesia’s 34 provinces, at least 4,016 Indonesians have died with acute symptoms of the coronavirus. That could make the death toll well over 5,400 – about four times the official figure. “With data guarded centrally during the pandemic, it’s a good thing that there’s people who want to provide help from the outside,” said Shela Putri Sundawa, a Jakarta hospital doctor.

The number of new coronavirus hospitalizations across New York state has dropped to the lowest level since tracking began at the pandemic’s onset, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Tuesday, while the daily death toll also continued its steady decline. “[The] number of new COVID cases [is] down to the lowest level since this ever started, just about 200,” said Cuomo, referring to the three-day rolling average of new hospitalizations, at 201 through Monday. At the pandemic’s height in April, the daily rolling average of hospitalizations was over 3,000. Total hospitalizations, as well as the net changes in both hospitalizations and intubations, also continued to trend in the right direction, Cuomo told reporters in a press briefing at the New York Stock Exchange in Lower Manhattan. Another 73 New Yorkers succumbed to the bug in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Tuesday, the lowest daily toll since 56 fatalities were reported on March 23. Cuomo called the daily tally — which raises the overall state death toll to at least 23,561 — a bittersweet figure. “In this absurd new reality, that is good news,” said Cuomo. “Any other time and place when we lose 73 New Yorkers, it’s tragic. “It’s tragic now.”

No NBA owner has stepped to the plate more during the coronavirus pandemic than Nets’ Joe Tsai. And he feels New Yorkers have responded in kind after seeing the city become the nation’s COVID-19 hotspot, believing the toughness embodies his NBA franchise. Tsai’s wife, Clara Wu Tsai, was placed on Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s advisory board on bringing back sports back to New York. The Nets practice facility will open to players on a limited basis Tuesday after Gov. Cuomo’s Sunday announcement that training can take place for the professional sports teams in the state. “My wife Clara and I have always felt that we are very deep-rooted in New York,” Joe Tsai said in an interview on YES to be aired Wednesday. “The people in New York are resilient, they are tough. It’s that ‘New York tough’ especially characterized by the Brooklyn grit that kind of represents the Nets ethos, and I think in a time of need and a time of crisis, New York feels especially important to us.” Among other contributions, the Tsais have donated 2.6 million masks, 170,000 goggles and 2,000 ventilators to New York. “When extraordinary circumstances befall us, we just have to react to it in real time,” Tsai, co-founder of the Alibaba Group, said. “And a lot of the philanthropy that we’re doing wasn’t pre-planned or anything; we just felt at the moment it was the right thing to do. I think every time I walk into Barclays Center, I see the fans, they are smiling, they are really rabid fans, they support the team, and I want to make sure that I can give back to the fans.” The NBA will have a Board of Governors conference call Friday to decide the format of the season’s restart. There’s a chance just the 16 teams seeded in the playoffs on March 11 will return to action at Orlando’s Disney World. The Nets are part of the group – in seventh place in the East. The neighboring Knicks won’t be invited in that scenario. Recently, Tsai gave a lecture to a Stanford class, saying some owners of teams out of the playoffs didn’t prefer to return. Tsai said his background has prepared him for chaos. “Look, it was an incredible year starting from last summer,” Tsai said, referring to the signings of Kevin Durant and Kyrie Irving. “We were able to do some good things in free agency and now we’re in the middle of a pandemic worried about whether the season can start or not. I come from the technology business, and in the rough and tumble world of technology, you get disrupted or you risk getting disrupted and you always worry. So I would say coming into ownership of the Nets, it’s no different. We have a phrase in our own business. We say, “Never a dull moment,” and I think that pretty much characterizes my first year here.”

It is a step toward getting football back for the Giants and Jets. New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy on Tuesday said professional sports teams in his state may return to training and competition, opening the door for the Giants and Jets to get their training and practice facilities open — though no football coaches and only players rehabbing from injuries are initially allowed to enter the building under the first phase of the NFL plan. “We have been in constant discussions with teams about necessary protocols to protect the health and safety of players, coaches, and personnel.” Murphy wrote on Twitter. Murphy stressed this opening can take place in sports “if their leagues choose to move in that direction.’’ On May 19, NFL commissioner Roger Goodell gave all 32 teams the go-ahead for limited reopenings of their facilities, as long as this was in accordance with state and local authorities. The Giants and Jets are now in the mix. “We are working closely with Governor Murphy’s office, the league and our medical staff to establish prudent, health and safety measures for our staff and players,’’ the Jets said, according to a team spokesperson. “Based on those guidelines, we will begin to open our facility using a phased approach at a time that is the most practical for our operations.”  Submit your Giants and Jets  questions here to be answered in an upcoming Post mailbag The Giants say they will not open their facility until next week at the earliest and limit those who enter their building. “Governor Murphy and his administration continue to guide New Jerseyans through this very difficult time,’’ the Giants said in a statement. “We have been in close contact with Governor Murphy’s staff to comply with the state’s protocols throughout. With today’s announcement by the governor, we are finalizing our plans to reopen the Quest Diagnostics Training Center. We will continue to have as many employees as possible working remotely. For employees who need to return to work at our facility, we expect to begin that process next week, and we will do so in a systematic and safe way that adheres to the state’s guidelines and NFL protocols.” This opening comes with severe restrictions. No more than 50 percent of a team’s staff is allowed in the building, with a maximum capacity at 75 people. The only coach who can enter is a strength and conditioning assistant or coordinator needed for rehab purposes. It is expected that healthy players not rehabbing injuries will not be back in the team facilities until the start of training camp — if camps are allowed to open later this summer. The Giants were originally scheduled for a mandatory minicamp June 9-11, and clearly that will not happen. The next significant target date for the Giants and Jets is July 29. That is the earliest — in a normal offseason — players would be permitted to report for training camp, given the teams play each other in their Aug. 13 preseason openers. It remains to be seen whether COVID-19 restrictions are further lifted by then.  — Additional reporting by Brian Costello

A low-cost German airline tried to resume flights to Italy over the weekend — but its jet was forced to turn around just outside its destination because the airport was still closed, according to reports. The Airbus A320 operated by Eurowings departed Düsseldorf early Saturday en route on a 730-mile trip to Olbia Costa Smeralda Airport in Sardinia, Italy, but was flying above Corsica when air traffic controllers told pilots of the closure, Italian newspaper Corriere Della Sera reports. Flight EW9844 was then kept in a 40-minute holding pattern while the pilot attempted to get special permission to land before a diversion to Cagliari about 120 miles away was proposed, the newspaper reports. But the pilot and crew were ultimately forced to head back to Dusseldorf, landing on the same runway it took from some hour later. Fortunately, just two passengers were aboard the flight, the newspaper reports. An investigation into the mishap is ongoing and “further details” are expected in coming days, a Eurowings spokesperson told the newspaper. “We are investigating the story, trying to understand what happened,” a spokesperson said. The airport remains closed to commercial traffic through June 2 and currently only accommodates private jets with a maximum of 19 seats, according to the report. A Eurowings spokesperson told CNN that the fluid conditions at European airports amid the coronavirus pandemic contributed to the error. “Against the background of the corona crisis, the situation at numerous airports in Europe is very dynamic,” the spokesperson said. “The large amount of information provided on operating hours or airport closures are often changed at short notice.” Both passengers on the flight were able to get rebooked, CNN reports.

US car rental company Hertz Global Holdings said on Tuesday it has paid about $16.2 million in retention bonuses to a range of key executives at the director level and above, days after the company filed for bankruptcy protection. The company paid president and chief executive officer Paul Stone $700,000, and executive vice president and chief financial officer Jamere Jackson $600,000 as retention bonuses, Hertz said in a filing to US regulators. Last week, the board of the company, which counts billionaire investor Carl Icahn as its largest shareholder with a nearly 39 percent stake, allowed it to seek Chapter 11 protection in a US bankruptcy court in Delaware. The firm is reeling under travel bans and lockdowns imposed to curb the spread of the new coronavirus. Since the virus outbreak, a large portion of Hertz’s revenue, which comes from car rentals at airports, has evaporated. With nearly $19 billion of debt and roughly 38,000 employees worldwide as of the end of 2019, Hertz is among the largest companies to be undone by the COVID-19 pandemic. Employees who received the retention bonuses would forfeit the right to participate in the company’s 2020 annual bonus plan.

A 100-year-old World War II veteran was clapped out of a Virginia hospital following a 58-day battle with the coronavirus. Lloyd Falk was one of Henrico Doctors’ Hospital’s first COVID-19 patients when he was admitted on March 24, and soon suffered the heartbreak of losing his wife of 74 years to the disease, the hospital said. But he “continued to stay strong, defying the odds and surviving his fight,” the hospital said alongside video of staff clapping as he was wheeled out on a gurney last Wednesday after more than eight weeks of treatment. “I really thought so many times he was gone, I really did — and he just popped back up!” said his tearful daughter, who was not identified. “It’s just amazing that he survived,” she said in the video, noting that the death of his wife was “hard on him.” Falk was handed his veteran’s cap and proudly put it on as he left the hospital, which said his “courage and resilience inspires us all.” “We salute you, Mr. Falk,” the hospital said in its video caption.

Dolphins owner Stephen Ross has no doubt: There will be football this fall. Though no major American sports league has resumed play during the COVID-19 pandemic, Ross believes the NFL will start as scheduled on Sept. 10 — and could even feature fans in the seats. “I think there definitely will be a football season this year,” Ross said Tuesday on CNBC. “Real question is, will there be fans in the stadium? Right now — today — we’re planning to have fans in the stadium.” Last season, Miami averaged over 63,000 fans per home game — ranking 23rd in the league — and will be even more intriguing this season with rookie quarterback Tua Tagovailoa. Current plans for Hard Rock Stadium would cap attendance at 15,000 fans, who would wear masks, sit spread throughout the stadium, enter in staggered intervals and avoid concession lines by ordering food from their seats. The plan unveiled by Dolphins CEO/president Tom Garfinkel early this month hasn’t yet been green-lit by the NFL or local government, though Hard Rock Stadium was the first public facility to earn the Global Biorisk Advisory Council’s STAR accreditation, which evaluates a facility’s proficiency in cleaning, disinfecting and disease prevention. “We all want to see life back to normal,” Ross said. “We all miss our sports. The NFL, I think, will be ready to go. I know we’re all looking forward to it. I know I am.”

Jennifer Lopez has mixed feelings about having to postpone her wedding to Alex Rodriguez amid the coronavirus pandemic. “I’m a little heartbroken because we did have some great plans but I’m also like, you know what? God has a bigger plan so we just have to wait and see,” she said via video chat on the “Today Show” on Tuesday. “Maybe it’s going to be better. I have to believe that it will be.” For now, J.Lo, 50, says she and A-Rod, 44, have stalled their plans. “There’s no planning right now. You just have to kind of wait and see how this all plays out,” she said. “It’s disappointing on one level, you know, after the Super Bowl and after [filming] “World of Dance” … I planned to take time off, which is what we’re doing kind of right now, but at the same time, you know, we had a lot of plans for this summer and this year but, everything’s kinda on hold right now.” In April, the former Yankees slugger joked they could have a drive-through wedding to save on costs, adding that they are just going to “go with the flow now.” “Everything has been put on pause — and see where the world takes us. These are obviously unprecedented times, and for us, we just want to make sure ‘safety first,’ and that all the little ones are taken care of,” he said at the time. The couple got engaged in March 2019. A-Rod proposed with a ring estimated to be worth over $1 million.

It’s the tell-tale finger. Men with longer ring fingers may have a lower chance of dying from the coronavirus and could be more likely to face mild symptoms, according to a new study published in the journal Early Human Development. The reason? The length of ring fingers is believed to be linked to how much testosterone men are exposed to in utero — the longer the finger, the greater the hormonal exposure. And testosterone is believed to protect against severe coronavirus-related illness because it increases the concentration of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in the body. Earlier this month, researchers estimated that men, with no mention of finger length, are more than twice as likely to die from COVID-19 than women because of the greater presence of ACE2 found in their blood. ACE2, a receptor and a gatekeeper to cells, binds to the coronavirus, allowing it to cause infection. So while it may not stop them from getting the coronavirus, it could be a sign that the symptoms won’t be as severe. Other studies suggest that even higher levels of ACE2 — thought to create greater entry points for the virus to infect cells — can protect men against lung damage, the Daily Mail notes. With regards to the lungs, the coronavirus is known to lower the number of ACE2 receptors once inside the body. But it appears that men who have higher levels of the enzyme could be better protected from the disease’s wrath than men with a lower count. The Swansea University-led researchers pored over data from 200,000 people across 41 countries where they measured volunteers’ ring fingers in relation to their index fingers to the nearest millimeter. A smaller “digit ratio” means the ring finger is longer, and this trait was found in countries including Malaysia, Russia and Mexico — where the COVID-19 fatality rate was lower. Countries where men have a higher digit ratio, meaning the ring finger is shorter, include the United Kingdom, Spain and Bulgaria — where there’s been a higher fatality rate. On average, men in countries with longer ring fingers have a death rate of 2.7 per 100,000. For the countries where there’s shorter finger length, the average is 4.9 per 100,000.

New Jersey will allow schools to host outdoor in-person graduation ceremonies this summer, Gov. Phil Murphy announced Tuesday. Murphy said that starting July 6, commencement events can be held for the Class of 2020 — as long as they comply with social distancing rules. “Our goal is to give our students the sendoffs they richly deserve and which they have been working towards,” Murphy said at his daily coronavirus press conference. More guidance will be released Wednesday to help schools safely organize ceremonies for graduates and their loved ones amid the pandemic, he said. “Given that some graduating classes may be too large to accommodate a crowd within the restrictions in place for outdoor gatherings, this guidance may require that multiple ceremonies be held across different times and even different days,” Murphy said. Murphy, who has been working to slowly reopen the state, said it’s not known what the capacities will be yet for the graduations — a number which will be determined by evolving data on outbreaks. “Certainly, these will be graduations unlike any others,” Murphy said. “The steps we are taking are necessary to ensure the health and safety of everyone in attendance, but we are equally as confident that no one will ever forget the way we celebrate the class of 2020.” The move is a win for students across the Garden State, particularly those in Toms River who sued the governor earlier this month, saying his stay-at-home order violated their constitutional rights, according to the Asbury Park Press.

Kelly Dodd continued to downplay the coronavirus pandemic via social media over the holiday weekend. On Monday, the “Real Housewives of Orange County” star — who has gotten heat for her controversial comments about COVID-19 — appeared celebratory when she saw mall patrons not wearing face masks while out to eat in her California hometown. Per the Centers for Disease Control, masks could help stop the spread. “Yay, we get to finally have a meal out,” Dodd said on her Instagram Stories. “Yay, no one is wearing a mask. I love it. Yay!” Once inside the restaurant, Dodd, 44, repeated, “No one is wearing masks here in Orange County. Yup, because nobody is dying here of the virus.” Meanwhile, servers wearing masks were clearly visible in the shot. Earlier this month, Gov. Gavin Newsom announced modifications to California’s stay-at-home order that would allow restaurants and malls to re-open in accordance with specific guidelines. Despite Dodd’s claim that “no one is dying here,” Orange County recorded 14 new coronavirus-related deaths last Thursday — the most in a single day in the area since the pandemic began — according to The Los Angeles Times. The county’s total death toll was more than 130 as of Monday. Dodd shared a quote on her Instagram that said, “It’s not the government’s job to protect my health. It’s the government’s job to protect my RIGHTS. It’s my job to protect my health. When you trade liberty for safety you end up losing both.” The reality star has been outspoken about her views on the outbreak that has claimed the lives of more than 346,000 people worldwide. The “RHOC” star was first blasted on social media for saying coronavirus is “God’s way of thinning the heard.” She then apologized profusely for her comment. However, Dodd soon made a controversial remark again by comparing the virus to the flu and adding, “Well, people are going to die! I’m sorry to tell ya.”

MOSCOW – Russia said on Tuesday 174 people with the coronavirus had died in the past 24 hours, a record one-day amount that pushed the nationwide death toll to 3,807. Officials reported 8,915 new cases on Tuesday, pushing its overall case tally to 362,342.

The CDC says that you’re less likely to pick up the novel coronavirus from surfaces, but there’s plenty of evidence that shows the life-threatening pathogen travel easily through the air and can stick on surfaces for hours or days. We’ve seen plenty of scary videos that show how easily the virus spreads from human to human, proving how vital social distancing is. The same clips indicate that the use of PPE, such as face masks, is key during the pandemic. But you have to use the mask correctly and avoid touching it. The virus can survive for days on the outside and inside of face masks as well. You should avoid touching your face while you’re outdoors. Scientists are already studying technologies that might help them apply an outer layer to face masks that would kill the coronavirus on contact. Now, some researchers think they could apply an electric current to the exterior of a face mask to destroy the virus’s ability to infect cells. Electroceuticals are a novel form of medical devices, a combination of the words “electrostatic” and “pharmaceuticals,” Forbes explains. Such technology is already being used to dress wounds. A polyester product made by Vomaris has little metal dots made of zinc and silver printed on it. The alternating pattern makes microcell batteries, which generate an electric field when exposed to moisture. This electric field contraption can help heal wounds by preventing infection. The following video shows the bandage with electric powers in action:  Chandan Sen, from the Indiana Center for Regenerative Medicine and Engineering, worked on this type of technology before and is currently pioneering a similar idea for the novel coronavirus. Sen and his team penned a paper that explains how PPE made from electroceutical fabric might kill the novel coronavirus on contact. The team used a polyester fabric without the microcell batteries on the surface as a control and then exposed both surfaces to water solution that contained cells with a different respiratory coronavirus at room temperature. The testing did not include the actual SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19. They found that a single minute of contact was enough to significantly reduce the electrokinetic property of the viral particles. Viruses depend on electrostatic forces to attach themselves to cells. So these electroceutical materials use electric fields against the particles. The researchers monitored the recovered cells and noticed they were as healthy as non-infected cells. The virus had lost its ability to infect the cells following the exposure to the electric field. Alternatively, the cells in the control fabric were infected. Further study of electroceutical materials could lead to new PPE technologies that could be effective against the novel coronavirus as well as other pathogens. Whether the face masks of the near future can kill viruses and bacteria on contact or not, remember to keep your hands away from your face and wear a mask.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo rang the opening bell at the New York Stock Exchange Tuesday as brokers returned to its iconic trading floor for the first time in two months following its longest closure ever. The Democratic governor kicked off the first day of in-person trading at 11 Wall St. since the floor closed on March 23 after several employees tested positive for the coronavirus. “In the two months the floor was dark, NYers bent the curve and slowed the spread of this virus,” Cuomo said on Twitter. Cuomo wore a light-blue protective face mask for the brief ceremony, in line with the NYSE’s requirements for the handful of floor brokers allowed in the building. They’ll also have to follow social-distancing rules and have their temperatures checked before entering. Only 25 percent of the exchange’s traders returned to the floor — and those lucky few had to avoid public transportation, have their temperatures checked upon entry and follow new social-distancing rules. According to NYSE president Stacey Cunningham, most NYSE employees — including all market makers — will continue working remotely. One face that won’t be seen on the iconic trading floor is Peter Tuchman — the most photographed floor trader and so-called “Einstein of Wall Street.” Tuchman, who revealed he had been diagnosed with COVID-19 on March 26, tweeted a photo of the opening bell being broadcast on what appeared to be his home TV. “NYSE reopens with humans in the building … Those Brave souls will usher in phase I of the return to some normalcy of the greatest financial institution in the world,” Tuchman, 62, tweeted. “As safety proves our case .. full staff will return.” NYSE officials have decided not to test returning staff for the virus, relying instead on what Cunningham has called “layered protections” of temperature checks, masks, plexiglass partitions, and social distancing. The Big Board is also requiring that all brokerages hoping to reopen on the trading floor sign a liability waiver, acknowledging the risks their staff will face. While many smaller brokerages have agreed to the waiver, according to a report in The Wall Street Journal, some larger brokerages, like Morgan Stanley, have refused and will continue to trade electronically. The NYSE kept trading going electronically as the coronavirus spread around the US and disrupted the global economy. Cunningham has said the Big Board won’t resume its regular schedule of events just yet — though some people were allowed on the floor during the closure for the initial public offering of a Chicago-based mutual fund, as The Post reported last month. The bell-ringing came ahead of Cuomo’s daily briefing on how the coronavirus has affected New York. The state has allowed seven of its 10 regions to begin reopening their economies after a lengthy shutdown aimed at stemming the spread of the virus. Restrictions have not been eased in New York City, but financial institutions like the NYSE are considered essential businesses under the state’s lockdown rules.

Quarantine boredom? Meet your match. Along vacant boardwalks, empty parking lots and the ghost town that is Times Square, roller skaters rule again. Google search interest for the retro footwear skyrocketed to a five-year high in early May — about the time lockdown doldrums also started peaking. And if the movement had a mascot, it’d surely be actress Ana Coto. The 29-year-old went viral on TikTok for her infectiously fun videos, skating (often backward) through Southern California sunshine with positively immaculate vibes. The swagger-filled social-distancing videos, now a certifiable trend on the video app, hit up to 31.2 million views each, with positive comments like “Do I wanna be her? Or do I wanna be with her?” and “Run me over you goddess.” The TikTok fame has turned her into a spiritual ring leader to a tribe of newly minted (and newly appreciated) quarantine roller bladers. It’s the hobby we never knew we needed, at a time we need it most. Coto says she’s been trying to get friends to take up roller skating for years. When COVID-19 hit, they finally listened. “Lots of those people are coming out of the woodwork like, ‘OK, you convinced me,’ ” the former dancer who now lives in Los Angeles tells The Post. “You can do it alone and have fun, and it’s exercise.” In her most-viewed video, Coto wears an an all-white jumpsuit, matching sunglasses and a coronavirus mask — peeled off at just the right moment to reveal a steely glance.  What? Like it’s hard?  ♬ nursery – bbno$    Coto, best known for her role in the 2014 horror flick “Ouija,” says her TikTok fame has been a welcome distraction since the lockdown put her acting career on hold — although the hobby has led to at least one role, as a roller gal pal in Tove Lo’s 2018 indie film “Blue Lips.” Now, instead of going to auditions and callbacks, she’s scouting out pothole-free streets, and giving maneuvering tutorials to her expanded online fan base.  Call me Jenny 💋 @jlo #rollerskating #jlotiktokchallenge  ♬ Jenny from the Block – Bronx Remix No Rap Edit – Jennifer Lopez    Now, countless TikTokers are posting their own quarantine skating endeavors — in varying degrees of gracefulness. Coto says she and other roller OGs are happy to see it, especially the ones wearing helmets and wrist guards. Let’s just say, the learning curve is steep.  @ girls who bought roller blades during quarantine (i am girls) #rollerblade #fyp #foryoupage #foryou #foryourpage #4u #foruyou  ♬ original sound – joeyklaasen    It’s no coincidence Roller blading has taken off during the pandemic — biking has seen a similar revival, with long lines spilling out of shops in New York City. And even though indoor rinks are off limits for now, there are plenty of open roads to practice on. Plus, it’s the kind of eye-catching activity that could be just the mood-booster a passer-by needs. “Especially in quarantine, everyone’s feeling a little more aware of how important human connection is,” she says. She and others have found that it’s a way for younger people to feel connected from afar to older generations with memories of the skate rink. That can feel especially poignant at a time when visiting with relatives is off-limits, Coto says. “Your grandparents, parents, they all have history with it,” she says. “Lots of young people are seeing that it’s a connective thing now.”  my mama’s usually a bit shy, so this made my day #foryou #rollerskating  ♬ original sound – ashinabeana   

Nick Cordero has a long way to go in his recovery from coronavirus. The Broadway star’s wife, Amanda Kloots, says he is “doing slightly better” but is still facing challenges. “He is still very sick and battling a lot,” she wrote on her Instagram story. “They turned him to a proning position today to open his airways. He has had this before and it helped a lot.” Kloots said doctors also cleaned out the 41-year-old’s lungs to help fight infection. She also noted that Cordero is still testing negative for COVID-19. “What he is and has been dealing with is the fail [sic] out from the virus and from infections that arise from being in the ICU as long as he has,” she wrote. Last week, Kloots said her husband’s health was “going a little downhill” since waking up from his medically induced coma. Cordero first became sick at the end of March and was admitted to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles with what he believed was a severe case of pneumonia. After being diagnosed with coronavirus, he was placed on a ventilator. He ultimately had to have his right leg amputated, suffered two mini-strokes and a septic infection, battled fungus in his lungs and was given a temporary pacemaker for his heart.

Health officials in Missouri have called on partiers who descended on Lake of the Ozarks’ crowded Memorial Day weekend celebrations to self-quarantine out of concern they may bring the virus back with them. The St. Louis County Public Health Department slammed the packed poolside bars in videos that emerged from the lake spot as “reckless.” “This reckless behavior endangers countless people and risks setting us back substantially from the progress we have made in slowing the spread of COVID-19,” county executive Dr. Sam Page said Monday in a statement. The health department expressed concern that revelers, some of whom are from the St. Louis area, may be putting others at risk. “Any person who has traveled and engaged in this behavior should self-quarantine for 14 days or until they receive a negative test result for COVID-19,” the department said in a travel advisory. Employers are already encouraged to screen workers for health risks and should ask them about their recent travel and social distancing practices, health officials said. St. Louis Mayor Lyda Krewson said it was “irresponsible and dangerous” for people to engage in the high-risk behavior on display at Lake of the Ozarks, which is about 180 miles west of St. Louis and a popular vacation destination. “Now, these folks will be coming home to St. Louis and counties all over Missouri and the Midwest, raising concerns about the potential of more positive cases, hospitalizations, and tragically, deaths,” Krewson said in a statement. “It’s just deeply disturbing.” With Post wires

Presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden’s campaign appears to be pivoting to a tricky topic for the presidential hopeful ahead of the general election: the economy. The former vice president’s team is planning to have their candidate argue that President Trump’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic caused severe economic harm, and that Biden is the better leader to shepherd the economy to a full recovery, according to The Hill. Biden allies told the outlet that the Trump administration’s response to the pandemic allows them to effectively make the case that the economy is in bad hands under the current commander-in-chief. The move is not entirely surprising, given where both 2020 candidates stand on the issues and with voters. Through his economic recovery-focused coronavirus strategy, Trump is betting that financial concerns will overtake health anxieties by late summer, making it more prudent to focus on reopening. Biden, meanwhile, has argued that the economy won’t bounce back until people feel safe enough to go back to work. The two men’s priorities amid a global health emergency have been made evident to the voters. A new Fox News poll showed voters trust Biden to do a better job on health care issues by 17 points, and coronavirus by 9 points. Trump, on the other hand, is more trusted by voters to steer the country to economic recovery. On Friday, Biden slammed Trump for his response to the pandemic, arguing “his slowness is costing lives and costing jobs and costing our ability to rebound,” and warning that an economic recovery looks “a long way away.” Responding to a mention of the president and his GOP allies pushing for businesses to open again, the 2020 Democrat said, “the way to fix the economy is get the public health response correct.” Biden allies have also argued that his past work successfully handling the implementation of the $787 billion economic stimulus package in 2009 should be brought up more by the former VP, according to the New York Times. Biden has only mentioned the stimulus package briefly on the 2020 trail, but the paper reports that there is broad agreement on the campaign that his work at the time had a positive impact “on an economy in free fall.”

A former Marine leading activists trying to reopen North Carolina says they are willing to take up arms and kill people to end the coronavirus lockdown, according to reports. “Are we willing to kill people? Are we willing to lay our lives down? We have to say yes,” Adam Smith said in a Facebook Live video shared Sunday by ReOpenNC, a group founded by his wife. Smith called lockdown orders a “test” to see if Americans are “ready to accept this New World Order system they want to implement over humanity,” according to WFAE radio. “We’re taking up arms. It’s time for us to fight against this … at the end of the day, the only thing that’s going to secure our freedom is our willingness to step up and fight,” he said. “I’m going to say: If you bring force — we’re going to bring force. If you bring guns, we’re going to bring guns. If you’re armed with this, we’ll be armed with this,” he warned, according to WFAE. Smith, of Morganton, initially deleted the video when it was highlighted by Raw Story — but his wife shared it to her ReOpenNC group’s Facebook page Sunday. “Maybe you agree with him and maybe you don’t, but we have nothing to hide,” Ashley Smith wrote along with the video in the now-private group, according to the News & Observer. “This group is built on the Constitution and that includes free speech and the Second Amendment. He is simply stating to protect his family and our freedom, he is willing to take up arms like our forefathers did.” As an ex-Marine, he remains “willing to die for all of you” as he was when he was in the service, his wife said. Adam Smith was present with armed Blue Igloo demonstrators in Raleigh on May 16, the paper said, noting the name is a play on “Boogaloo,” which the Anti-Defamation League calls slang for a coming civil war. He later defended his comments when reached by Raw Story. “I’m trying to make the men of this country stand up,” the former serviceman said. “The last thing we want is bloodshed, but that’s something they should know we’re willing to do.” AP/Gerry Broome Rusty Jones/ZUMAPRESS.com Facebook View Slideshow Saying he wanted to “instill fear in the government,” Smith said, “We know that freedom from time to time has to be renewed by the blood of tyrants. “We were founded through rebellion and bloodshed.” The News & Observer said it contacted numerous police departments, none of whom commented on the video.

LATAM Airlines Group announced Tuesday that it filed for bankruptcy in the latest sign of how the coronavirus pandemic has roiled the travel industry. Latin America’s biggest airline and its affiliates in Chile, Peru, Colombia, Ecuador and the US sought Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in Manhattan federal court as part of a reorganization brought on by the virus crisis, which has gutted air travel around the world. “We have implemented a series of difficult measures to mitigate the impact of this unprecedented industry disruption, but ultimately this path represents the best option to lay the right foundation for the future of our airline group,” LATAM CEO Roberto Alvo said in a statement. LATAM said it will keep operating passenger and cargo flights amid the restructuring, though they’ll be subject to demand and travel restrictions. The Chile-based company said it has up to $900 million in financing from shareholders — including the Cueto and Amaro families and Qatar Airways — to support it during the bankruptcy process. LATAM’s second-largest shareholder is American carrier Delta Air Lines, which paid about $1.9 billion for a 20 percent stake last year. LATAM has between $10 billion and $50 billion in assets and liabilities, according to its bankruptcy petition. The S&P and Fitch ratings agencies downgraded the company Friday after it confirmed that it missed debt payments. LATAM flew more than 74 million passengers to about 145 destinations and launched 26 new routes last year, when it raked in more than $10 billion in revenues, the company said. But that was before the coronavirus pandemic led to a roughly 95 percent drop in its passenger service, which accounts for most of its operating revenue, according to a court filing. “At the beginning of 2020, LATAM was financially and operationally one of the strongest groups in Latin America and poised to continue its upward trajectory,” chief financial officer Ramiro Alfonsín Balza said in a court filing. “Unfortunately, like so many businesses around the world, the unprecedented effects of the COVID-19 global pandemic have significantly affected LATAM’s operations and its business plan.” LATAM is just the latest airline that the coronavirus has forced into bankruptcy. Virgin Australia sought bankruptcy protection in April, followed by Colombia’s Avianca earlier this month. With Post wires

The New York Stock Exchange is set to reopen its iconic trading floor Tuesday with new safety measures in place to ward off the coronavirus. The partial reopening will bring an end to the floor’s longest closure ever. It shut down more than two months ago on March 23 after some staffers tested positive for the deadly virus. But only a handful of brokers will be allowed on the floor — and they’ll have to have their temperatures checked, wear face masks and follow social-distancing rules, NYSE president Stacey Cunningham has said. Most NYSE employees will continue working remotely and those who do commute to Wall Street must avoid public transportation, she said. “The virus will remain a stubborn reality but we can’t keep the country closed indefinitely,” Cunningham wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed earlier this month. “Given that, our reopening will bring a ‘new normal’ for the NYSE, hopefully helping chart a path that other businesses in densely populated areas might follow.” The NYSE kept trading going electronically as the coronavirus spread around the US and disrupted the global economy. Cunningham has said the Big Board won’t resume its regular schedule of events just yet — though some people were allowed on the floor during the closure for the initial public offering of a Chicago-based mutual fund, as The Post reported last month.

Countries could see an “immediate second peak” of coronavirus if they reopen too quickly, warned a top World Health Organization official who said the world is still battling the first wave of the disease. “Right now, we’re not in the second wave,” Dr. Mike Ryan, a WHO executive director, said Monday. “We’re right in the middle of the first wave globally. “We’re still very much in a phase where the disease is actually on the way up,” he told reporters, pointing to South America, South Asia and other areas seeing burgeoning numbers of infections. Noting how epidemics often come in waves, Ryan said outbreaks could pop up later this year in places where the first wave has subsided. “When we speak about a second wave, classically what we often mean is there will be a first wave of the disease by itself, and then it recurs months later,” he said. “And that may be a reality for many countries in a number of months’ time.” The WHO warned leaders in Brazil, now the second-most affected country next to the US with 375,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, to avoid reopening its economy before it can perform enough testing to get the rapid spread under control. “Intense” transmission rates in the country mean Brazil should continue some stay-at-home measures, despite the burden on the economy, according to Ryan. “In these kind of circumstances, there may be no alternative,” he said. “You must continue to do everything you can.” A travel ban on foreigners coming from Brazil to the US is set to take effect Tuesday, after being moved up from Thursday, the initially planned start date. Meanwhile, India reported a record single-day jump in new coronavirus cases for the seventh straight day. The country reported 6,535 new infections Tuesday, bringing the tally to 145,380, including 4,167 deaths. There is no proven treatment or vaccine for the deadly bug. But tests by US biotech company Novavax have begun in Australia in hopes of releasing a proven vaccine this year. The first phase of the trial is underway, in which 131 volunteers are getting injections to test the vaccine’s effectiveness and safety. Worldwide, more than 5.5 million coronavirus cases have been reported. The US has seen the greatest number of cases, with more than 1.6 million reported. With Post wires

A devoted coronavirus victim’s dog waited patiently in a Chinese hospital every day for more than three months to be reunited with his beloved owner. Sadly, the pensioner was killed by the bug after just five days at Wuhan Taikang Hospital, say staff. The little dog won the hearts of concerned workers at the hospital after he arrived with his elderly owner during the height of the coronavirus pandemic in February. Unaware that his owner would not be returning, the seven-year-old male pooch waited in the lobby of Taikang Hospital for more than three months, searching everywhere for him. Kindhearted passing patients and medical staff ended up feeding the pining pooch. Wu Cuifen, who runs a supermarket in the building, told reporters she learned that the dog’s owner was admitted with complications from Covid-19, and was suffering from pneumonia. She tried to send the dog away from the hospital – to no avail. Wu Cuifen decided to temporarily look after the pooch, and she named it Xiaobao, or “Little Treasure”. From April 13, after Wuhan lifted its lockdown restrictions and the hospital supermarket reopened, he was cared for by the shopkeeper. Ms Wu said: “I first noticed the little dog when I returned to work in the middle of April. I called him ‘Xiaobao’. “They told me his owner, a pensioner, was admitted with the coronavirus. “Then he passed away, but Xiaobao didn’t know and just stayed in the hospital looking for him. “He never left the hospital. It was incredibly touching, and so loyal.” Wu Cuifen ’s supermarket is on the first floor of the hospital. She added: “I grew familiar with the dog and later brought him into the shop. “Every morning when I opened up, Xiaobao would be there waiting for me. He saw me off at the end of each day.” Ms Wu said Xiaobao refused to leave the hospital. Even when they deliberately dropped him off somewhere far away, he would make his way back to Taikang Hospital and patiently wait for his owner to return. “Although Xiaobao can’t speak, we understand that he is definitely still looking for his owner,” she told reporters. Eventually, however, some patients weren’t keen on having the dog roaming the hospital and complained to its bosses. So nurses contacted the Wuhan Small Animal Protection Association, whose members took Xiaobao in. He has been treated by vets and has also been sterilised as he prepares to be rehomed. The shelter is now vetting animal lovers who have offered to foster Xiaobao, the association’s director Du Fan said on May 24. Ms Wu said she hopes that Xiaobao can find an owner who will treat him well.

A tattoo is forever. An engaged Irish couple with matching ink of their planned October wedding date were reportedly forced to postpone the fall nuptials because of the coronavirus. Francis Donald, 26, and Fionnuala Kearney, 24, got engaged in 2017, and while later partying in Turkey got matching tattoos of their October 16, 2020 wedding date in roman numerals, the bride-to-be told The Sun. “We strolled past a tattoo salon and we were tipsy, so thought it was a great idea to get matching tattoos,” Kearney said. “It’s funny because we were being extra careful to make sure we got the roman numerals correct, and the staff were teasing us, saying: ‘Are you sure that’s the right date?’” Kearney told the outlet she was “devastated” upon learning her big day would be pushed back — rendering the couple’s tattoos inaccurate. “If you don’t laugh, you’ll cry!” Kearney said. Kearney, who met her fiance while studying at Ulster University in 2015, said their wedding day has already been rescheduled for next April. She said they plan to do something “memorable” on their original wedding day to honor their tattoos.

A Texas doctor in town to help with the fight against the coronavirus was ripped off for $11,000 worth of personal items in her Brooklyn hotel room, police sources said Monday. The suspect, a woman believed to be in her 20s, broke into the room in the Brooklyn Hotel on Atlantic Avenue near Nostrand Avenue in Crown Heights at about 9 a.m. on Saturday, cops said. She then grabbed about $11,000 worth of jewelry and clothing before getting away on foot, police said. The victim was in town to help provide care for New Yorkers stricken by coronavirus, sources said. The crook, who is still at large, was last seen wearing a blue tank top and black pants. The burglary is the latest crime against a frontline worker in New York. In April, a nurse who works at Bellevue Hospital — and had just recovered from COVID-19 — was beaten and robbed by a group of about 15 muggers on her way to work. Martha Toscano, 60, told The Post she feared for her life during the beating, but was saved by three good Samaritans who intervened and stopped the mugging. Also in April, a Florida nurse who had come to help during the pandemic was mugged in Times Square.

A little zoo with a big heart is asking for help. A zoo in Wales may have to euthanize hundreds of animals because of the risk of them starving to death due to a lack of funds amid the coronavirus. The owners of Borth Wild Animal Kingdom are in despair because they only have enough money for one more week to care for the animals. “I’m sorry to say that financially things are looking bleak here at Borth Wild Animal Kingdom,” the owner said in a video released by the zoo. “We have maybe a week’s money left and then we will have to start looking at re-homing some of our animals, or as a last resort euthanizing the ones we can’t find homes for.” The zoo, already struggling after a “long, quiet winter season,” said the issue worsened when it emerged a special government zoo fund did not apply to Wales. “We need help now more than ever. Despite everything, we are as determined as ever to not give up,” the couple say. The zoo, which houses more than 300 animals, faced calls to close after a lynx was accidentally strangled in “a terrible handling error” just days before a second lynx was shot and killed following an escape.

Who needs WeWork when you can work in a private room with a minibar? Hotels slammed by the coronavirus pandemic are turning to a different kind of guest: The cooped-up parent down the street. Big hotel chains — including Hilton, Sheraton and Marriott — are increasingly finding they can boost their quarantine business by catering to parents in search of a quiet place to conduct a Zoom conference followed by an uninterrupted hour at the gym. “Need a productive office day?” read a recent ad by Hilton’s Cincinnati Netherland Plaza hotel. The ad features a mother rubbing her temple as her two children run amok, including one who is pounding at the mom’s open laptop. The hotel promises “complimentary WiFi and coffee, along with a desk in quiet comfort.” Guests pay $69 for a room from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. “I needed to focus and when you have a 1-year-old in quarantine, you can’t do that,” explained Jess Solomon, owner of Kansas City, Mo.-based Experience Events Group, of her recent two days working out of a hotel after her co-working space closed. “It was worth every penny for me,” said Solomon, 37, who used the time to launch the virtual arm of her events business. Located just five minutes from her home, The Raphael Hotel had been promoting a 7 a.m.-to-7 p.m. office package starting at $65 a day. Currently, about 10 percent of the boutique property’s business are locals like Solomon and another guest who’s studying for his medical boards, according to The Raphael’s director of sales, Patrick Joyce. Sales to locally based working stiffs accounted for 30 percent of April and May occupancy at the Sheraton College Park North hotel in Maryland, General Manager Andrew Labetti told The Post. “They are helping us to pay our bills,” said Labetti, who says occupancy overall has fallen to 18 percent in the pandemic. Instead of conference-goers and tourists, the hotel — located off of I-95 between Baltimore and Washington, DC — now rents rooms to about 15 area residents in need to a quiet place to do their jobs. Some guests also take advantage of the hotel’s gym, which is kept locked and monitored for social distancing, Labetti said. Since the hotel’s restaurant has been off-limits, Labetti upgraded the food options in its gift shop — stocking heartier snacks like crackers and cheese, yogurts and fruit cups. In the early days of the pandemic, Labetti said he reached out to hospitals and corporate accounts to fill the Sheraton’s rooms. “We did everything to find business,” Labetti said. Then quarantined parents started trickling in. “They found us,” he said. “We see the same faces. They have become our friends since there are so few of us working at the hotel right now,” he said of his staff of 12, down from 40 pre-coronavirus. Amy Domizi, director of sales and marketing for StepStone Hospitality, which operates 14 hotels across the country, says bookings from locals have only increased as lockdowns around the country have been extended. “People will sometimes work for a few hours and use the fitness centers afterwards.” Six of StepStone’s hotels now offer a “remote office package,” which lets guests book a room from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. for as little as $69. The Cincinnati Netherland Plaza has also made a robust business during the pandemic selling tote bags stuffed with luxury goods, including champagne, caviar and cheeses, from its critically acclaimed eatery, Orchids. The bags, which cost between $34 to $54, have been selling at a rate of 80 a week, including purchases by local residents looking to spice up their virtual happy hour, said Brian Louis, director of sales. The new revenue stream is expected to continue to trickle in through the summer — even as businesses and coworking spaces like WeWork reopen, sources added. “Missouri lifted its restrictions on May 15, but some of our clients have told us they are not returning to their offices until Labor Day,” said Joyce of The Raphael. Solomon, the entrepreneur mom, agreed. Although her co-working space has now reopened, she plans to continue to use the hotel so she can avoid sharing a bathroom and reception area, she said. “Our office is technically open now, but I’ll probably go to the hotel again,” she said.

A performance artist wore a bikini made out of blue surgical masks near a Trader Joe’s in Los Angeles to protest lockdown restrictions. The half-naked artist, DaVida Sal, was not covering her mouth but repurposed one mask as a blindfold, taking a jab at the perceived “blindness” of those complying with social distancing measures. Sal wrote in a Facebook post that she subscribes to a theory that coronavirus is a hoax created to erode freedoms by forcing people to wear masks in public and maintain a six-foot distance from each other. The reaction to her latest stunt has been overwhelmingly negative. “People where I live are dying, Karen. Protecting the most vulnerable people in our population is the right thing to do. Wearing a mask is not difficult,” wrote Amanda K. Reotar. People were outraged by her waste of personal protective equipment, which is still rationed in many places. Maureen Linde wrote, “As a healthcare worker whom is rationed one mask until it falls apart. I’m pissed off you wasted so many for your ‘statement.'”

When the coronavirus lifts, viral spending will kick in. A new survey has found that Americans just can’t wait to spend their money when the country starts to reopen. CompareCards surveyed 1,000 Americans and discovered a pent-up urge to spend. More than a quarter of respondents will be hitting their favorite restaurants as soon as restrictions lift. About 15% will be traveling to visit family, and nearly as many will go for haircuts or manicures — an indulgence some haven’t exactly avoided during the lockdown. And they’ll have the dough to do it. While staying home and avoiding the malls, Americans estimate that they have saved some $330. Bigger indulgences are in the offing as well. Among those surveyed, 20% are planning vacations, 10% are looking at pricey home repairs and some 14% of Gen-Z respondents anticipate purchasing new cars. Matt Schulz, chief industry analyst for CompareCards, is not surprised. “I think there is going to be an absolute explosion of spending once this outbreak is behind us,” he says in a statement. “The desire to spend is going to be massive.” Some New Yorkers have already begun to blow the big bucks. Stuck-at-home high rollers have used shopping as a pricey diversion. Feeling indulgent, they’ve loaded up on high-end cheeses, CBD chocolates and top-shelf booze. “Shopping takes your mind away from the harshness of everyday life,” Carrie Rattle, a financial counselor in Westchester, tells The Post. “Shopping is self soothing.” Jackson Isaacson, a 27-year-old marketer, would agree. “I bought an area rug, a coffee table, prints for the walls, a mirror and plants,” he says, admitting that he spent some $4,000 during the first month of the pandemic. “I could have gone for a cheap coffee table, but I went for a chic, nice one from West Elm … I love it.” One thing that hasn’t changed: Only 4% of those surveyed by CompareCards plan on getting gym memberships.

The governor of Michigan — whose strict coronavirus lockdown policies have caused infamous revolts in the state — is taking heat after her husband appeared to have flouted some of her own advice about holiday travel. Gov. Gretchen Whitmer pushed some of the strictest regulations in the country as Michigan became engulfed in cases and deaths, prompting widespread protests by some residents, including those who stormed the statehouse last month. Whitmer has said some of the protesters had “nooses and swastikas,” along with guns, as they screamed, “Lock her up!” Last Monday, Whitmer announced that she was lifting some lockdown restrictions in areas before Memorial Day weekend. But “if you don’t live in these regions … think long and hard before you take a trip into them,” she said. “A small spike could put the hospital system in dire straits pretty quickly. That’s precisely why we’re asking everyone to continue doing their part. Don’t descend on [waterfront] Traverse City from all regions of the state.” Three days later, a marina owner wrote on Facebook that the governor’s husband, Marc Mallory, had asked its workers to get their nearby boat in the water before Memorial Day, the Detroit  News said Monday. The vacation property that the governor and her husband own is about 25 minutes from Traverse City, the News said. The couple’s main residence is in Lansing. “This morning, I was out working when the office called me, there was a gentleman on hold who wanted his boat in the water before the weekend,” NorthShore Dock LLC owner Tad Dowker wrote Thursday on Facebook, according to the News, which said the posting has since been made private. “Being Memorial weekend and the fact that we started working three weeks late means there is no chance this is going to happen,’’ Dowker wrote, the paper said. “Well our office personnel had explained this to the man and he replied, ‘I am the husband to the governor, will this make a difference?’ ” The docking company later said on its Facebook page that Mallory was respectful when told it couldn’t accommodate him, according to the News. Republican state Sen. Tom Barrett (R-Charlotte) noted to the News that Whitmer had urged state residents not to flock to Traverse City, and “Yet, what did her family try and do? “In the Army, we have a tradition that the leaders get in line for chow last behind everyone else in the unit,” he said. “Here is the leader of our state. … Her family is trying to cut people in line.” Whitmer’s spokeswoman, Tiffany Brown, did not deny the claims involving her boss’s husband to the News but said the governor’s office would not be responding to “every rumor that is spread online.” The governor landed in President Trump’s cross hairs in March when she complained about the federal government’s response amid the pandemic. “I love Michigan, one of the reasons we are doing such a GREAT job for them during this horrible Pandemic. Yet your Governor, Gretchen ‘Half’ Whitmer is way in over her head, she doesn’t have a clue. Likes blaming everyone for her own ineptitude!” he tweeted after her comments. Whitmer confirmed last week that she is in talks with Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden to become his running mate.

“The coronavirus outbreak and the resulting massive surge in unemployment have moved American political discourse to the left,” observes FiveThirtyEight’s Perry Bacon Jr., and you can expect Joe Biden “to do the same.” The ex-veep was called “a centrist or a moderate during the Democratic primaries,” but he actually doesn’t “have any kind of set ideology at all.” He has always followed the party line, not led it, and the “center of the party is a moving target”: Democrats have shifted left since President Barack Obama stepped down, and so has Biden. If he makes it to the White House, “we might look back at how Biden won the Democratic primary — by emphasizing his moderation — and marvel that he became the most liberal president in recent history.” The Hong Kong flu pandemic of 1968-69 claimed 1 million lives, but Bloomberg News’ Joe Nocera can’t recall it — not just because he was in high school then, but because it got little media attention, and with no “discussion of lockdowns.” By contrast, the COVID pandemic “will be ­indelibly seared in the memory of those who lived through it.” Kids now “wearing masks, doing schoolwork online and staying indoors will never forget it.” Yet he wonders: Given the economic damage, is today’s lockdown “worth it”? Quarantining “an entire population is not some set-in-stone technique.” And there is “little evidence” it works. Meanwhile, there is a “high likelihood” of another wave of the coronavirus this fall. “If that happens, are you truly ready to lock down again?” Judging by her recent comments, Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez thinks “neighbors helping neighbors” would be a “break from American tradition,” marvels City Journal’s Howard Husock. Yet “the tradition of American mutual aid long predates the welfare state.” Any progressive celebration of such aid is “a welcome, if ironic, acknowledgment of America’s self-help muscle memory.” Sure, there is a “long history” of believing government can and should replace such efforts. But “even the welfare state’s architects” doubted it could substitute for the kind of community assistance — “conviviality” and “fellowship” — mutual-aid organizations provide. AOC’s comments “suggest a rediscovery of the limits of the welfare state,” notes Husock. “But don’t expect her to acknowledge that such views reflect those of millions” of Americans, let alone that they “go back to our country’s earliest days.” Gov. Cuomo’s “deadliest mistake,” charges Glenn Harlan Reynolds at USA Today, was requiring nursing homes to accept COVID-19 patients. More than 5,300 nursing-home patients in New York died from COVID-19, and critics blame Cuomo’s policy. In Florida, Gov. Ron DeSantis protected such patients, and only 3.5 per 100,000 nursing-home residents got the disease, versus 27 out of 100,000 in New York. Cuomo’s decisions prompted “a giant ‘Cuomo Killed My Mom’ sign” by an upstate overpass — “possibly unfair but certainly indicative of how some New Yorkers feel.” And while he has “gotten a lot of mileage out of an engaging TV manner,” as folks start “looking at the results, they’ll be asking more and more questions. And the answers are likely to be bad for Andrew ­Cuomo’s political career.” In a little noticed move last month, New York legalized gestational surrogacy — which, Jennifer Lahl fumes at First Things, is nothing less than “the contractual renting of wombs and the buying and selling of newborn babies.” Gov. Cuomo “buried his surrogacy proposal in the state budget,” sidestepping the debate over thorny bioethical issues and potential for abuse, including medical risks to the women involved in embryo implantation, the cruelty of ripping newborns from biological mothers and the fact that “abortion . . . clauses are routinely written into all surrogacy contracts,” that is, terminating some of the babies if the implantation yields too many. No doubt, though, “surrogacy brokers, lawyers and fertility doctors will profit handsomely.” — Compiled by The Post Editorial Board

City University colleges are rolling out plans to slash their adjunct teaching staffs as the system faces a nearly $150 million cut in aid thanks to the coronavirus budget crises at City Hall and in Albany. The famed John Jay College of Criminal Justice is prepared to cut 430 adjunct professors, amounting to roughly 40 percent of its teaching staff, according to their union, the Professional Staff Congress. Officials at the College of Staten Island are planning to cut course offerings by 35 percent, while Brooklyn College could slash as much as 25 percent of its courses and steep cuts are anticipated at Harlem’s City College, too. “It’s a disaster because CUNY has already been deeply, deeply depleted. There’s no more room to cut,” said Barbara Bowen, the president of the PSC. “The communities that rely on CUNY the most are exactly the communities that have been hardest hit by the COVID crisis.” The union figures show that the number of full-time faculty at CUNY has declined from a peak of 11,500 in the 1970s to just 7,700 full-time professors currently. To fill the gap, CUNY has depended on an army of more than 12,000 part-time adjuncts to make up the difference — where the cuts are aimed. Bowen said the union will begin running ads on local cable television systems this week to push back against the likely cuts. The PSC is also calling for CUNY officials to use $118 million in promised federal coronavirus relief to keep adjuncts on the job. Lawmakers in Albany gave Gov. Andrew Cuomo the power to adjust spending levels in the state budget based on actual revenues during times of emergency, cuts that could cost the system up to $95 million, a CUNY budget analysis provided by the PSC shows. Additionally, the de Blasio administration has already slashed $20 million in city support for the public higher education system in the current budget and plan to cut nearly another $32 million during the next budget, according to CUNY and union officials. A City Hall representative pegged the reductions at $53 million and said they were another example of the city’s need for federal aid. Gotham’s budget writers are contending with a potential $9.5 billion drop in tax revenues — that could grow another $3 billion thanks to the state’s own budget shortfall, which currently weighs in at $13 billion. “In order to uphold these priorities and avoid disastrous budget cuts, the federal government must step up and fund our recovery,” said de Blasio spokeswoman Laura Feyer. Her CUNY counterpart, Frank Sobrino, added: “The state is facing a more than $13 billion revenue shortfall due entirely to the pandemic and if the federal government doesn’t step up to offset those losses, the state will have to reduce spending by billions of dollars to balance its budget.”

Denmark has eased its coronavirus restrictions and is now allowing in visitors seeking to be reunited with their better halves  — so long as they can prove their romance is real. People who are married or engaged to someone in Denmark — or those who have been tied romantically for at least six months — must present evidence of their relationship when they attempt to cross the border to join their partner, Deutsche Welle reported. “They can bring along a photo or a love letter,” deputy police chief Allan Dalager Clausen told Danish broadcaster DR. “I realize these are very intimate things, but the decision to let in the partner ultimately rests on the judgment of the individual police officer,” he added. The government later said a written declaration would be enough to be granted entry under the rules that went into effect Monday. “If you say, you are in a relationship and put it in writing, that is enough,” Justice Minister Nick Haekkerup told local broadcaster TV2. The rules apply to travelers looking to come into Denmark from other Scandinavian countries or Germany. But online love affairs don’t count. Partners have to show that they had regular, in-person meetings prior to the pandemic. Relationships that consisted “solely of written or telephone correspondence” won’t be recognized “in the context of the current entry restrictions,” Danish authorities said. Some lawmakers slammed the relationship-proving procedures as a breach of privacy. “I’ve never heard of a country where entry requires the showing of intimate texts or photos from a partner,” said Kristian Hegaard of the Social-Liberal Party. “We finally allowed couples to visit each other, but did not abolish the right of privacy.”

Americans commemorated a socially-distant Memorial Day on Monday due to the coronavirus pandemic. With much of the nation on lockdown, grieving kin of late military veterans — including some who died from the virus itself — had to honor their relatives without the support of traditional parades or group graveside remembrances. At a visit to Fort McHenry in Maryland, President Trump likened the outbreak to war, saying the “towering spirit” that spurred American resistance to British invasion in 1814 will “vanquish the virus.” Meanwhile, former Vice President Joe Biden left home for the first time in months — in a black mask — to lay a wreath at a memorial near his home in Delaware. Get the latest developments on the coronavirus straight to your inbox by signing up for our special edition newsletter. Here’s what else we learned today: 

A viral video shows a mob of Staten Island grocery store shoppers screaming at a customer who wasn’t wearing a mask. The furious crowd yelled, “Get out!,” “Get the f–k out of here!” and “You’re a loser, bro!” at the woman at the ShopRite, according to footage posted on Facebook on Saturday and later widely shared on Twitter and other online sites. When a man yelled after the woman, “Dirty-ass pig!,” a female customer added, “Dirty,ass ho!” One man pulled his mask down around his chin to yell at the lady. “What happens in Staten Island when you don’t wear a mask at ShopRite!” Facebook poster Christine Lynn wrote above the footage on her page. Lynn wrote that a friend had taken and sent her the video. “I think video shows shameful humans at their finest,” Lynn said when responding to a comment. The other person added, “Agreed. Working in a supermarket has shown me how ugly peoples can be.” Lynn wrote, “I get ppl are anxious NO reason to act the way some of them are…especially guy following her to scream at her and call her a pig!” When someone wrote, “Question! Why is everyone so angry??? The’re wearing masks after all, aren’t they safe???” Lynn replied, “they’re staten Islanders – this is how they act when they can! They were chasing her to yell at her – obviously not afraid of her!” Someone wrote, “Same sh-t as the [local] stop and shop.” Another person added, “this happen yesterday at my target neither were wearing masks though but one was mad the other wasn’t social distancing.”

Forget Trader Joe’s — long lines are snaking around the corners of Big Apple bicycle stores as transit-averse New Yorkers seek a safe way to get around during the coronavirus crisis. “The line is constant,” said Larry Duffus of Larry’s Freewheeling bike shop in Harlem as 10 people waited outside Monday. “For the past two months, every day is a busy day. People are afraid of taking public transportation, and when you ride a bike you are free in the fresh air,” he continued. “I’ve been in business here for 50 years, and I haven’t seen anything like this since the 12-day subway strike in 1980. Four months ago, we had 250 bikes in stock. Now we have 30 left to sell.” At Mr. C’s Cycles in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, there are usually 10 to 18 people hovering outside at any given time these days — and owner Carlos Valentino estimated business is up “200 percent.” “We’re probably about 60 percent sold out,” Valentino said. Demand is so high that it has prompted a national bike shortage, shop owners said. “Right now all of our suppliers are out of the bikes that we sell,” said Charlie McCorkell, whose company Bicycle Habitat has three locations in Brooklyn and Manhattan. Victor Lei, 39, a teacher from the Bronx waiting outside Duffus’s store in Harlem on Monday said he was seeking a way to get around without taking a bus or subway. “My procrastination is going to cost me several hundred extra dollars, I’m sure,” he said. A recent survey found that three-quarters of New Yorkers plan to use mass transit less or avoid it entirely when lockdowns begin to lift. Cycling advocates have called on the city to rapidly increase the number of bike lanes to make space for the growing demand. So far, however, data suggests people may be mostly biking on weekends. The number of Citi Bike trips on weekends averaged 60,651 in the first three weeks of May, compared to last May’s 50,652 average — even as the number of weekday trips this year remained nearly half what it was in 2019. Bike counts on East River bridges reflect a similar trend: there were an average of 20,135 bike crossings on May weekends this year — a 64 percent spike over last year — even as weekday crossings remain low. But Bike New York spokesman Jon Orcutt, a former city transportation official, argued that those stats may not reflect New Yorkers taking short trips within their neighborhoods. “It’s certainly happening on weekends, but you see more bikes on the street any day of the week,” Orcutt said.

That shaggy-haired self-isolators around the world are willing to risk their lives for a trim during the coronavirus pandemic has been well-documented. But London-based beauty and fitness influencer Stefanie Williams claims to know a hair hack that will rid your mane of mangy split ends in minutes, from the safety of your home. Williams shared the trick in a TikTok post that has been viewed more than 1.7 million times. The “trick my mum taught me” prevents “split ends and means hair won’t break off so easily,” she writes in the caption, adding, “Curly hair straighten it first.” In the clip, she demonstrates the steps, which begin with well-brushed straight hair. Next, she separates her hair along top and bottom layers, then divides the bottom layer into smaller sections. Taking one of the small sections in her hand, she twists it “tight” to reveal the split ends of her strands squeezing out of the twisted locks. Finally, she uses a sharp pair of scissors to snip away at the frayed hairs — effectively ridding her hair of the broken parts. “Don’t go too close to the twist,” she warns at the end, then telling her 222,000 followers to “repeat all over” and every three weeks to maintain healthy hair growth. Many showed their appreciation for the handy advice in the comments. “I tried this and tbh I’m pleasantly surprised. My hair feels and looks more smooth,” one fan wrote. “Omg I started doing this and trimming the bottom and my hair grew so much, like a lot,” claimed another. Others, however, were less enthusiastic with the results of their quarantine cuts, and warned that too much twisting could also weaken strands. “I did it and now I have loads of whispy hairs that fly around everywhere. I would not recommend but I probs did it wrong lol,” one wrote. “Last time I tried this on my best friend I accidentally cut six inches of her [hair] off,” another cautioned. Of course, embarrassing, homemade haircuts have become relatable fodder for social-media posters and entertainers alike, all of whom have commiserated over bad hair days during the lockdown caused by COIVD-19. The first sign of hair-care restlessness came with reports of women thoughtlessly giving themselves bangs, mostly out of boredom, when salons first closed back in March. Last month, The Post reported on a few inspiring couples who chose to stay together even after one partner gave the other a horrible amateur haircut. Meanwhile, many celebrities — including Anthony Rapp, Riz Ahmed and Carson Daly — have attempted trims while social distancing, with mixed results.

Everyone into the pool — just remember to leave your face mask on deck. While seemingly mundane activities — including attending religious services, getting a haircut and dining at your favorite restaurant — are all high-risk for catching COVID-19, swimming during the coronavirus appears to be relatively safe. Experts report that the virus does not live in pool water. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “There is no evidence that COVID-19 can be spread through the use of pools and hot tubs.” But before you do your most obnoxious cannonball into the deep-end, here is what you need to know to ensure that an afternoon at the pool will not end with the virus swimming in your bloodstream. Chlorinated pool water is fatal for the miserable microbe. “The average amount of chlorine in a pool is going to kill the virus,” Roberta Lavin, professor of medicine at University of Tennessee’s College of Nursing, tells US Masters Swimming. Similarly, scientists report that coronavirus is unlikely to thrive in ocean water. It prefers human saliva to, say, the Coney Island surf. And while fresh water may not kill this vicious virus, the likelihood of being infected on a lake is remote. “You’d probably have to drink the entire lake to get an infectious dose of the coronavirus,” Paula Cannon, a professor of molecular microbiology and immunology at USC’s Keck School of Medicine, told the Los Angeles Times. “The dilution effect is so humongous.” Coronavirus may not be able to swim, but it is more than adept at lounging. For that reason, it’s important to make sure that surfaces of beach chairs, slides and handrails are all routinely disinfected. When your mayor says there’s “no way to control” crowding at parties near Lake of Ozarks, it’s time to find somewhere else to party. While water activities appear safe, maintaining 6 feet of distance from other people, in and out of the water, remains crucial. Swimming, drinking and socializing in close proximity of fellow revelers ranks as downright dangerous. It’s also tempting to mooch goggles off of a friend or relative. We’ve all done it. But this is the summer when you need to buy your own. The CDC is “discouraging people from sharing items that are difficult to sanitize or are meant to come into contact with the face.” Nose-clips and snorkels also qualify as single-user gear. We’re all sick of wearing masks — but we dread the social drubbing that comes with showing our faces. Good news for swimmers: The CDC advises that you absolutely should not wear a mask in the water. “Cloth face coverings,” the center warns, “can be difficult to breathe through when they’re wet.” And that can be just as deadly as a dose of COVID-19.

Several beach-banner planes at the Jersey Shore targeted Gov. Phil Murphy and his Pennsylvania counterpart apparently over their coronavirus lockdown stances during the holiday weekend. “Resist Murphy,” one banner read as it was flown about Sea Isle City, according to a tweet with a photo Saturday. Another plane banner flown over Wildwood on Sunday said, “Murphy’s mom voted for Guadagno,” reported NJ.com. Murphy ran against Republican Kim Guadagno and won in 2017. His mother, Dorothy, died in 2008. The governor has been criticized both for re-opening some aspects of the state amid the deadly coronavirus and not lifting the lock-down fast enough. He re-opened the shore starting Memorial Day, although with restrictions, including on the number of people allowed on beaches and requiring social-distancing. Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf responded to the beaches’ opening by urging his state’s residents to stay away from the Jersey Shore. A plane banner flew over Wildwood on Sunday that said, “Tom Wolf likes to color,” and another over Sea Isle City read, “Wolf is a Nerd King,” according to NJ.com. Wolf has become known for his color-coded reopening plan amid the pandemic. The signs about Murphy’s mom and Wolf liking “color” were flown by planes from the aerial-advertising company Paramount Air Service, which confirmed to the site that someone had paid for the fly-bys but wouldn’t reveal who.

A Manhattan woman says her dad died from coronavirus in a Harlem nursing home because it failed to implement basic health guidelines including not stopping loved ones from visiting the facility until the day after her father’s death, according to a new wrongful death lawsuit. Kim Williams says her dad William Oliver died March 15 from COVID-19 while staying at Northern Manhattan Rehabilitation Center because of gross negligence and medical malpractice by the facility and its staff, according to a Manhattan Supreme Court lawsuit filed Monday. The 78-year-old father’s “gruesome and agonizing pain and suffering and death was precipitated by the defendants,” the court papers charge. As of May 20, the East 125th Street facility has had 11 confirmed and 12 presumed coronavirus deaths, the suit alleges. The disease spread there because workers were “infected with and contracted COVID-19 while caring for patients,” the court filings claim. The home, “failed to take the proper steps to protect the residents and/or patients at their facilities from the COVID-19 virus,” by not implementing basic health guidelines, the court documents say. For example, Williams claims the home only “first closed its doors to visitors on or about March 16” — the day after her dad’s death. Williams also accuses the home of failing to put into place other measures including separating residents, enforcing social distancing among staff and residents, stopping group activities, having residents and staff wear masks, staffing appropriately and screening people who came into the building for the virus. Williams’ lawyer, Joseph Ciaccio, told The Post, “Many families have been left in the dark about what has happened to their loved ones over the past couple of months. “While this pandemic has understandably been a tremendous challenge for those in healthcare, some nursing homes appear to have been woefully unprepared.” The lawsuit — which is seeking unspecified damages — was filed on the first day that courts reopened to new non-emergency cases after a moratorium began in late March. A rep for Northern Manhattan told The Post that the home “denies all allegations.” “Family visitation was stopped on March 9 as per the state regulations. The Department of Health did a covid visit to inspect the facility as they are doing for all facilities on May 11 and we were in compliance and none of these allegations were substantiated,” the rep said.

Truth hurts: Beach season is going to look a little different this year, due to COVID-19. But Lizzo seems to have discovered the solution for enjoying pool parties and beach days without sacrificing safety or style, posing on Instagram over the weekend in a “pankini” (yes, as in “pandemic bikini”) from Thick by Robyn. “Welcome to summer 2020,” the Grammy winner, 32, captioned her snap. Priced at $180, Lizzo’s pink tropical-print two-piece is really more like a five-piece, since it comes complete with a matching face mask and gloves. Unsurprisingly, the set swiftly sold out after the star posted her pic. The “Juice” hitmaker also shared a video of herself twerking in the skimpy suit (sans mask), captioned with one of her signature body-positive affirmations. “Go look in the mirror. That body *is* your summer body,” she wrote. A post shared by Lizzo (@lizzobeeating) on May 23, 2020 at 9:59am PDT Lizzo’s Thick by Robyn suit is right in line with the “trikini” trend of bikinis bundled with matching face masks, a concept created by Italian designer Tiziana Scaramuzzo of Elexa Beachwear that began as a joke but soon became a real-life hit.

A Georgia man accused of assaulting two women with a razor blamed coronavirus stress to the “unprovoked” attack, police said. Eric Keith Mitchell, 39, of Athens, was arrested late Sunday in the parking lot of a Golden Pantry where he allegedly attacked the women as they left the grocery store, Athens-Clarke County police said. Mitchell, who was armed with a razor knife, was taken into custody by a sergeant who was on patrol nearby, police said. He then blamed stress over COVID-19, cops allege. “Mitchell cited stress from COVID-19 concerns as the precipitating factor for the unprovoked attacks,” police said in a statement Monday. The victims, who were not identified, are recent graduates from the University of Georgia. They were seriously injured during the incident and were taken to a hospital for treatment, police said. Mitchell was later charged with two counts each of aggravated assault and aggravated battery. He remained held without bail Monday at the Clarke County Jail, records show. A message seeking additional comment from Athens-Clarke County police was not immediately returned.

Tensions between the US and China reached a new peak over the weekend as the fallout continues from the coronavirus pandemic and the coinciding economic crisis, with a top official from the Communist government accusing the US of pushing the two nations “to the brink of a new Cold War.” “It has come to our attention that some political forces in the US are taking China-US relations hostage and pushing our two countries to the brink of a ‘new Cold War,'” Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi told reporters during a news briefing Sunday. “This dangerous attempt to turn back the wheel of history will undo the fruits of decades-long China-US cooperation, dampen America’s own development prospects, and put world stability and prosperity in jeopardy. People with wisdom and foresight on both sides must step forward to stop it,” Wang continued. The foreign minister’s comments are yet another example of how relations between the two countries have soured. President Trump signed phase one of the deal with China in January, ending a bitter trade war between the two countries that took place amid months of tense negotiations. In the months that followed, the Communist nation began to face a wave of international scrutiny for its lack of transparency at the onset of the coronavirus outbreak. President Trump and top administration officials — most notably Vice President Mike Pence and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo — have squarely blamed China for the global health emergency. Beijing, meanwhile, has been engaged in a months-long smear campaign against the three men. Earlier this month, Trump told The Post in an Oval Office interview that Chinese authorities were responsible for the virus’ spread. “I think the worst part of it was they could have extinguished the fire. And they could have stopped people from traveling and extinguished the fire. And they did stop people from traveling to China, but not to other parts of the world. So it’s a very sad event, I will tell you,” he remarked. Xinhua/Chen Yehua via Getty Images Paul Hennessy/SOPA Images/LightRocket via Getty Images View Slideshow After Pompeo began publicly repeating the theory that the virus originated in a lab in Wuhan, Chinese state media went on the attack. The People’s Daily, the official newspaper group of the Chinese Communist Party, devoted whole editorials to attacking Pompeo for his vocal criticism of Beijing. CCTV, China’s state broadcaster, attacked Pompeo’s assertions as “insane and evasive,” and even went after the secretary of state in extremely personal terms. Newscasters referred to him as the “common enemy of mankind” and accused him of “spreading a political virus” on multiple occasions. Images of Pompeo with the word “liar” stamped across his face were also broadcast on TV screens in Beijing’s subways. On Sunday, Wang reiterated some of that same propaganda, calling it “most regrettable” that a “political virus” is being spread in the US as an “opportunity to attack and slander China.” “Some politicians ignore the basic facts and make up countless lies and conspiracy theories concerning China,” the Chinese foreign minister added. Vice President Pence, who is chairman of the White House coronavirus task force, denounced China over the weekend for their handling of the virus, saying the country “let the world down, and the World Health Organization was their willing partner.” Speaking during an appearance on Breitbart News’ SiriusXM program Saturday, Pence argued that the Chinese Communist government withheld vital information about the virus “that would have made it possible for us to stand up a national response sooner.” Pence went on to say that China “didn’t even let American CDC personnel in on the ground until mid-February to see what was going on.” The United States put more than 30 Chinese firms and government enterprises with alleged links to China’s military activities and human-rights abuses on a blacklist late last week and threatened to sanction China over its new “national security law” imposed on Hong Kong. Wang addressed American efforts to check Communist China’s actions, saying the US should not expect any changes. “China has no intention to change, still less replace, the US. It’s time for the US to give up its wishful thinking of changing China or stopping 1.4 billion people’s historic march toward modernization,” he said.

A band of hooligans stole five golf carts from a Brooklyn golf course to go on a joyride and vandalized the course, along with a fleet of other carts, causing $100,000 in damages, police and a staffer said. “It looks like a tornado hit the course,” Richard McDonough, the director of golf operations at Marine Park Golf Course told The Post on Monday, adding that 25 of the roughly 60 carts were wrecked. Police responded to a 911 call regarding the theft of golf carts at around 9 p.m. Sunday. Officers searching the Marine Park neighborhood by car nearly collided with five suspects each zipping around on a golf cart when the police made a right turn from Avenue V onto Hendrickson Street nearby the course, cops said. The thugs then ditched the golf carts and ran into the nearby parking lot of the Kings Plaza Shopping Center, said authorities. Following a brief foot chase, cops were only able to catch up with one of the vandals – a 16-year-old boy. The teen was arrested on charges of burglary, grand larceny, criminal mischief, reckless endangerment, and criminal trespass, authorities said. McDonough said the incident “couldn’t have come at a worse time” in reference to the coronavirus pandemic. When the golf course eventually reopens from its coronavirus-induced shutdown, there will likely be restrictions of one person to a golf cart for social distancing purposes, McDonough explained, noting that the fleet of trashed golf carts will now make logistics even harder.

Americans freaked out by the coronavirus crisis are increasingly turning to prescription drugs to calm their nerves, according to a report Monday. Health-research firm IQVIA found that prescriptions for anti-anxiety drugs spiked 10.2 percent in March, to 9.7 million, compared with 8.8 million during the same month last year, the Wall Street Journal reported. Meanwhile, prescriptions for antidepressants rose 9.2 percent, from 27.2 million to 29.7 million, from March 2019 to March 2020. Even more startling increases were reported by other companies — Express Scripts, a pharmacy benefit manager owned by Cigna, said that prescriptions for anti-anxiety medications rose 34.1 percent between mid-February and mid-March, according to the Journal. Prescriptions for antidepressants and sleep medications increased 18.6 percent and 14.8 percent, respectively, according to Express Scripts. Meanwhile, psychiatrists working for Ginger — a company that provides employers with video- and chat-based mental-health services for their workers — wrote 86 percent more scripts for psychotropic drugs, primarily antidepressants, in March and April 2020 than they did in January and February. Dr. Bruce Schwartz, deputy chair and professor of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Montefiore Medical Center in New York, called the increased demand for the drugs “very problematic.” “Many physicians have a low threshold for prescribing them,” he told the Journal. “Many people do develop a dependency on these medications.” Dr. James Potash, director of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at Johns Hopkins Medicine, noted that the most popular anti-anxiety drugs were benzodiazepines such as Valium, Xanax, Ativan and Klonopin. “They are powerful, and they are powerfully attractive in that they work instantly,” he said. “You take Ativan, and 30 minutes later you are feeling dramatically less anxious.” But Potash cautioned that although the drugs are effective for short-term treatment, users can develop a tolerance to their effects in as little as two weeks. That can lead people to increase their intake, making it hard for them to stop gobbling down the pills — and leading to potentially dangerous withdrawal symptoms when they finally do. Dr. Beth Salcedo, a psychiatrist and the past president of the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, said that the best ways to deal with anxiety included “exercising, eating well, avoiding alcohol and making sure we surround ourselves with our social support as much as possible.” If those don’t work, she recommends a type of counseling known as “cognitive behavioral therapy,” possibly coupled with antidepressant medications like Lexapro and Prozac.

Prepare for a germ reckoning at the gym. As the coronavirus lockdown restrictions begin to ease, gyms and fitness studios have started to roll out reopening plans. But health experts warn that your regular sweat seshes are about to look very different. Some worry about a repeat of what happened in South Korea, where more than 100 coronavirus cases were linked to a group of dance instructors. “The gym is a perfect storm for transmitting respiratory disease,” says Dr. Purvi Parikh, a member of Physicians for Patient Protection and an immunologist at NYU Langone who points to “crowds, heavy breathing and touching,” as possible COVID-spreading culprits. She warns that not all workouts are equally contagious, but says all gyms will have to take “drastic measures” to comply with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s guidelines for social distancing. Gym owners such as Kelvin Gary, who runs Body Space Fitness in Union Square, have already begun to make serious changes. Gary has sunk about $12,000 into remodeling efforts to make his space more sanitary. “We’re setting it where essentially each client has their own mini gym,” Gary tells The Post. At Equinox, expect shorter hours, temperature checks and prescheduled workout slots. The luxe chain announced these among other changes earlier this month, while its sister brand, SoulCycle, says they’ll require gloves for staff, close their showers and cap the number of available bikes per class to ensure a socially distant sweat. Big box gyms such as Retro Fitness have pledged to scrub down “[using] hospital grade cleaner to clean the entire gym,” according to a press release. Plus, they promise to enact touch-free check-ins and preorders for smoothies to limit hand-to-hand contact. But will it be enough? Here, the experts share what the gym of the future might look like. Expect machines to be more spread out at your local gym. “The way you see airlines blocking seats, we might see that, where gyms are blocking treadmills or bikes,” says Parikh. In Hong Kong, some gyms have installed Plexiglass barriers to keep exercisers’ sweat and germs from mingling. But Parikh is skeptical this will make a real difference. “Plexiglass is great, but only if it’s being cleaned after each use or else the germs stay enclosed,” she says. You might be asked to wear a mask, or be required to, depending on where your gym is located. This can make working out tougher, or downright dangerous — a man in Wuhan, China recently passed out while running with a mask. In two other incidents involving physical activity, two Chinese boys dropped dead within a week of one another recently while wearing masks during gym class. Your best bet is to wear a mask when you can, but when it comes to workouts that require a lot of oxygen, such as running or heavy weightlifting, you might be forgiven for removing your mask, Parikh says. “Realistically I don’t think many people will be able to work out [that heavily] with a mask,” Parikh says. Depending on the material of the dumbbells at your gym, these might be your best bet. “The virus tends to last the longest on plastic,” says Parikh. “Steel and aluminum surfaces are after that.” And, maybe skip using an exercise bench: “If you press one button on a treadmill, that’s less to worry about than an entire bench, where more onus is on the gymgoer to clean the entire thing,” says Parikh. Russian twists, planks and yoga moves that take place on communal mats will require the most prep. “Your whole body is being exposed at this point, rather than one area [using a weight, or machine],” says Parikh, who points out that gym cleaning policies will matter most in these high-traffic areas. Expect more disinfecting products in this area of the gym. Gary, the Union Square gym owner, plans on providing liquid sanitizer that can be used on both hands and equipment, and virus-killing UV light wands for each training station, too. Classes may be the last thing to return at your local fitness center. “Classes used to be a lot of people in one room breathing heavily with their heart rate up,” says Parikh. “If everybody is dancing and gasping, you’re probably not 6 feet apart, and you may be touching your face because you’re sweating. You’re basically doing all the things we’ve been telling people not to do since January.” New-age classes will likely mean less people, and markers on the ground for everyone to keep a safe space from each other. Gary says looking forward, he plans on keeping his gym’s group classes online, but venturing out to meet his clients. “We’re looking at potentially doing some group classes outside,” he says. Be careful not to get too comfortable in the locker room. “Towels everywhere, close quarters and high turnover all concern me in terms of cleanliness,” says Parikh, who adds that saunas and steam rooms are a no-go. Sweaty, enclosed rooms are where the virus thrives, and “social distancing becomes a problem immediately,” she says, adding that it might be a better idea to hit the showers at home.

SHANGHAI – Nightclubs in China have mostly come back to life as owners and customers feel increasingly comfortable the novel coronavirus epidemic is under control, but disinfectant, disposable cups and masks have become part of the experience. At 44KW, a club for electronic music lovers in the financial hub of Shanghai, customers sat, danced and mingled with little sign of social distancing on the weekend. The club re-opened in mid-March after closing for about six weeks, but it took a while for business to get back to normal. “There really weren’t many clients as most people were quite worried about their safety,” said Charles Guo, founder of 44KW. “Our client flow began to recover quickly towards the end of April”, Guo said, adding that business was back to last year’s average levels by mid-May. But not everything is like the old days. The club checks the temperature of every customer and gets them to register their details. Staff, including bouncers, bartenders and waiters wear masks and gloves all the time. Customers don’t have to wear masks but many do. Some glasses have been replaced with plastic cups and the club has installed hand sanitizer dispensers throughout. Door handles and toilets are disinfected every hour while the entire club is disinfected every day before and after opening, Guo said. Clubs have been at the centre of coronavirus flare-ups in other Asian cities. A cluster of cases linked to clubs emerged in South Korea this month, triggering fears of a second wave of infections and leading to clubs and bars being shut again. “I checked with my friends about what types of precautions were taken at each venue before deciding which one to go,” 23-year-old clubber Cao Douzi told Reuters outside 44KW. China, where the coronavirus emerged late last year, has seen a sharp fall in cases since March.

MIDDLETOWN, Md. – The milk truck can be heard more than a block away, chugging along the narrow tree-lined streets of Washington’s historic Capitol Hill neighborhood. Milkman Seth Burmeister is making the first of the day’s 150 home deliveries of milk, eggs and ice cream produced at South Mountain Creamery in Middletown, Maryland, some 60 miles away. South Mountain Creamery says it saw an almost tenfold increase in new home delivery customers over a single weekend in late March when stay-at-home measures due to the COVID-19 pandemic started in the region. By mid-May the company had a wait list of 6,000 new households, it said. “COVID kind of pushed people over that line, that ‘Hey, I’m going to have to try this’,” said the dairy’s CEO, Tony Brusco. An extra advantage is the milk is delivered in glass bottles rather than single-use plastic jugs found in most grocery stores. The eggs come from cage-free chickens and the milk from grass-fed cows, according to the company’s website. South Mountain’s overall customer base doubled over four weeks after the initial surge in interest in late March, said Brusco, and they are still hiring more drivers and trucks. Capitol Hill resident Sarah Henn has been ordering her milk from South Mountain for 14 years and says the realities of a post-COVID world mean home food delivery will likely be something more people will want. “We certainly all know that nothing’s going back to normal in the next six, 12 months; that we’re going to be living differently,” Henn said. “And certainly that some of the things that we’re adopting now I’m sure will continue to become part of our lives as we move forward.”

Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Monday sank Staten Island’s bid to begin its coronavirus reopening ahead of the other four boroughs. “I understand the Staten Island mentality. I love Staten Island and I have a lot of friends there,” said Cuomo. “But it’s not a place unto itself for this purpose.” Arguing that the borough has already met the state’s seven metrics for reopening — measuring hospital admissions, deaths, available beds, testing and tracing — a group of pols led by State Sen. Andrew Lanza (R-SI) last week asked Cuomo to allow the island to reopen on its own. But Staten Island life is inextricably tied to the rest of New York City — which, as a whole, is yet to clear all seven hurdles — Cuomo said during a Memorial Day press briefing at the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum. “If you live on Staten Island, you very well may be working in Manhattan, you’re traveling through the New York City area,” said Cuomo. “I get that sometimes every borough would like to secede and be its own place. “But Staten Island, just practically, is still part of New York City.” Seven of the state’s 10 economic regions have already entered phase one of the state’s four-phase reopening plan, which permits low-risk businesses including construction, manufacturing, landscaping and curbside pick-up retail. Another two regions are expected to qualify for phase one this week: the Mid-Hudson on Tuesday, and Long Island on Wednesday. Spencer Platt/Getty Images Tamara Beckwith/NY Post View Slideshow That leaves the Big Apple as the only sector on the outside looking in, though Mayor Bill de Blasio has said that the city is on pace to be cleared as early as June 1.

Ibiza has been plagued with an invasion of Asian tiger mosquitoes — four times bigger than normal — as swimming pools in the vacation hotspot are left untreated during the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new report. The critters — which carry diseases like Zika virus, West Nile virus and dengue fever — have likely thrived since the closure of hotels and holiday villas on the Spanish island, The Sun reported. The bugs, which prefer moist air, have been attracted to the swimming pools left untended due to the lack of tourists, according to the report. The mosquitoes take 10 to 12 days to hatch — and when they do, they tend to emerge during the day, when humans are out and about, not just dawn and dusk, The Sun reported. They are able to bite through clothing, according to the report. All tourism has been prohibited in Ibiza during the coronavirus outbreak, leaving the usual tourist hotspots deserted. Now, the department for environmental management in Ibiza’s council has warned residents to keep their pools purified, warning that not doing so could create a “real public health problem,” The Sun reported. Meanwhile, Ibiza is beginning to soften its lockdown, the outlet reported. “We have been able to advance quickly because we have moved forward with things done well,” said Francina Armegol, head of the Balearic government. “And we have to carry on doing this responsibly.” Spain, one of the countries most heavily hit by the pandemic, will allow tourism to resume in July, according to the report. “Foreign tourists can start planning their holidays,” Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez said over the weekend. “We guarantee that tourists will not be at risk and that they will not put us at risk.” “Health and business are not opposing factors,” he added. “Spanish tourism will now have two new trademarks: ecological sustainability and health protection.” A total of 235,772 coronavirus cases and 28,752 deaths have been reported in Spain, Johns Hopkins University statistics show.  News of the tiger mosquitoes comes weeks after it emerged that “murder hornets” from Asia measuring up to two inches long had been found for the first time in the US. But insect experts have said those insects pose a much greater threat to honeybees than humans.

China’s “bat woman” researcher warns that the deadly coronavirus surfacing now is “just the tip of the iceberg” in terms of what humans may soon face without a global effort to prevent similar infectious outbreaks. “If we want to prevent human beings from suffering from the next infectious-disease outbreak, we must go in advance to learn of these unknown viruses carried by wild animals in nature and give early warnings,” Shi Zhengli, a top Chinese scientist specializing in viral transmissions from bats, told CGTN in an interview that aired Monday. “If we don’t study [the viruses], there will possibly be another outbreak,” warned Shi, who was dubbed “bat woman” by the press because of her research involving the mammals. AFP via Getty Images AFP via Getty Images AFP via Getty Images View Slideshow The coronavirus has killed more than 345,000 people across the world since it appears to have first surfaced in Wuhan, China, late last year. The Wuhan lab where Shi is deputy director has been suspected of accidentally unleashing the virus on humans. China also has been accused of not coming clean on the danger soon enough and consistently lying about the virus’ toll on its citizens. Shi has denied that her lab was involved in the pandemic, saying the strains it has been researching are different.

The World Health Organzation announced Monday that it has temporarily suspended clinical trials of the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine as a potential coronavirus treatment amid safety concerns. The move comes after a study last week published in medical journal The Lancet indicated that the use of the drug on COVID-19 patients could increase their likelihood of dying. WHO/Christopher Black via AP GEORGE FREY/AFP via Getty Images View Slideshow WHO chief Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus told reporters that the clinical trials involving the drug had been “suspended while the safety is reviewed.” “The executive group has implemented a temporary pause of the hydroxychloroquine arm within the Solidarity trial while the safety data is reviewed by the data safety monitoring board. The other arms of the trial are continuing,” Ghebreyesus said during a virtual press briefing. An earlier study of more than 300 male patients at Veterans Health Administration medical centers across the country also found a higher rate of death in those who took the hydroxychloroquine, and the FDA in April cautioned against taking the drug outside of hospitals and clinical trials. President Trump recently revealed that he had been taking hydroxychloroquine for several weeks to ward off the coronavirus, but said Sunday he is no longer taking the drug. With Post wires

The first pro sport in the US to come back during the coronavirus pandemic is strengthening its health and safety protocols ahead of its expected return to Las Vegas. The UFC has updated its testing and self-isolation guidelines, according to MMA Junkie, as it heads into UFC Fight Night on Saturday — its fourth event since coming back, but the first to take place in Las Vegas and not Jacksonville. Fighters will undergo two COVID-19 tests — one upon checking into the hotel and another on Friday after weigh-ins. After the first one, fighters must take stricter precautions until learning the test results. “This means you should not leave the Athlete Hotel or have physical contact with anyone other than the members of your camp until you have received your test result,” the promotion said in a memo obtained by MMA Junkie. There are similar precautions following the Friday test, as fighters and their corners will have to self-isolate until leaving for the UFC Apex arena on Saturday. “During this time, no athletes or cornermen will be permitted to leave the Athlete Hotel without express prior approval from the Nevada State Athletic Commission,” the memo said. Saturday’s event, which is still subject to a vote by the Nevada State Athletic Commission, will be headlined by a welterweight bout between Tyron Woodley and Gilbert Burns.

President Trump likened the coronavirus pandemic to war during a Memorial Day visit to Fort McHenry in Maryland, saying the “towering spirit” that spurred American resistance to a British invasion in 1814 will “vanquish the virus.” Trump highlighted the military’s role fighting COVID-19 while speaking at the island fortress near Baltimore. “In recent months, our nation and the world have been engaged in a new form of battle against an invisible enemy,” Trump said. “Once more, the men and women of the United States military have answered the call to duty and raced into danger. Tens of thousands of service members and National Guardsmen are on the front lines of our war against this terrible virus, caring for patients, delivering critical supplies and working night and day to safeguard our citizens as one nation.” Trump visited the historical site as he encourages states to reopen their economies after more than two months of COVID-19-triggered lockdowns. The virus has sickened more than 1.6 million Americans, killed almost 98,000 and left nearly one-quarter jobless. “We mourn alongside every single family that has lost loved ones, including the families of our great veterans,” Trump continued in his speech. “Together, we will vanquish the virus and America will rise from this crisis to new and even greater heights. As our brave warriors have shown us from the nation’s earliest days, in America we are the captains of our own fate. No obstacle, no challenge and no threat is a match for the sheer determination of the American people. “This towering spirit permeates every inch of the hallowed soil beneath our feet. In this place more than 200 years ago, American patriots stood their ground and repelled a British invasion in the Battle of Baltimore during the War of 1812.” Fort McHenry’s resistance inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The Star Spangled Banner,” which later became the National Anthem. The commander-in-chief’s visit followed a solemn Monday morning wreath-laying ceremony at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia. Some Baltimore officials objected to Trump’s visit, noting that local residents remain under a stay-at-home order during the holiday known for cookouts and enjoying the outdoors. Trump is slowly resuming domestic travel after largely being confined to the White House since March. On Wednesday, he’s expected to attend a SpaceX rocket launch in Florida.

The families of New York’s public workers who gave their lives fighting the coronavirus will receive death benefits from the state and local governments, Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Monday. “I feel a grave responsibility to our frontline workers, our essential workers who understood the dangers of this COVID virus, but went to work anyway, because we needed them to,” said Cuomo in a somber press briefing at the Intrepid Sea, Air and Space Museum on Manhattan’s West Side. “Today, we’re saying we honor that service, and we’re going to make sure that every government in the state of New York provides death benefits to those public heroes who died from COVID-19 during this emergency.” The office of Mayor Bill de Blasio, who last week joined a growing chorus of calls for the benefits, was quick to take credit for the idea. “Thank you @NYGovCuomo for endorsing our plan to provide line of duty benefits to city workers lost to COVID-19,” tweeted City Hall press secretary Freddi Goldstein within minutes of Cuomo’s announcement. “Everyday, but particularly on Memorial Day, it’s so important to stop and remember those we’ve lost, and do all we can to support the families they left behind.” The benefits, for which Cuomo has long signaled support, will be paid out of state and local pension funds, and go to the families of publicly-employed responders including health-care workers, cops and firefighters — “the people who showed up,” the governor said. Other details of the initiative, including the projected cost and when benefits would first be disbursed, weren’t immediately announced. Cuomo also called on the federal government to go one step further by approving hazard pay for responders. “It’s a way of saying thank you, we understand what you did, we appreciate what you did,” said Cuomo. “And it’s a way of showing Americans that when there is a next time — and there is a next time — that we truly appreciate those people who show up and do their duty.” Cuomo announced the move during a solemn briefing that began with his tossing a memorial wreath into the Hudson River, the playing of “Taps” and a moment of silence. As America mourned its fallen military heroes, another 96 New Yorkers succumbed to the coronavirus, raising the state’s overall confirmed death toll to 23,488. “Ninety-six is still painfully high,” said Cuomo of the fatalities logged in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Monday. “But only in the relative absurdity of our situation is that relatively good news. “We remember those 96 families today.”

Patrick Ewing is getting the upper hand in his fight against coronavirus. Three days after the Knicks legend announced he tested positive for COVID-19, his son Patrick Ewing Jr. said Monday the 57-year-old Georgetown coach is out of the hospital. “I want to thank all of the doctors and hospital staff for taking care of my father during his stay, as well as everyone who has reached out with thoughts and prayers to us and since his diagnosis,” Ewing Jr. wrote on Twitter. “My father is now home and getting better. We’ll continue to watch his symptoms and follow the CDC guidelines. I hope everyone continues to stay safe and protect yourselves and your loved ones.” In a statement released by Georgetown on Friday, Ewing said the virus “should not be taken lightly” and said he will “be fine.” “I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones,” Ewing said in the statement. “Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines.” Ewing received support from his former teammate Charles Oakley, who in a recent interview with The Post blamed Ewing for the Knicks’ failure against Michael Jordan’s Bulls during the 1993 playoffs. “I went to war with you for ten years. I won’t leave you on the battlefield now. Get well Patrick. More fights ahead,” Oakley tweeted. Ewing was an 11-time All-Star with the Knicks during his Hall of Fame career.

JAKARTA, Indonesia — Before the coronavirus pandemic arrived, 2020 seemed fated to be a great year for Siko Setyanto’s dance career: touring Germany and South Korea, performances in Indonesia, classes and more classes. Now this man in motion has spent more than two months holed up at home with his wife. “For dancers, it is like the blood line stopped in our body,” he says. “I cannot move freely, no more job … while my economic responsibilities do not stop. Personally, I was stressed too.” He was rescued by two choreographers in Indonesia’s capital who have given a traditional system for tipping artists, saweran, a modern twist — posting video recordings of dancers’ work on YouTube and asking for donations to keep the dancers and their art alive. “We remember a long time ago we watched performances with the saweran system,” said Rusdy Rukmarata, who masterminded the project with Yola Yulfianti. “No ticket box, no promotion, only space in the market and the musicians. People can watch them for free, if they like it, they give the tip to the performers,” Rukmarata said. AP AP AP AP AP AP AP AP AP View Slideshow So Rukmarata and Yulfianti, members of the Jakarta Arts Council, started Saweran Online on the Indonesian Dance Network channel. On this digital stage, dancers can show their work; the shows are free, but viewers are encouraged to donate. There are more than 60 videos by individual and dance groups from various backgrounds and genres. Included are traditional Indonesian dance, contemporary ballet and even dance workouts for older viewers. Some dancers provide videos, while others record performances at Rukmarata’s studio. Each donation is divided: 75% for the performer, 20% to other COVID-19 needs in Indonesia and the rest to pay for the project’s costs. Siko Setyanto saw money deposited in his bank account two weeks after his video went up. The cash is important to Setyanto, but so is the opportunity to show his art: “I really appreciate how this program can be a place for the dancers to express our works.” Yulfianti said performers are responsible for attracting viewers and support. “The dancers should be as creative as they can. They should attract their viewers too,” Yulfianti said. The two have been joined in their effort by independent art producer Ratri Anindyajati, who has recovered from the COVID-19 and is renowned as Case 03 in Indonesia. Anindyajati said her survival has inspired her to do more for others during the pandemic. “As I grew up with the dance community, I would like to help them. Moreover, it is not only helping people around the dance community,” but also others who need aid, Anindyajati said.

A decision is coming this week on whether one of the most impressive Naismith Hall of Fame classes will have to wait to be enshrined, according to a report. This year’s induction, headlined by Kobe Bryant, Kevin Garnett, Tim Duncan and Tamika Catchings, was originally scheduled for Aug. 28-30 in Springfield, Mass., but could be forced to move to this fall or the spring of 2021 because of the coronavirus pandemic, the Boston Globe reported. The Hall of Fame is already planning on holding the event at a bigger venue to allow for social distancing — the MassMutual Center instead of Symphony Hall — but will decide this week whether to move forward with the original date or push it back to Oct. 9-11 or early next year, CEO John Doleva told the Globe. Even if it is delayed until 2021, though, it will not be combined with next year’s class. “I do want to make it very clear we will have a separate event for the class of 2020 because of the notoriety of that class and, frankly, every class deserves its own recognition,” Doleva told the newspaper. “There is a potential next calendar year that we could have two enshrinements.” Whenever the event does take place, it will tweak its rules to allow family members to speak live at the event on behalf of inductees, according to the Globe. Previously a posthumous inductee would be honored with a video presentation, but the change could allow Vanessa Bryant to speak for her late husband if she chooses. Bryant and his daughter Gianna were among nine killed in a helicopter crash in California on Jan. 26. “I had the opportunity to speak very briefly with Mrs. Bryant and she was very appreciative and very emotional,” Doleva said. “She has certainly indicated to be very involved, she and her family and others, in his enshrinement ceremony when it happens.” The 2020 Hall of Fame class also includes Rudy Tomjanovich and Eddie Sutton, who died Saturday at 84.

The Venice Film Festival will go ahead as planned this fall, the region’s governor confirmed on Sunday. Luca Zaia, governor of Veneto, said the world’s longest-running film festival, which was due to take place Sept. 2-12, is still on. The official’s confirmation comes days after the Venice Biennale, which oversees the film festival among a number of other arts events, moved its Biennale of Architecture to 2021, but maintained the film festival’s fall dates. Previously, the architecture and film festivals were meant to overlap. Zaia said on Sunday that the Biennale of Architecture was postponed due to complications in constructing the necessary pavilions. The film festival will proceed, although he warned that there will likely be fewer films this year. Venice surveyed a wide range of film industry executives in early May to ask for concerns and suggestions about the upcoming edition, as reported by Variety. The letter, which was signed by Venice’s artistic director Alberto Barbera, was meant to gauge how many filmmakers, actors and producers are willing to attend the fest. “We know that it would be simply impossible to plan a festival without knowing if you all are willing to use the Festival to give a new start and a strong sign for keeping cinema alive, even in these difficult times,” wrote Barbera. The letter also asked producers and sales agents about “the concrete possibility of bringing (talent) to accompany the invited films.” Evidently, organizers — who were expected to take a decision in late May — are now confident the fest is able to go ahead as planned, although the look of the event will be different this year, as public health safeguards must be taken into consideration. The festival has not yet commented on plans for September. Venice previously declared that it would not go the virtual route, but made clear in its industry survey that it was considering a “virtual screening room, using a safe online platform” for those who won’t be able to attend but have been previously accredited. In January, the fest revealed that Cate Blanchett would serve as jury president. Italy will reopen its borders for European travelers on June 3, forgoing mandatory quarantine restrictions for inbound travel. The country, which was among the hardest hit by coronavirus in Europe, has slowly come out of lockdown in recent weeks, though it has reported 32,785 fatalities to date.

China urged US officials Monday to undo new sanctions against nearly three dozen companies amid growing tensions between the two nations. The demand came three days after the US Department of Commerce blacklisted more than 30 Chinese firms and government enterprises with alleged links to China’s military activities and human-rights abuses. Washington “violated the basic norms governing international relations” by adding organizations to its “Entity List” restricting American companies from doing business with them, Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian said at a news conference. “We urge the US to correct its mistake, rescind the relevant decision, and stop interfering in China’s internal affairs,” Zhao said, according to a transcript the ministry released. “China will continue to take all necessary measures to protect the legitimate rights and interests of the Chinese enterprises and safeguard China’s sovereignty, security and development interests.” The Department of Commerce did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The agency blacklisted eight Chinese firms and China’s Ministry of Public Security’s Institute of Forensic Science over their alleged roles in the mass detention and surveillance of Uighur Muslims and other Muslim minorities. The feds called them “complicit in human rights violations and abuses” in China’s northwestern Xinjiang region. Another 24 companies and government organizations went on the list because there’s a risk they could support the procurement of items for military use in China, according to the department. Some blacklisted companies joined the Chinese Communist Party in slamming the feds’ decision. Aksu Huafu Textiles Co. — which the Department of Commerce accused of human-rights violations — said the move “recklessly disregards facts,” while software supplier Qihoo 360 said the agency was “politicizing business.” The move came amid growing tensions between Washington and Beijing over China’s handling of the coronavirus crisis and its crackdown on Hong Kong, which has been roiled by pro-democracy protests in recent months. President Trump suggested in a recent interview that he could “cut off the whole relationship” with China as relations soured. The Department of Commerce also blacklisted Chinese tech giant Huawei last year over national security concerns, a move the Chinese Communist Party criticized at the time. With Post wires

The NHL has formulated plans to open club training facilities for small-group on-ice and off-ice workouts as soon as next week in what the league is calling Phase 2 of its response to COVID-19. The league has steadfastly avoided putting a timetable on a potential summer return, but if all goes well in negotiations between the NHL and NHLPA and governing health bodies allow, training camps (Phase 3) could begin by late June. That would put the league in position to start its 24-team tournament (Phase 4) the second or third week of July with the crowning of a Stanley Cup champion in mid to late September. Under these protocols distributed to players by the NHLPA on Monday before the 22-page memo’s official release by the league, no more than six players at a time will be permitted in a club facility. Coaches would be permitted to observe, but not join, on-ice activity. Teams are responsible for arranging testing through their club health care providers. Players and staff members will be given a nasal swab test two days before commencing training and then will be re-tested twice a week thereafter. Tests are expected to yield results within 24 hours. Players and staff are also expected to take their own temperature and check for symptoms on a daily basis. As well, temperature and symptom checks must be performed daily at the entrance to the club facility. Players and staff members who test positive or develop symptoms will be segregated from the group and referred for further medical observation under self-isolation. The league states that “[the] over-riding principle [of] testing of asymptomatic Players and Club personnel [is that it] must be done in the context of excess testing capacity, so as to not deprive health care workers, vulnerable populations and symptomatic individuals from necessary diagnostic tests (‘Publicly Necessary Testing’).” Players returning to their teams’ respective home cities by public transportation — including commercial air travel — must self-quarantine for 14 days before joining the Phase 2 small group workouts. Those deemed to be returning from “high-risk” environments may be required to self-quarantine for 14 days even if not traveling via public transportation. All personnel are expected to maintain social distancing, with players and staff members required to wear cloth masks (except when working out on or off the ice) if not possible to maintain six-foot spacing between parties. All personnel are required to wear masks when entering and exiting the arena. These small-group workouts are voluntary. Teams cannot compel players to return to their respective home cities. NHL facilities will be open to all players in the area, including those on other clubs, for Phase 2. The NHL and NHLPA are expected to resume negotiations Tuesday on an agreement covering all outstanding issues relating to a summer return to the ice. The parties have agreed on the general framework of a 24-team Stanley Cup playoff tournament.

TOKYO — Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe lifted a coronavirus state of emergency in Tokyo and four other remaining areas on Monday, ending the restrictions nationwide as businesses begin to reopen. Abe also unveiled a plan for a new stimulus package to support businesses hit by the pandemic. Experts on a government-commissioned panel approved the lifting of the emergency in Tokyo, neighboring Kanagawa, Chiba and Saitama prefectures, and in Hokkaido to the north, which had more cases and remained under the emergency declaration after it was removed in most of Japan earlier this month. Under the emergency, people were asked to stay at home and non-essential businesses were requested to close or reduce operations, but there was no enforcement. Since May 14, when the measures were lifted in most of Japan, more people have been leaving their homes and stores have begun reopening. Japan, with about 16,600 confirmed coronavirus cases and about 850 deaths, has so far avoided a large outbreak like those experienced in the U.S. and Europe despite its softer restrictions. “We were able to bring the outbreak nearly under control in just a month and a half in a uniquely Japanese way” without enforcing measures with penalties, Abe said. “We demonstrated the power of the ‘Japan model.’” But the world’s third largest economy has fallen into a recession, and public discontent over Abe’s handling of the outbreak has sent his support ratings tumbling. Recent media surveys show public support for his Cabinet has plunged below 30%, the lowest since he returned to office in December 2012. Abe said the lifting of the emergency does not mean the end of the outbreak. He said the goal is to balance preventive measure and the economy until vaccines and effective drugs become available. ”Our goal is to create a new normal,” he said. “We need a new approach to resume our daily social and economic activity.” AP AP AP AP AP AP View Slideshow Abe also announced a new stimulus plan worth about $930 billion to provide financial support for companies hit by the pandemic. Cabinet approval of a second supplementary budget to fund the additional stimulus is expected later this week. Combined with an earlier 117 trillion yen stimulus, the amount of spending will be more than $1.9 trillion, he said. The new package will include loan programs to reduce the burden of rent for store owners and subsidies for local governments to step up regional measures. Abe declared the state of emergency on April 7 in several parts of Japan including Tokyo, expanded it to the entire nation 10 days later, and then extended it until the end of May. On Monday, Matsuya Ginza department store, a landmark in the posh Tokyo shopping district, resumed operation after being closed for seven weeks. Sales staff wearing plastic face shields welcomed customers with bows but no verbal greetings under new guidelines. Economy Minister Yasutoshi Nishimura said earlier Monday that recent data suggest that infections have slowed enough and pressure on the medical system has fallen sufficiently to allow a gradual resumption of social and economic activity. He said Tokyo, Kanagawa and Hokkaido, where the number of infections is still fluctuating, will be watched closely. Individual prefectures are allowed to impose their own measures. Tokyo Gov. Yuriko Koike said last week that the capital will reopen in three phases starting with schools, libraries, museums, and longer service hours for restaurants. She said theaters, sports facilities and other commercial establishments will be next, with nightclubs, karaoke and live music houses in the final phase.

An obese British man says he unexpectedly has a new lease of life after losing a stunning 70 pounds during a six-week near-death battle with the coronavirus. Kim Wai Li, 43, first fell ill from the virus on March 12 — and spent almost two weeks in a medically induced coma before finally leaving a London hospital on April 22. He went in weighing 210 pounds at just 5-foot-6 — but was 140 pounds by the time he finally made it home. His waist also dropped four inches. “I didn’t recognize myself in the mirror when I saw how much weight I’d lost,” Li told UK agency Triangle News, recalling the shock on the faces of his wife and two young kids when they finally saw him. His battle with the bug initially left him too weak to shower or even feed himself. But now he is getting stronger, he appreciates the fresh start his staggering weight loss is offering. Li blames his obesity for getting hit so hard by the contagion in the first place — along with causing the high blood pressure that vanished along with the weight. Triangle News/Joe Newman Triangle News Triangle News Triangle News View Slideshow “I’m determined to keep my weight where it is. It’s a second lease of life,” he told the UK agency. “I was on pills for my blood pressure when I went in and it’s now within normal limits.” “How else can you take it? You can either sit there and think ‘Wow that was a really depressing episode of my life’ and let it affect you or take it for what it is — that you’ve been very, very lucky,” he said. Kim Wai’s wife of five years, Ceri, 38, said she barely recognized her husband when he first returned to their home in south London. “There’s no more junk food for him,” she said. “He’s got a second chance. It’s a wake-up call.”

Austrian President Alexander Van der Bellen says he’s “sorry” for breaking pandemic-related rules by staying at a restaurant past curfew. The leader came under fire after he was spotted at an Italian restaurant in Vienna after midnight Saturday — despite eateries being required to close at 11 p.m. as part of measures to ease lockdowns, BBC reported. “I’m sincerely sorry. It was a mistake,” Van der Bellen wrote on Twitter on Sunday. He claimed he was unaware at the time that he had lingered at the restaurant past closing time. “I went out for the first time since the lockdown with two friends and my wife,” he wrote. “We then lost track of the time while chatting.” The restaurant could be fined for staying open, but the president said he would “take responsibility” for any losses suffered, the report said. “We closed after a last round of drinks on time at [11 p.m.], as required by law,” the owner told German newspaper Krone, according to the BBC. Austria was among the first countries in Europe to announce in April that it was easing restrictions to restart the economy. Austria has seen more than 16,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, including 641 deaths, according to the latest figures from Johns Hopkins University.

Hundreds of publicly traded companies appear to be keeping government-backed loans meant to help small businesses weather the coronavirus crisis. Only 68 of the 424 public firms that disclosed receiving $1.3 billion in loans from the federal Paycheck Protection Program had pledged to return them as of early Monday morning, according to regulatory filings compiled by data-analysis company FactSquared. That suggests 356, or roughly 84 percent, of those companies are holding onto the money amid the Trump administration’s pledge to crack down on abuse of the $659 billion program. Officials gave firms until May 18 to repay loans without facing further scrutiny. Some 76 of those companies had enough cash and cash equivalents on hand to cover operating expenses until at least June, a Reuters analysis found. The firms keeping loans include upscale restaurant operator ONE Group Hospitality, which got $18.3 million from the pool of money meant to help small businesses cover payroll and overhead costs, FactSquared’s database showed. There’s also Hallador Energy, a coal firm that got $10 million, and high-end hotel company Sotherly Hotels, which got nearly $10.4 million, according to the data. Those are likely to get a closer look from the US Small Business Administration, which has pledged to review all Paycheck Protection Program loans larger than $2 million to ensure the rules were followed. The feds will try to get outstanding loan balances back from companies that they find didn’t actually need the funds to keep operating amid the pandemic, according to officials. But the SBA won’t scrutinize firms that borrowed less than $2 million because they’re “generally less likely to have had access to adequate sources of liquidity in the current economic environment,” officials have said. That indicates many public companies like Wilhelmina International — the big-name modeling agency that snagged just under $2 million in loans — will effectively get a free pass. The Paycheck Protection Program drew fire for initially helping big companies such as Shake Shack and Ruth’s Chris Steak House while struggling small businesses were left out in the cold after its initial $349 billion budget ran out in two weeks. Those two restaurant chains have since returned their loans. But the second round of $310 billion has lasted longer, with $135.7 billion still available as of May 19, according to the SBA. The average loan size as of last week was $118,000, though the majority of those distributed have been for $50,000 or less, the agency said.

The national security adviser warned that the Trump administration could slap sanctions on China’s ruling Communist Party over the harsh new security laws it plans to impose on Hong Kong, as rallies over the weekend pitted pro-Democracy demonstrators against Hong Kong police. Robert O’Brien said the Chinese Communist Party is poised to restrict Hong Kong’s autonomy, established when the former British colony was returned to China in 1997. “So now … it looks like with this national security law, they’re going to basically take over Hong Kong,” O’Brien said on NBC News’ “Meet the Press” on Sunday. And if they do, “Secretary Pompeo would likely be unable to certify that Hong Kong maintains a high degree of autonomy. And if that happens, there will be sanctions that will be imposed on Hong Kong and China. It’s hard to see how Hong Kong could remain the Asian financial center that it’s become if China takes over,” he added. O’Brien said he believes the world’s corporate community will abandon Hong Kong if China ends the “one country, two systems” form of government that has been in place since 1997. “I just don’t see how they can stay. One reason that they came to Hong Kong is because there was the rule of law there, there was a free enterprise system, there was a capitalist system. There was democracy and local legislative elections. If all those things go away, I’m not sure how the financial community can stay there,” O’Brien said, adding that Hong Kong would suffer from “terrible brain drain.” The Chinese Communist Party on Monday told international companies that the security laws would actually create a better business environment in Hong Kong, restoring calm by squashing “terrorist forces.” “The international community can rest assured about the legislation for Hong Kong,” said Xie Feng, China’s foreign ministry commissioner in Hong Kong, according to the Financial Times. “The legislation will alleviate the great concern among the local and foreign business communities about the violent and terrorist forces attempting to mess up Hong Kong . . . and will create a more law-based, reliable and stable business environment for foreign investors.” Xie was speaking a day after pro-Democracy protesters returned to the street following a lull because of the coronavirus pandemic to rally against Communist China’s plan to crackdown on dissent and anti-government demonstrations. Police fired tear gas and water cannons as the protests spilled into a popular shopping district. At least 120 people were arrested. Hong Kong has been rocked by protests since March 2019 that were sparked when the Chinese Communist Party in Beijing introduced a plan that would allow for the extradition of criminal suspects to mainland China. The bill was withdrawn last September but the rallies continued to support full democratic reforms and investigations into the police’s actions.

Floyd Mayweather is known for his defense in the ring, but he tested the limits outside of it this weekend. In the midst of the coronavirus pandemic, the retired boxer was spotted at a packed nightclub in Scottsdale, Arizona on Saturday night without any masks or social distancing in sight. Mayweather was partying at the International Boutique Club, according to TMZ. The club, known as INTL, posted a video to Instagram of Mayweather in a VIP section taking in the scene. While coronavirus had shut down most of the country, some states have begun to reopen, with Arizona ending its stay-at-home order on May 15. Restaurants were allowed to reopen on May 11 at limited capacity with social distancing restrictions including no more than 10 people per party. As of Sunday, the coronavirus death toll in Arizona had increased to 800 while 300 new cases brought the total cases in the state up to 16,339. The 43-year-old Mayweather has not fought since 2017, when he improved to 50-0 in his career with a TKO of Conor McGregor. He recently mourned the deaths of his uncle, who was his longtime trainer, and his ex-girlfriend.

Coronavirus appears to attack pregnant women’s placenta in ways that could interfere with delivering oxygen and nutrients to the fetus, according to researchers. The study, which was published in the American Journal of Clinical Pathology, determined that all of the placentas of the participants showed signs of injury, suggesting that those infected with the virus may need closer monitoring, researchers said. Researchers looked at 16 pregnant women who were found with COVID-19 during routine testing at Northwestern Medicine Prentice Women’s Hospital between March 18 and May 5. Of the 16 women, there were 12 who had a type of injury called vascular malperfusion that can impair blood flow from the mother to the fetus, researchers said. Six of them had blood clots in the placenta. “These findings support that there might be something clot-forming about coronavirus, and it’s happening in the placenta,” co-author Dr. Jeffrey Goldstein, a Northwestern pathologist, told Reuters. These issues could hinder the placenta’s role in delivering oxygen and nutrients from the mom’s bloodstream to the fetus, as well as removing waste products from the baby’s blood. Fifteen of the women delivered healthy babies, while one miscarried, researchers said. None of the babies who survived tested positive for coronavirus. Researchers acknowledged the small size of the study, but said the findings present concerns about how coronavirus could impact pregnancy. “Not to paint a scary picture, but these findings worry me,” said Northwestern Medicine obstetrician Dr. Emily Miller, a co-author of the study, according to CNN. Miller said doctors could start testing the oxygen delivery of the placenta during the pregnancy in addition to following the growth of the babies using ultrasounds, the outlet reported. “We must discuss whether we should change how we monitor pregnant women right now,” Miller said. With Post wires

As Boohoo’s co-founder Mahmud Kamani is getting set to sell COVID-19 home-testing kits through his other company Medusa19, his fashion brand is sponsoring private parties for TikTok-ers in LA in the midst of the lockdown. On Thursday, eyebrows were raised online when a group of TikTok influencers who are staying in a home dubbed “Clubhouse” threw a bash sponsored by Boohoo, complete with signage, a step-and-repeat, and logo pillows and floats. Influencer Charly Jordan posted a number of online stories tagging the brand and showing caterers in masks. A rep for Boohoo told us the group “have been in quarantine together” and that all branded items “were delivered and set up outside in the yard by minimal staff members,” and “the delivery team wore all the proper PPE.” “The intent,” they said, “is not to make light of the current pandemic or encourage large gatherings, but rather to promote the stay-at-home order and provide a safe but entertaining environment for those in quarantine together.”

The Dutch agriculture ministry on Monday said it had found what it believes to be a second case of a human becoming infected with the new coronavirus after coming in contact with a mink that had the virus. In a letter to parliament, minister Carola Schouten repeated that the country’s National Institute for Health believes the risk of animal-to-human transmission of the virus outside the farms on which they are kept is “negligible.” On April 26, the Dutch government reported mink on a farm in the south of the country had been found to have the disease, prompting a wider investigation of such farms, where mink are bred for their fur. Last week the government reported its first suspected case of mink-to-human transmission.

Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez was tested for coronavirus antibodies over the holiday weekend at one of the newly-launched testing sites in her home district of Queens. In a video uploaded by the Congresswoman to Twitter Saturday, Ocasio-Cortez (D-NY) could be seen saying “There we go, easy peasy, that was easy,” as she had her blood drawn by a health care professional. After the test was completed, the nurse told AOC that she should expect to receive a call in five days with her results. The Democratic socialist wrote in a tweet accompanying the video that she received her test at the First Baptist Church in Flushing, Queens, which is located in her district. “Did you know? There are 2 types of COVID tests! The nasal swab tests if you have COVID now. Antibody blood tests check if you already had COVID, even w/ few or no symptoms,” the New York Democrat tweeted, “I got my antibody test today at First Baptist in Queens w/ our amazing nurses. You can get one too!” Last week, Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced a new effort to bring down the high Covid-19 infection rates in low-income and minority communities in New York City. The effort included the establishment of 28 additional testing sites at churches and community-based providers. The move came as an outcome of New York state’s antibody testing survey, which showed those populations in the city facing a higher rate of infection than that of the city’s overall population. AOC is the second major New York lawmaker to take one of the coronavirus tests while on camera. Twitter Twitter Twitter Twitter View Slideshow Earlier this month, Cuomo was tested for the coronavirus during a press briefing in order to promote more widespread screening in the state. “It is so fast and easy that even a governor can take this test,” Cuomo told reporters in Albany, before rising from his seat to greet a PPE-clad doctor. The governor hammed it up as the doctor produced a swab and instructed him to close his eyes. The doctor explained that the test can cause some people to tear up, as she inserted the swab into the governor’s nostril for a few seconds. The test later came back negative.

A 17-year-old boy has become the youngest to die of coronavirus in Georgia, officials have revealed. The unidentified teen was listed Sunday as part of the Georgia Emergency Management Agency’s latest statistics showing 43,321 confirmed cases and 1,827 deaths in the Peach State. The teen boy was from Fulton County and had pre-existing conditions. A health department spokeswoman confirmed the death to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution without giving further detail. Previously, the state’s youngest known coronavirus fatality had been a 22-year-old woman from Muscogee County, the paper said. Georgia has also reported nine children as suffering from MIS-C, the new inflammatory syndrome linked to the pandemic, AJC said.

The COVID-19 pandemic has forced cemeteries and other organizations to modify how to commemorate those in uniform who gave their lives for their country during Memorial Day. For example, Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Virginia, is closed to the public — with the exception of family members who have loved ones buried there. And although the 142 Veterans Affairs national cemeteries will remain open to the public, the National Cemetery Administration will not host any public events at these cemeteries. But despite social distancing requirements, multiple organizations and groups are continuing to honor those who gave the ultimate sacrifice in some way. Here is a list of events happening virtually over the weekend to honor Memorial Day, all times Eastern: Department of Defense: Secretary of Defense Mark Esper will visit Arlington National Cemetery at 9 a.m. on Monday to remember those who lost their lives serving their country. Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Army Gen. Mark Milley and several other senior government and defense officials will also be present. Those interested in viewing the wreath-laying ceremony can watch on www.defense.gov. United States Navy Memorial: United States Navy Memorial is holding a virtual wreath-laying ceremony this Memorial Day at the Navy Memorial plaza in Washington, D.C.. Speakers include retired Rear Adm. Frank Thorp IV, president & CEO at the United States Navy Memorial; Rear Adm. Carl Lahti, commandant of Naval District Washington; and Navy chaplain Cmdr. Pratik Ray. The event is slated for Monday, May 25 at 1 p.m. and is available to view here. Friends of the National World War II Memorial: Friends of the National World War II Memorial will be sharing pre-recorded remarks observing Memorial Day via Facebook on Monday, followed by a brief, virtual wreath-laying ceremony at the National World War II Memorial on the National Mall. Speakers will include Josiah Bunting III, chairman of the Friends of the National World War II Memorial; Jeff Reinbold, superintendent of the National Mall and Memorial Parks; and Roberta Nolan, whose father 1st Lt. James O’Boyle Lyons was taken prisoner of war during the Battle of the Bulge and died in May 1945. The pre-recorded remarks will be aired on Facebook at 9 a.m., and the wreath-laying ceremony will follow at 9:30 a.m. also via Facebook. The National WWI Museum and Memorial: The National WWI Museum and Memorial is holding multiple virtual events on Monday to commemorate Memorial Day. First, the museum and memorial are holding a ceremony featuring speakers, including Sen. Jerry Moran from Kansas, and Rep. Emanuel Cleaver II also from Kansas. The event is scheduled for 11 a.m. on Monday. Additionally, a bell tolling ceremony is also scheduled for 1 p.m., using a bell that the Daughters of the American Revolution wrung each day from 1917-1918. Lastly, the museum is livestreaming its biannual Walk of Honor Dedication Ceremony at 3 p.m. to dedicate 100 new Walk of Honor granite bricks at the museum. The bricks are dedicated to those who served in WWI, and veterans from all branches of the military. All events can be viewed here. JWB Jewish Chaplains Council: The JWB Jewish Chaplains Council is launching the first National Jewish Community Observance of Memorial Day to recognize Jewish commitment to the military on Monday. Speakers include retired Navy Capt. Rabbi Irving Elson, director of the JWB Jewish Chaplains Council; Rear Adm. Jeffrey Jablon, director of Military Personnel, Plans and Policies; and multiple Gold Star families. Additionally, there will be a performance from the Combined United States Naval Academy Glee Club. You can watch the event at 1 p.m. on Facebook here. Ancestry Parade of Heroes: Ancestry has partnered with groups including HISTORY®, Wounded Warrior Project, The Greatest GENERATIONS Foundation, Heroes of the Second World War and TAPS to hold a virtual “Parade of Heroes” event on Monday to commemorate Memorial Day and also the 75th anniversary of the end of WWII. Television personality Kathie Lee Gifford will host the virtual “watch party,” and the event will feature veteran speakers such as Army veteran Dan Nevins, who lost both legs from the knee down while serving in Iraq in 2004 during a combat mission. Nevins is now a professional speaker and a Baptiste yoga teacher, and is passionate about using yoga to help treat “invisible wounds of war” among veterans. Viewers can watch the “Parade of Heroes” on Ancestry’s Facebook page at 11 a.m. National Memorial Day Concert: PBS is still airing a National Memorial Day Concert this year on Sunday, May 24. Retired Army Gen. and former White House National Security Adviser Colin Powell will make an appearance, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Army Gen. Mark Milley is slated to deliver a special message. Performances will feature members from the U.S. Army Herald Trumpets, the U.S. Army Chorus, the U.S. Navy Band Sea Chanters, the U.S. Air Force Singing Sergeants, among others. In addition to airing on PBS, the concert will also be livestreamed on Facebook and YouTube, and PBS’s website here at 8 p.m.

Mobs of partiers who flocked to poolside bars at the Lake of the Ozarks in Missouri over Memorial Day weekend can’t be controlled — despite social distancing guidelines, a local mayor said. John Olivarri, mayor of Osage Beach, spoke out about the viral videos that have emerged showing over-the-top crowds at bars and restaurants at the popular lakeside destination, the Kansas City Star reported. “My concern is for our workers and whether some of the folks that have come down might be creating a health problem for the community, absolutely,” Olivarri said. “But the only other thing that you could do would be shut it down. I don’t know how you would shut down Lake of the Ozarks. There’s no way to control that.” Several videos posted to Twitter sparked outrage over the weekend with hundreds of revelers tightly packed at various poolside bars. “No covid concerns at the lake of the ozarks,” wrote KTVK anchor Scott Pasmore on Twitter along with footage of maskless people swimming and drinking in close quarters. The mayor estimated that at least a dozen locations hosted the massive parties to mark the start of summer. But he claimed there wouldn’t be enough manpower for local authorities to respond to every call about crowds over the holiday weekend. “The businesses have some responsibility, but I’ll be real honest with you, no one thought that it was going to be easy trying to enforce some of the governor’s guidelines,” Olivarri told the newspaper. Gov. Mike Parson has said that many businesses can reopen, including large venues, as long as they maintain about six feet between customers and staffers. Camden County Sheriff’s Office, which patrols part of Osage Beach, said their hands are tied because there are no penalties for disregarding the rules, KSDK reported.

Hospitals hoarding massive piles of cash got billions of dollars in federal coronavirus bailouts while vulnerable health centers were forced to scrape by, a new report says. The feds have given more than $5 billion in grants to 20 big hospital chains that already had more than $108 billion in cash, the New York Times reported Monday. The money was among $72 billion in grants the Department of Health and Human Services has distributed to hospitals and other providers since April under the CARES Act — the $2.2 trillion stimulus bill that Congress passed in March to shore up struggling businesses amid the pandemic, according to the paper. But some grants went to well-heeled institutions with cash reserves so large they could afford to gamble some of them on Wall Street, the Times reported. They include Seattle’s Providence Health System and the Cleveland Clinic, which got more than $700 million in combined aid after each reaped more than $1 billion in investment profits last year, the story says. Providence has nearly $12 billion in cash while the Cleveland Clinic had $7 billion last year, according to the Times. The hospitals reportedly argued they needed the money to help offset hefty losses as the coronavirus crisis forced providers to limit elective surgeries and other non-essential services. For instance, Providence told the Times that its grant helped stave off layoffs or pay cuts for its staff. “Remember, the pandemic isn’t over,” Providence spokeswoman Melissa Tizon told the paper. “We need to be financially stable for the next possible wave.” But the bailout program reportedly gave some cash-strapped hospitals a pittance by comparison. Hospitals serving more wealthy patients with private insurance got twice as much aid as those that focus on poor people on Medicaid or no insurance at all, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation Study cited by the Times. St. Claire HealthCare, Eastern Kentucky’s biggest rural hospital system, got just $3 million in federal money in April — enough to cover two weeks of payroll as the company grapples with a significant hit to its revenue, according to the paper. “This is just a Band-Aid,” St. Claire chief executive Donald H. Lloyd II told the Times.

President Trump pressed the Democratic governor of North Carolina on Monday to “guarantee” that he will allow “full capacity” at this summer’s Republican National Convention, dangling the economic blow Charlotte would take if the event were held elsewhere. “I love the Great State of North Carolina, so much so that I insisted on having the Republican National Convention in Charlotte at the end of August. Unfortunately, Democrat Governor, @RoyCooperNC is still in Shutdown mood & unable to guarantee that by August we will be allowed full attendance in the Arena,” the president wrote on Twitter. Trump said Republicans “must be immediately given an answer by the Governor as to whether or not the space will be allowed to be fully occupied. If not, we will be reluctantly forced to find, with all of the jobs and economic development it brings, another Republican National Convention site.” “This is not something I want to do. Thank you, and I LOVE the people of North Carolina!,” Trump continued. He said the RNC would spend millions of dollars “building the Arena to a very high standard without even knowing if the Democrat Governor would allow the Republican Party to fully occupy the space. Plans are being made by many thousands of enthusiastic Republicans, and others, to head to beautiful North Carolina in August.” Cooper’s office put out a statement saying state health officials “are working with the RNC and will review its plans as they make decisions about how to hold the convention in Charlotte.” “North Carolina is relying on data and science to protect our state’s public health and safety,” it said. North Carolina, which has more than 22,000 coronavirus cases, entered Phase 2 of its reopening plan on Friday, with Governor Roy Cooper describing it as a “modest” approach. Cooper’s executive order replaced the stay-at-home orders with “safer-at-home” guidelines, The Charlotte News and Observer reported. Phase 3 isn’t expected to begin until June 26. The convention is scheduled to be held in Charlotte from Aug. 24 to Aug. 27.

TOKYO — Japan’s professional baseball season will open on June 19 under a plan that excludes fans. League commissioner Atsushi Saito made the announcement on Monday after an online meeting with representatives of the league’s 12 teams. “I hope we can provide some guidance for sports other than professional baseball,” Saito said. “It is important to operate cautiously according to our guidelines”. The announcement came as the state of emergency was lifted in Tokyo and on the northern island of Hokkaido by Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. The state of emergency was lifted earlier this month for other parts of the country. Teams can being practice games on June 2. The season was to have begun on March 20 but the start was postponed because of the coronavirus pandemic. Japan has reported about 850 deaths from COVID-19. “It is with great joy that we have been able to decide on opening the season. But we believe it is from now that we must make thorough preparations without fail, and it remains crucial our efforts move forward cautiously while protecting our players, other people involved and their families,” Saito added. Japan joins South Korea and Taiwan whose leagues are open and playing largely without fans.

Two people were shot and killed at a massive South Carolina block party that drew up to 1,000 people despite ongoing warnings against large gatherings, authorities said. Revelers at the end-of-the-school year celebration on Dover Road in Union County “opened fire” on one another late Saturday, according to the Union County Sheriff’s Office. Deputies discovered the huge get-together after finding up to 300 cars parked along nearby highways, The State reported. They then found a male shot lying on the side of the road and a second man shot inside a nearby residence, Union County Sheriff officials said. The victims were identified as Jabbrie Brandon, of Union, and Lamont Bomar, 21, of Spartanburg, South Carolina, ABC News reported. Five other people were also shot and are expected to survive, Union County Sheriff’s Office Maj. Scott Coffer told ABC News. Two suspects, Shaquille Obryant Barber and Darnell Deandre Beacham, aka “Dough Fat” or “Fat,” were taken into custody, according to The State. But it’s unclear if they were involved in the deadly shootings, Coffer told ABC News. “Those two are actually being interviewed by detectives now,” Coffer said. Deputies were powerless to enforce the state’s voluntary stay-at-home order since the party was held on private property, Coffer said. “We’ve run into that before when this first started in March with the COVID-19,” he said. “We can’t tell people who can be at their house and who can’t.” A motive for the shooting is unclear and additional arrests are possible, The State reported. Meanwhile, in Florida, six people were hurt Saturday during a shooting at a huge Memorial Day weekend party in Daytona Beach. Two people were shot, while four others were hit by shrapnel, the Orlando Sentinel reported. The victims, who are expected to survive, are not cooperating with investigators. Police have not made any arrests, the newspaper reported.

Millionaire real-estate heir Robert Durst’s high-profile murder trial — on hold amid the coronavirus pandemic — is being moved to a larger courthouse to adhere to social distancing guidelines, according to a new report. The trial will proceed at the Inglewood courthouse, a few miles away from a location near the Los Angeles International Airport, where jurors had been hearing the case before officials were forced to close county courthouses to all but time-sensitive, essential matters in March, City News Service reported. Jurors are instructed to plan on returning July 27, but that could change based on Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Mark Windham’s ruling at a hearing set for June 23 on the defense’s motion for a mistrial in the case, court spokeswoman Mary Hearn told the outlet. Durst’s attorneys have argued that a lengthy delay caused by the pandemic has “made it impossible” for the scion to get a fair trial, according to the outlet. The length of the break, they claim, created a “prejudicial mid-trial delay,” making it “unrealistic” for jurors to remember the evidence they heard about the 2000 shooting death of Susan Berman, Durst’s best friend. Prosecutors have asked the judge to allow some witnesses to testify through Zoom or Skype to “avoid potential contagion or spread of contagion during air travel” as the pandemic continues — due to their “advanced age,” according to the report. But Durst’s attorneys argued that “the People’s repeated suggestion that the court resume trial via Zoom video conferencing should be rejected as violative of defendant’s Constitutional rights and utterly impractical.” Durst, 77, is on trial in Los Angeles for the alleged fatal shooting of Berman to prevent her from cooperating with authorities, who had launched a fresh probe into the 1982 disappearance of his first wife, Kathie Durst.

South Korea will now require places like nightclubs and bars to use QR codes to log customers’ visits as part of its coronavirus contact tracing efforts. Starting next month, those types of establishments, which the government deems high risk, will be required to use the app-based register to make it easier to track down potential COVID-19-infected patients. Officials said the move was made after infected patients submitted false personal information. “Over the course of tracking down patients linked to the Itaewon clubs [in Seoul], the government experienced difficulties because many of them made false statements about their personal details in the visitor logs,” South Korea’s health minister Park Neung-hoo said Sunday, according to the South Korean Yonhap News Agency. “We have decided to adopt an electronic register using QR codes so as to collect accurate data on visitors and operate a swift quarantine system,” the health minister said. The area of Itaewon has become a new hotbed for the bug after a 29-year-old man tested positive for the virus on May 6 following his jaunts to clubs and bars in the neighborhood known for its nightlife, the news agency reported. Other “high risk” establishments must also use the electronic system to track visitors. The QR code register will only be used when the infectious disease alert level is raised to “serious” or “cautionary,” according to the news agency. The government will test-run the system until mid-June before it officially launches. The deadly virus has infected more than 11,200 in South Korea and has killed 267 people in the East Asian country as of Monday, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University.

A Florida man was busted for kidnapping a teen and forcing her to drive him through a coronavirus checkpoint, local authorities said. Alexander Michael Sardinas, 37, of Tavernier, and Michelle Lynne Peterson, 43, from Islamorada, attempted to enter the Florida Keys in a taxi Thursday morning but were turned away at the highway checkpoint because they didn’t have the proper paperwork indicating they lived or worked there, the Miami Herald reported, citing the Monroe County Sheriff’s Office. Through the end of May, only those with proof of residency are allowed to enter the Keys due to coronavirus concerns. A Florida Highway Patrol trooper saw the pair arguing and gave them a “courtesy ride” to Florida City, sheriff’s office spokesman Adam Linhardt told the outlet. Sardinas and Peterson ended up at a Publix supermarket in Homestead, where they approached the teen near her car, which had both a hurricane reentry sticker on her windshield and a Monroe County license plate, according to the report. Sardinas threatened to harm the teen, a Florida Keys resident, if she didn’t give them a lift to the Keys or if she touched her phone, according to Linhardt. The frightened teen drove the pair to the highway checkpoint, where she easily passed through with her driver’s license, which showed her Florida Keys address. “The victim told detectives she did not say anything to deputies at the checkpoint about the man in the car threatening to harm her because she was scared,” Linhardt told the Herald. But after dropping off both passengers, the teen told a family member who called the cops. She was not harmed. Detectives found Sardinas near where the victim dropped him off and Peterson in Islamorada, the Herald reported. Sardinas is charged with one count of kidnapping and is being held in county jail on $50,000 bond, the paper reported. Peterson was not arrested. However, more arrests and charges may be pending, according to Linhardt.

Touring the real-life Hogwarts Castle might come with a coronavirus curse. Universal Orlando has warned guests that they might contract the deadly COVID-19 bug if they visit the sprawling resort when it reopens next week. “Note that any public location where people are present provides an inherent risk of exposure to COVID-19 and we cannot guarantee that you will not be exposed during your visit,” reads a disclaimer on the park’s website. The blunt notice came alongside Universal’s announcement that its Florida theme parks would welcome visitors again on June 5, nearly three months after the pandemic forced them to close. The reopening of Universal Studios Florida, Universal’s Volcano Bay and Universal’s Islands of Adventure — home to the “Wizarding World of Harry Potter” attraction — will come about three weeks after the resort’s CityWalk entertainment and food complex started operating again earlier this month. Stephen M. Dowell/Orlando Sentinel via AP Paul Hennessy / Echoes Wire/Barcroft Media via Getty Images View Slideshow Employees will start returning to the parks on June 1 followed by some invited guests on June 3 and the general public two days later, John Sprouls, executive vice president and chief administrative officer for Universal Parks & Resorts, told local officials last week. But guests will have to jump through several hoops before taking a spin on the “Incredible Hulk” roller coaster. Visitors will have their temperatures checked before entering the parks and must wear a face covering while inside, Universal says. The parks will also limit their capacity and ask guests to follow social distancing guidelines, according to the website. “We want people to know before you go exactly what we’re going to expect — exactly what we’re going to provide, from the point of view of our team members, but also what we’re going to expect of guests,” Sprouls said. Comcast, Universal’s parent company, warned last month that it would lose roughly $500 million in revenue if theme parks remained closed through June. Walt Disney World similarly warned guests of the risk posed by the coronavirus as it reopened its Disney Springs shopping and dining complex last week. The Mouse House has not yet set a date for reopening its massive Florida theme parks.

Several schools closed down in Seoul, South Korea after a kindergarten student contracted the coronavirus from his art teacher. As the news spread of the six-year-old boy’s illness, fear quickly emerged among parents with young children, just two days ahead of the planned second-phase resumption of schools, including kindergartens, reported the South Korean Yonhap News Agency. The teacher, who tested positive Sunday, had taught 35 students at Young Rembrandts, a private art school in Magok of Gangseo on the south side of the Han River. Ten nearby kindergartens and five nearby elementary schools will remain closed for two days for disinfection and other precautionary measures. The teachers all wore masks and followed the institute’s quarantine guidelines and social distancing rules, according to the Seoul Metropolitan Office of Education. Kindergartens had opened up on May 20, which was the first phase of South Korea’s school reopening plan. The art school’s 91 students, three teachers and two parents have all been tested for the virus and are awaiting their results, which will come out early Tuesday.

ANCHORAGE, Alaska — Thomas Waerner won this year’s Iditarod Trail Sled Dog Race in March, but he is still waiting to return to his home in Norway. Waerner and his 16 dogs have been stranded in Alaska by travel restrictions and flight cancellations caused by the coronavirus pandemic, The Anchorage Daily News reported Saturday. “I like Alaska a lot,” Waerner said. “It’s kind of my dream place. But I have a family.” Waerner has five children and 35 other sled dogs in Torpa, Norway. He missed the 10th birthday of one of his children and misses morning coffee with his wife, Guro, who left Alaska in March shortly before health restrictions stopped travel. The 47-year-old plans to fly home in early June on a DC-6 aircraft bound for the Air History Museum in Sola, Norway. Everts Air Cargo of Fairbanks is selling the historic plane, and Waerner said the museum is expected to finalize the deal this week. “We are hitchhiking,” Waerner said. “The plane is going to Norway, and we are going with them. We are so lucky.” Prior to the trip Waerner is expected to undergo a COVID-19 test and collect his dogs from a kennel in Salcha owned by fellow musher Arleigh Reynolds. Waerner said he has friends in the Alaska towns of Ester and Salcha and often spends a few days around Fairbanks after the Iditarod. This year, a few days turned into more than a few weeks and Waerner is ready to resume his normal life. “My wife has been taking care of 35 dogs, the kids, and working as a veterinarian,” he said. Once he returns home, “ ‘yes, dear,’ will be the answer for everything,” he said. For most people, the new coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough that clear up in two to three weeks. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness, including pneumonia, and death. The vast majority of people recover.

President Trump said that he is no longer on hydroxychloroquine, the anti-malarial drug he has been taking for several weeks as a treatment to ward off the coronavirus. “Finished, just finished,” Trump told “Full Measure with Sharyl Attkisson” during an interview that aired Sunday on Sinclair Broadcasting. “And by the way, I’m still here. To the best of my knowledge, here I am.” Last Monday, Trump revealed he had started taking the drug “a couple of weeks ago.” The president said he’d received letters and calls from doctors extolling the drug’s benefits and that the White House physician consented to him taking it. “I’ve heard a lot of good stories. And if it is not good, I will tell you, right. I’m not going to get hurt by it. It has been around for 40 years for malaria, for lupus, for other things,” Trump had said. The Food and Drug Administration, however, has warned about using the drug for coronavirus treatment outside of hospitals or clinical trials due to the risk of heart problems. A study published Friday in The Lancet medical journal found that COVID-19 patients were more likely to develop serious heart arrhythmias if treated with hydroxychloroquine.

Protesters hanged an effigy of Gov Andy Beshear from a tree as they condemned his administration’s coronavirus restrictions at a Second Amendment rally in Kentucky over Memorial Day weekend. At least 100 supporters of gun rights descended on the state capital in Frankfurt on Sunday for a “Patriot’s Day” event organized on Facebook by the group Take Back Kentucky, according to the Louisville Courier Journal. The rally was originally intended to defend the right to bear arms but some demonstrators began to rage against the coronavirus restrictions implemented by the Beshear administration. A contingent of the group walked down to the governor’s mansion, carrying signs that read “Abort Beshear from office” and “My rights don’t end where your fear begins.” They also chanted, “Come out Andy” and “Resign Andy.” The crowd then returned to the capitol where an effigy of Beshear was hung from a tree while “God Bless the U.S.A.” by Lee Greenwood played over a speaker. A sign on the effigy said, “sic semper tyrannis,” which translates to “thus always to tyrants,” a phrase famously used by John Wilkes Booth after shooting President Abraham Lincoln. Both Republican and Democrat leaders in the state condemned the hanging of the effigy. Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell spoke out against the action on Twitter. “As a strong defender of the First Amendment, I believe Americans have the right to peacefully protest,” he wrote. “However, today’s action toward Governor Beshear is unacceptable. There is no place for hate in Kentucky.” Secretary of State Michael Adams, a Republican, tweeted that it was “disgusting.” “I condemn it wholeheartedly,” he wrote. “The words of John Wilkes Booth have no place in the Party of Lincoln.” Kentucky House Democratic Leader Joni Jenkins, House Democratic Caucus Chair Derrick Graham, and House Democratic Whip Angie Hatton issued a joint statement, calling the effigy “beyond reprehensible” and an “act that reeks of hate and intimidation.” Crystal Staley, a spokeswoman for Beshear, said in a statement, “The act that was displayed on Capitol grounds today, near where the Governor and his young children live, was wrong and offensive.” “This type of behavior must be condemned. As Kentuckians we should be able to voice our opinions without turning to hate and threats of violence. Put simply — we are and should be better than this.” As of Sunday evening 8,842 residents of Kentucky have tested positive for the coronavirus while 399 people have died in the bluegrass state.

A Long Island bar got into hot water over the weekend after apparently allowing dozens of customers inside the establishment to drink beverages in violation of the state’s coronavirus shutdown. Videos posted on social media showed scores of maskless people packed inside the Dublin Deck Tiki Bar and Grill in Patchogue on Friday night as music played. “Everybody’s so thirsty, let’s go!” someone can be heard shouting in one of the clips, as a crowd of people knocks back beers at the bar. “Finally back to normal!” a reveler yells. Suffolk County police received multiple 911 calls on Friday night about the bar not complying with Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s “PAUSE” order, but said no summonses were issued, Newsday reported. Reps for the bar apologized in a Facebook post on Saturday, saying they’ll stick to social-distancing rules moving forward. The Facebook page has since been deleted. “We apologize to anyone who may have been offended by the videos that surfaced,” read the post, according to Newsday. “We assure you it was not intended and will not happen again.” Co-owner Frank Mills claimed the bar allowed patrons inside during a “quick rainfall.” Most of them were boaters parked at the nearby marina who were ordering meals to go, he said. “Everybody decided to run inside out of the rain and they overwhelmed us,” Mills told the outlet. “It was that simple. It has never happened before and it will never happen again.” The crowds may have acted inappropriately because they were itching to socialize, Mills added. “Everybody hunkered down. We did what we were supposed to do,” Mills said. “You can call it what you want but they’re chomping at the bit to go do something.” At a press conference on Sunday, the governor’s top aide, Melissa DeRosa, blasted the customers’ actions as “stupid.” “From what I understand, the photos show people were in this space and they weren’t wearing masks. That’s stupid. Stupid for you, it’s stupid for your surrounding patrons, it’s stupid for the bar,” DeRosa said. DeRosa noted that the watering hole said it was just providing shelter from the rain, and that enforcement was up to Suffolk County cops. “I take them at their word that that’s what happened, but moving forward they should be on notice, and again the enforcement is up to the locals,” she said. Cuomo added: “It’s supposed to be curbside pickup, right? That doesn’t sound like curbside pickup.” Suffolk Police Commissioner Geraldine Hart said that by the time cops responded to the bar, about 85 percent of the customers had cleared out. Cops said they followed up with the establishment and other Suffolk County businesses throughout the weekend. Dublin Deck didn’t immediately return a call from The Post on Sunday night.

A 101-year-old World War II veteran and his 73-year-old daughter — who live at the same Maryland nursing home — were able to celebrate Memorial Day Weekend together after both beating the coronavirus, The Post has learned. Charles Barbier and his daughter Kathryn Dean were reunited on Friday after spending weeks in isolation at the Westminster Healthcare Center’s COVID-19 ward, said Lisa McLaurin, a nurse at the facility, about 35 miles from Baltimore. The father and daughter, who are originally from Louisiana, fell ill in late April. Dean said “it’s a blessing from God” that they both survived. “My dad is 101 so that’s a big accomplishment,” she told The Post. “He survived a war, the depression and now this. He’s an amazing guy.” Since other family members aren’t able to visit amid the pandemic, Dean said she was grateful to be reunited with her dad on Friday to celebrate Memorial Day and their recovery. “I’ve been wanting to see him for a while because I miss him and we can’t have family here. It’s difficult not being able to see the family,” she said. Under normal circumstances, Dean would take her dad — a U.S. Army Air Corps vet who was stationed in England — out to eat to celebrate the holiday. Though her father never shared many war stories, “the military has always been very important to us [and] we are much appreciative of what the military does to protect us,” Dean said. Dean, who suffers from a rare kidney disease that requires dialysis three times a week, said she was hit harder by the virus than her centenarian father. “It was horrible. I feel sorry for anybody who gets it,” she said. She experienced a high fever, shortness of breath and had no appetite for about five days, “but it seemed a lot longer.” “It leaves you very weak,” Dean said, adding that she’s doing physical therapy to help regain muscle she lost while being bed-ridden. Her dad fared better, though due to his advanced age he wasn’t fully aware of what having the virus meant, Dean said. “He doesn’t understand too well but he did great,” she said. “They took very good care of us and we survived.” There have been at least 65 cases of COVID-19 among residents at the nursing home, and 10 deaths, according to the Carroll County health department. McLaurin said some 58 residents who tested positive have recovered and will be moving out of the center’s coronavirus ward. The facility, which is home to two other veterans, is also planning on hosting a cookout for residents on Monday in celebration.

Joe Biden’s disastrous interview with black radio host Charlamagne Tha God on Friday encapsulates everything that is wrong with the Democratic Party and its presidential hopeful. “If you have a problem figuring out whether you’re for me or Trump, you ain’t black,” the former vice president blurted out at the end of the interview. It was a statement so staggeringly, primitively racist, that it landed like a gut punch to many black Americans, of all political persuasions, who took to the airwaves to denounce it over the weekend. “It played into the long-standing notion that the black vote is uncritical and guaranteed,” said left-wing writer Roxane Gay. Former NFL player Jack Brewer declared “the mask is off.” “Pure unadulterated hubris, the taking for granted of the black vote,” said ex-Bernie Sanders campaign co-chair Nina Turner, one of many who took issue with Biden’s patronizing use of the ungrammatical “ain’t.” Attempts by the Biden campaign to claim the comment was made “in jest” were futile, even as Democratic-friendly media such as CNN ignored the story. Biden’s attempt at damage control also fell flat. Perhaps he was “too cavalier,” he mused, and shouldn’t have been a “wise guy.” Neither of those descriptions is accurate. Biden clearly was annoyed by abrasive questions from Charlamagne, whose breakfast show attracts more than 4 million young black listeners. Biden’s irritation had been building since the opening question about “your cognitive health. I don’t think everything’s working upstairs.” The 17-minute interview descended into a series of shouted monologues from Biden, complete with “Come on, man” and “get a life” outbursts. It was not a friendly affair. “A lot of black voters, including myself, feel . . . that Democrats take black voters for granted,” was one question that set Biden off on a 900-word rant about his prowess in winning black votes, which only ended when a staffer off-camera tried to cut the interview short. His staff could see the danger signs, but Biden was on a roll. As we have seen with his “Hey, fat” and “lying dog-faced pony soldier” outbursts on the campaign trail, Biden is quick to anger and embellishes his achievements when challenged. For instance, he told Charlamagne: “The NAACP has endorsed me every time I’ve run.” But the NAACP issued a denial, saying it “does not endorse candidates for political office.” Biden also said: “I come from a state with the eighth-largest black population in America.” But Delaware has just 220,000 black residents, ranking in bottom one-third of states. Another exchange captured Biden’s odd mix of aggrieved passivity. “I’m wondering, how are you going to energize people and win a campaign from [your] house?” asked Charlamagne, kindly not mentioning the word “basement.” The astonishing response from the man who aspires to be leader of the free world was that he is just doing what he was told: “I’m following the rules, man . . . My governor says he doesn’t want us out. I haven’t been out. I wear my mask. I have a mask. I got Secret Service outside. I walk outside. I have it on.” The interview was a train crash. And, as his staff anticipated, it was always going to end in tears. “Ain’t black” is Biden’s “deplorables” moment. Yet his supporters seem oblivious to the lethal blow it has delivered to his prospects, just as Hillary Clinton didn’t comprehend the catastrophe of her “basket of deplorables” insult to half of America in 2016. Biden confirmed what Candace Owens’ “Blexit” movement is all about, the exit by black Americans from a Democratic Party that takes their vote for granted and traps them in a victim narrative. Of all the rebukes to Biden over the weekend, probably the most eloquent came from Tim Scott, the Senate’s only black Republican, who pointed out to ABC that 1.3 million African Americans voted for Trump in 2016. “Joe Biden told every single one of us we ‘ain’t black’ . . . It sends the wrong message to the young people of this nation that you have to stay in line or you’re not black enough . . . I remember being a kid in high school with people putting labels on me, whether I was an ‘Oreo,’ or someone who did not quite fit in.” Scott said Biden should be judged on his 1994 crime bill, which included a mandatory life sentence for repeat offenders and “locked up more African-American men than any other crime bill in the last 50 years.” He also raised Biden’s telling history of racial gaffes, including his comment: “Poor kids are just as bright and just as talented as white kids.” Scott asked: “Is that to suggest that every single kid in America that’s living in poverty, like the poverty I grew up in, has to be black?” Biden’s internal filter has always been faulty, but lately it has deserted him entirely. His latest id-explosion narrows his options for a running mate, after he already locked himself into choosing a woman. Now, as Charlamagne says, the only way to atone is to choose a black woman. Nursing Biden over the finish line looks increasingly precarious for the Dems. It’s hard to watch the horrendous video of a 20-year-old man bashing an elderly man in a Detroit nursing home. The victim can’t defend himself, other than to raise a fragile hand to his head as the assailant rains blows on him. Outrage on social media after the video was posted, allegedly by the perpetrator, led to a quick arrest last week, with the suspect reported to be mentally ill. But why was the 20-year-old placed in a room with a 75-year-old, and how could the staff be oblivious to the violence? Deprived of the watchful eyes of family members, vulnerable residents of nursing homes have borne the brunt of COVID-19. In New York that’s thanks in large part to Gov. Cuomo’s order forcing them to admit infected patients. The tragic neglect of nursing homes predates the pandemic, but the problems have been exacerbated to the point where the public is starting to pay attention at last. Spare a thought for the brave young protesters of Hong Kong. They are fighting pitched battles with riot police as Chinese President Xi Jinping exploits the pandemic he unleashed on the world to bring the once thriving British colony to heel with draconian “national security” legislation. As Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said, it is the “death knell” for an independent Kong Kong, free of authoritarian rule.

The golf matched the weather, which was sloppy, and that was just fine because the purpose of the “The Match: Champions for Charity’’ Sunday was met based on the $20 million raised for COVID-19 relief and the entertainment it delivered to a TV audience starved for live sports. Tiger Woods, Phil Mickelson, Tom Brady and Peyton Manning dished more humor and self-deprecation than they produced birdies and eagles through torrential rain storms at Medalist Golf Club in Hobe Sound, Fla. Woods, who is a member at Medalist, and Manning won the match 1-up. But, as was the case last Sunday at Seminole — where Rory McIlroy, Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler and Matthew Wolff raised more than $5 million in their skins game for COVID-19 relief — the result mattered little. This event raised more money than last week’s and treated the viewers with more entertainment with four players mic’d up and providing great color. Former NBA star Charles Barkley, one of the color commentators on site, was the fifth star in this event with his tweaks and jabs. For a while, it looked as if Brady, a perennial winner with six Super Bowl titles, was going to be the biggest loser. If Brady were still quarterbacking the Patriots, Bill Belichick would have replaced him with Jarrett Stidham by halftime. Brady was one of the stars of this show for all the wrong reasons. Arguably the greatest quarterback in NFL history, he was taking the kind of pummeling on social media usually reserved for Mark Sanchez and the “buttfumble.’’ There are some places where six Super Bowl rings can buy you nothing, and Medalist was one of those places. In fairness to Brady, who signed with the Buccaneers in the offseason, he’s been spending most of his time working out with his new receivers. Perhaps a harbinger of how Brady would struggle was the fact he played 18 holes in the morning Sunday in a desperate 11th-hour attempt to find his game for the big match. The best — and most fitting — exchange of the day came as the players got to the fourth tee for the first par-3 of the round and Barkley, on air, offered $50,000 to donate out of his pocket to the charity if Brady could merely hit the green with his tee shot. “Chuck, you got any swing tips for me, because I’m struggling?’’ Brady said. “I’m not the guy you want to be taking swing tips from,’’ responded Barkley, whose awkward swing has been universally panned. Brady then sprayed his tee shot some 30 yards to the right of the green, prompting Barkley to quip: “I should have said, ‘If you just keep it on the planet … ’ ’’ It got no better for Brady on the next hole when Brooks Koepka tweeted that he would donate $100,000 to the charity if Brady would merely par one of the final four holes on the front nine. “I can do that,’’ Brady responded. “Tell Brooks I said, ‘Thank you.’ It’s coming. I’m saving it up.’’ So he was. The unquestioned highlight of the match came on the par-5 seventh hole, when Barkley poked at Brady, saying, “Hey Tom how many shots you want? I want some of you.’’ “Chuck, I’ve been focusing on football, bro,’’ Brady said “I’m trying to win a Super Bowl, man.’’ Brady then proceeded to hole out his fourth shot from more than 100 yards out with a wedge for birdie. Moral to the story: Never count out the GOAT (See: Super Bowl LI, Atlanta Falcons and 28-3). “Take a suck of that, Chuck,’’ Brady chirped. Then: “Brooks owes me a little money.’’ Accentuating color to his hole-out, Brady split his slacks during the shot, joking that it happened because “there was so much torque in that swing,’’ forcing him to put rain pants on for the rest of the match. The most memorable exchange between Mickelson and Woods came on the fifth hole when Mickelson, with a muddy lie about 50 yards from the hole, asked Woods to mark his ball on the green. “Want me to use one of my U.S. Open medals?’’ Woods asked. “I’ve got some silver ones; do you have any of the gold ones?’’ Mickelson responded, making fun of his record six U.S. Open runner-up finishes. “Actually, I’ve got three of them,’’ Woods said. Ouch. In the lead-up to the event, Mickelson was the leader in the clubhouse with the smack talk, publicly chiding Woods for his supposed “insistence’’ on playing at Medalist and predicting that him and Brady were poised to leave him with a “bad memory’’ at his home course. By day’s end, though, the four players and the entire production left everyone who watched with a good Memorial Day weekend sports memory and 20 million more reasons to be happy.

A Washington state software engineer is charged with fraudulently seeking over $1.5 million in coronavirus relief funds intended for small business loans, prosecutors announced Friday. Issaquah resident Baoke Zhang, 35, is accused of filing applications seeking forgivable loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration (SBA) under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and Economic Security (CARES) Act. According to the charges, Zhang sought the relief funds by claiming fake payroll expenses with his non-existent information technology companies. Zhang allegedly submitted fake documents to two different banks in support of applications for forgivable loans guaranteed by the SBA for coronavirus relief through the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP). The fake IRS documentation purported to show federal tax withholdings for a sole proprietorship in his name for 25 employees. To show that his businesses had been operating for longer than they actually had, Zhang allegedly submitted documents showing that the IRS had assigned an Employer Identification Number (EIN) to his businesses – one in 2017 and one in 2018. The IRS actually assigned an EIN number for each of his businesses last month – shortly before Zhang submitted his application. “The defendant allegedly submitted false documents in a brazen scheme to acquire over 1.5 million dollars in loan funds made available for legitimate businesses adversely affected by COVID-19,” Assistant Attorney General Brian A. Benczkowski said. “The department and our law enforcement partners will continue to identify and bring to justice those who commit fraud on CARES Act programs.” Zhang faced charges of wire fraud and bank fraud. It was not immediately clear if he had an attorney who could speak on his behalf. Issaquah is about a 20-minute drive southeast of Seattle. US lawmakers passed the CARES Act this past March to provide emergency financial assistance for people and businesses suffering from the economic effects caused by the coronavirus pandemic. The bill set aside $349 billion in forgivable loans to small businesses for job retention and expenses through the PPP. Lawmakers approved more than $300 billion in additional PPP funding in April.

Tiger Woods and Peyton Manning held off a late challenge to beat Phil Mickelson and Tom Brady 1-up in a charity golf match in Florida on Sunday that raised $20 million for COVID-19 relief efforts. Woods, a 15-times major champion, and two-time Super Bowl winner Manning jumped out to a three-hole lead on the front nine at the Medalist Golf Club in Hobe Sound. While Woods’s booming drives and Manning’s solid putting saw the pair dominate the early holes, five-times major winner Mickelson and Brady won the 11th and 14th to shave the lead to one. However, they were unable to force extra holes after Woods delivered a dagger putt on 18 as darkness descended on his home course. The shot of the day came from Brady on the seventh when he holed out from the fairway just after NBA great Charles Barkley, working as a commentator, had been giving the quarterback a hard time for his ice cold start. “Shut your mouth, Chuck,” Brady said with a smile. But Brady, who joined Tampa Bay in March after 20 years with New England, had little time to revel in the moment. After giving a short speech where he told his wife and kids he loved them the six-times Super Bowl winner then split the seat of his pants while retrieving the ball from the cup. Woods, who lost to Mickelson in a $9 million winner-take-all challenge in 2018, congratulated Manning and Brady for their performance in the team match play event, dubbed The Match: Champions for Charity. “We all came together and were able to raise $20 million for those that have been so severely affected,” Woods said. “I take my hat off to Tom and Peyton. This is our arena, this is what we do for a living. I couldn’t imagine going on the field and do what they do,” he added with a laugh. The competition comes 2-1/2 weeks before the PGA Tour plans to resume its season on June 11 at Colonial. Woods last competed in February and then withdrew from a number of tournaments with a back injury before the PGA Tour decided to cancel a slew of events because of the novel coronavirus outbreak. He has said he is healthy and will be ready to go when the Tour resumes. Mickelson finished third in the Pebble Beach Pro-Am in early February and missed the cut in his next two starts. Manning, who played for the Indianapolis Colts and Denver Broncos, retired in 2016 as the NFL’s all-time leader in passing touchdowns and yards and is the only five-times winner of the league’s Most Valuable Player award.

Memorial Day has become even more heart-wrenching amid the coronavirus. With much of the nation on lockdown, grieving kin of late military veterans have been left to honor their relatives without the support of traditional parades or group graveside remembrances. And for some families of veterans, the contagion will not only prevent special public commemorations Monday, it’s also what actually killed their loved ones. “The veterans should have especially been taken care of, and they weren’t. It’s despicable,’’ said Rosemarie Rado, whose father, Korean War veteran Daniel Rado, 92, died of COVID-19 at the Paramus Veterans Home in New Jersey about three weeks ago. The state-run nursing home has been an infamous epicenter for the virus in the country, with a coronavirus death toll of at least 79. Louise Lombardi, 61, of Baldwin, LI, said she usually participates every year in the Flags Across America event, where volunteers put small Old Glories at gravestones in military cemeteries for the holiday. But this year, because of social-distancing rules stemming from the deadly pandemic, she put a face mask on Sunday — and privately stuck a flag into the ground at the grave of her father, World War II vet Joseph Lombardi, at the Long Island National Cemetery in Farmingdale. “There were a lot of vets there today that were disappointed that this event could not go on,’’ Lombardi told The Post of the group flag-planting. “For the people we memorialize, circumstances didn’t matter to them,’’ said the Long Island woman, whose father died 55 years ago. “They still had to fight for our freedom. “There was no such thing as lockdown for them.” Kristie Espinal’s 94-year-old grandfather, Joseph Guagenti, a Purple Heart recipient from Queens who served in World War II, died of suspected coronavirus at the end of April. She said the holiday will be especially hard this year because of her grandfather’s death — and the lack of public gatherings to honor heroes such as him. “They usually have a little Memorial Day parade in our neighborhood, but unfortunately, it was canceled,’’ said Espinal, who like her grandfather is from Howard Beach. “So [Monday], we’re going to honor another veteran who’s still alive and 99 years old, and people are going to do a drive by and pass his house because he’s stuck in the house and really sad. “I’m going to take my two sons … [and] in honor of Grampa, we’ll pass by, we’ll wave. What else can you do?” she said. Espinal, 38, said that fortunately, her grandfather was laid to rest at a mausoleum, and the family is still able to visit the site. “I can’t image being told that you can’t go and see your loved ones at this time, when you want to remember,’’ she said of other families and their friends who have been told not to congregate in large groups at grave sites. “They played such a vital role for this country, and to not be able to honor them the way they should be honored is terrible,’’ she said of late service members. “To me, veterans are No. 1.’’ Arnold Haber’s son, Mitchel, whose Bronx-born dad served in the Korean War and died of the coronavirus at the Paramus nursing home in April, told The Post that surviving veterans at the facility must be distraught over the decimated holiday. “It’s their holiday, and there’s no one there to celebrate them,’’ he said. On a regular Memorial Day, “We’d be in the nursing home having a party. They always had a great party, with entertainment,’’ Mitchel Haber said. “They just aren’t doing any of that’’ this year because of the virus,’’ he said. “The [veterans] that do remember, they look forward to this day. It’s going to be very lonely for them.’’ The son added that his dad was very proud of his service and would wear an American flag baseball hat every day and had a flag tied to his wheelchair. “He was a staff photographer for his unit. … He would always tell stories, he remembered everything,’’ Mitchel said. “He wasn’t able to get a military sendoff because of the pandemic,’’ the son said. “But it would have been “something he would have loved.” AP Facebook View Slideshow Another Paramus nursing-home resident and veteran, Robert Hopp, died of COVID-19 in April. The Vietnam War vet and Purple Heart recipient was 70 years old. His family said they have no idea how they will commemorate his heroism this Memorial Day. “We couldn’t even have a funeral for him yet,” stepson J.J. Brania-Hopp said. “There’s not really anything we can do right now. All we’ll probably do is talk about him, maybe go for a walk out in the sun.” According to the federal Department of Veterans Affairs, more than 1,000 veterans have died from the virus across the country — although that figure does not include the hundreds more who succumbed in facilities such as the Paramus nursing home. With AP

The novel coronavirus has eclipsed another American crisis, deadlier and much longer in the making: the scourge of opioid addiction. And for a recovering addict like me, the pandemic and the lockdowns are especially dangerous. I read about the death of Melissa Etheridge’s 21-year-old son, Beckett Cypher, as a result of opioids. The story filled me with sorrow and a terrible feeling of the familiar. I understood his addiction. I could feel his anguish. And more than that, I could see how the months of isolation probably worsened his suffering. The siren song of opioids sounds loudest to an addict in times of great grief. When I first tried snorting OxyContin, it was just a few weeks after my family had lost my sister Allison to her own overdose. I remember the drug making me feel both high and at peace at the same time — an overpowering sensation I can still barely describe with words. Thanks to the drug, I didn’t have to feel the grief I was supposed to feel — for myself, for my sister. I rode that feeling for days, then weeks, and each time, I needed more Oxy to get the original euphoric feeling. Though I’ve been clean for years, I can imagine the temptation to use amid isolation. Drugs work by altering the neurological activity in areas of our brain. Usually addicts are people who have experienced intensely negative events, and the drugs numb the mental and emotional anguish we keep stored in our brains about those events. Drugs produce such a powerful relief from anguish, it was a miracle that I got clean. And that was without a mass quarantine. I’ve kept sober all these years by helping others. I’ve volunteered with the homeless, shared my story in prisons and visited people with terminal illnesses. Now, with the pandemic, I can’t do any of that. At first it left me feeling isolated and going a little stir-crazy, playing way too many video games and feeling sorry for myself — a perilous combo. Then I remembered who I was, and how I keep myself sane. True, I couldn’t help others by physically visiting them. In lockdown, helping others starts by picking up the phone. I started reaching out to other sober people, other friends, other members of my community. Just to say, “Hey, man, how are you ­doing?” Sometimes “how are you doing” means: “How are you ­doing?” And sometimes, like right now, it can mean: “Man, are you alive?” Or: “Do you want to keep living?” I know I do. My daughter had her third birthday a couple of weeks ago. At first, my wife and I were pretty bummed about her having to spend her special day without seeing her friends. So we reached out — in this case, on Facebook, asking people if they had any ideas on how we could make a quarantine birthday feel better for her. Our friends introduced us to the idea of a “birthday drive-by.” On her birthday, people drove by our house, honked their horns and waved and gave her birthday greetings. Some of them brought cakes. And they just kept doing that all day, while she stayed outside in her little pool, waving at them. We weren’t alone. And all of us need that reassurance. Because addiction can happen to anyone, no matter the material privileges we enjoy, no matter how much we’ve “got to live for.” I should know. I was born into ­affluence. The wealthy are sometimes able to avoid some of the consequences of addiction (jail, homelessness); sometimes they can hide their addictions altogether. But you can’t hide the tragedy of a death. Addiction is a deadly killer. But it isn’t staying in the shadows anymore. Etheridge announced her son’s death on Twitter and acknowledged the role that opioids played in it. Singer TobyMac announced just a few months ago that his son had died of an overdose, too. Here’s hoping policymakers and others take notice. We need research into addiction. We need funding. We need reform. We can’t let the coronavirus take our eyes off the addiction crisis, which killed nearly 70,000 Americans in 2018. This pandemic is awful. But the opioid epidemic has killed more. And there is never going to be a vaccine for the cycle of grief, pain and addiction. Nicholas Bush is the author of “One by One: A Memoir of Love and Loss in the Shadows of Opioid America.”

Only seven months till Christmas 2020! Popular jewelry chain Pandora, known for its keepsake charms, is starting the all-important retail countdown by reopening half of its 375 stores in North America with an eye toward ironing out the kinks required to operate under the threat of COVID-19 during the holiday season, The Post has learned. “At this point we are more focused on Christmas,” Pandora Jewelry President Sid Keswani, who heads up the North America region, told The Post. To manage store crowding, Denmark-based Pandora is taking a page from the restaurant industry — employing the Waitlist Me app to let customers know when they can enter the store. The idea is to avoid making customers stand in line at the entrance, which is neither safe nor fun. The app tells customers via a text message when they can safely enter a store, while customers themselves notify sales associates about what they are looking for so those items can be pulled and displayed. Pandora also is limiting the number of store customers to five at one time — even though sales staff can only serve three customers at a time. “We are learning what to do if we had to manage crowds three to four times the size we are getting now,” Keswani said, adding that Pandora’s reopened stores in outdoor shopping centers have attracted more customers than those in indoor malls. Shoppers who want to try something on have to ask an associate for help as Pandora has moved all of its jewelry — even its less expensive trinkets — under glass counters. Anything that’s touched is to be immediately cleaned in full view before it’s returned behind glass. Sales associates wear face masks or visors, and the store has added social-distancing markers on the floor that show customers where to stand at a safe distance from other customers. In addition, shoppers are required to wear a face mask, a spokesperson said. Of course, there’s no telling whether retail traffic will ramp up for the holiday-shopping season, or if the deadly coronavirus will still be a threat. Pandora, like many other large retailers, are conducting these trial runs in safe practices in US states, including Florida, Georgia and Texas, that have allowed nonessential businesses to reopen in a bid to prop up their economies, even as the pandemic death toll, nearing 100,000 nationwide, continues to climb. So far, traffic at newly reopened malls — where many big brands are based — has been sluggish at best, according to reports. During the first 11 days of May, eight shopping malls across Georgia, Texas, Utah, South Carolina, Tennessee, Florida and Missouri — all of which have partly reopened — have seen average year-over-year traffic declines of 75 percent, according to an analysis by Barron’s. “I don’t think any retailer is saying ‘We are excited’ ” by current shopper demand, Keswani said. “But we are making assumptions that traffic will pick up and we are spending our time on preparing for larger crowds. “We don’t know what the regulations will be for the holiday season, so we are using this time to figure out best- and worst-case scenarios,” Keswani said, declining to share details about the grimmer projections. Retail executives across the nation have been racking their brains for a set of protocols that might make consumers feel like shopping is safe — and maybe even fun again — despite looming concerns of a second COVID-19 wave. As The Post has previously reported, mall landlords like Simon Property Group plan to hand out free “sanitizing wipe packets with masks” for customers who request them. Elsewhere, department store giants like Saks Fifth Avenue and Macy’s are still sorting out how and whether to quarantine clothing that customers try on in fitting rooms, while Urban Outfitters has stopped people from trying on clothes. “Even [discounter] T.J. Maxx has signs in stores saying ‘if you see a handbag you like, press a button for a sales associate,’ ” said Gabriella Santaniello, president of A Line Partners, a retail research firm. “These next few months are going to be very trial-and-error about what works and what doesn’t.”

The White House on Sunday announced a ban on non-citizens travelling from Brazil to the US. The Trump administration said it is suspending entry to the US by anyone who has been in the coronavirus-stricken country in the past 14 days. “The potential for undetected transmission of the virus by infected individuals seeking to enter the United States from the Federative Republic of Brazil threatens the security of our transportation system and infrastructure and the national security,” President Trump said in a proclamation. “I have determined that it is in the interests of the United States to take action to restrict and suspend the entry into the United States, as immigrants or nonimmigrants, of all aliens who were physically present within the Federative Republic of Brazil during the 14-day period preceding their entry or attempted entry into the United States.” After originating in China and traveling abroad to ravage nations including Italy, Spain and the US, the coronavirus has gained a toehold in Brazil to terrifying effect. Photo by CARL DE SOUZA/AFP via Getty Images Photo by EVARISTO SA/AFP via Getty Images View Slideshow As of Sunday afternoon, Brazil had seen 347,398 confirmed cases of the disease according to Johns Hopkins University, the most reported in any nation in the world other than the US. The South American nation has also lost 22,013 citizens to the pandemic. White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany said that the move is intended to keep Brazil’s bout with the bug from spilling over into the US, but stressed that the trade between the two nations won’t be impacted. “Today’s action will help ensure foreign nationals who have been in Brazil do not become a source of additional infections in our country,” said McEnany in a statement. “These new restrictions do not apply to the flow of commerce between the United States and Brazil.”

That’s one way to lift their spirits. A Chicago-area singer posted video of herself using a cherry picker to serenade nursing home residents with patriotic tunes over Memorial Day weekend. Video posted on Twitter Sunday shows Colette Hawley belting out “Tooty Fruity” from a moving bucket truck outfitted with American flags outside the Chicago Methodist Senior Services on the city’s north side. Hawley, who has been singing for seniors over the last five years, said she’s been offering free concerts to the elderly as they remain confined inside their hard-hit care facilities during the virus outbreak. “Once lockdown happened and I knew what the restrictions were and how severe they were, I said, ‘there’s got to be a way to still sing to them,’ ” she told The Post. Twitter Twitter View Slideshow So she bought wireless speakers and a microphone — and then decided to take her act to new heights with the help of a rented cherry picker. Hawley, who lived in New York for 18 years before moving back home to Chicago, said singing to the elderly during this time has brought her purpose and fulfillment. She thought it especially important to honor nursing home residents as Memorial Day approaches. “It’s such an important sort of solemn, respectful day for them and I think they miss not being able to connect on a day like today,” Hawley said. “I thought they really need something on this day, and to know we haven’t forgotten them and aren’t just going to blow past them on this important day.”

CHICAGO — Illinois churches holding services Sunday despite warnings about health risks during the coronavirus pandemic said they’re taking precautions to protect congregants, from scrapping communion to requiring masks. While President Donald Trump’s Friday order declaring houses of worship essential prompted some to expand, others said it was simply time to reopen as more people suffer in the pandemic. “It’s like a physician knowing that someone is bleeding and they can’t do anything about it,” said Pastor John Elleson of Lakewood Chapel in suburban Arlington Heights. The church reopened its sanctuary Sunday, something that was planned for weeks. Roughly 20 worshippers, including staff, wore masks and stood spaced out. Doors were kept open and communion wasn’t offered, said Elleson, who wore a glove while he prayed for congregants, touching them on the shoulder or side. Clashes between churches and local stay-at-home orders have popped up nationwide. In Chicago, three churches been holding services for weeks were fined $500. In Illinois, houses of worship are limited to 10 people to curb the spread of COVID-19. Some churches said they’d try to expand after Trump’s declaration. Pervis Thomas, pastor of New Canaan Land Missionary Baptist Church on Chicago’s South Side, urged leaders to lift restrictions and said he was planning for about 50 people. He said there wouldn’t be any singing as a precaution. “We just want her to recognize our institution as being essential,” Thomas told the Chicago Tribune. For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms, such as fever and cough. But for others, especially older people and the infirm, it can cause severe symptoms and lead to death. Public health officials announced 2,508 new cases of COVID-19 Sunday and 67 additional deaths. Overall, 110,304 people in the state have tested positive and 4,856.

America’s 98-year-old Golden Girl, Betty White, has become a pro at social distancing — and jokes that boozing is getting her through the lockdown, according to reports. “I’m blessed with incredibly good health,” White proudly told Closer Magazine. “That’s something you appreciate a lot,” she told the UK mag. White’s rep told the “Today” show that the actress — who turned 98 in January — has been strict on maintaining safety during the pandemic, knowing her age puts her in the high-risk bracket. “No one permitted in except those who must,” the rep said, noting she has “helpers who are great with her.” White likes to joke that her good health is down to something else, however — her love of a good vodka martini, friends told Closer. “Betty loves to joke that vodka keeps her young,” one unidentified close friend told the mag. “She loves the image of her sitting at home in a rocking chair, drinking a martini and watching game shows,” the friend said, while stressing that she’s “not really a big drinker.” She keeps busy by reading L.A. newspapers “cover to cover,” one of her closest friends, fellow actor Tom Sullivan, told Closer. “She owns literally thousands of crossword puzzle books and is constantly doing them to keep her mind jumping. This is really serious with her,” said Sullivan, who co-authored his best-seller, “The Leading Lady: Dinah’s Story,” with White. She also gets to spend time outside in her garden, sometimes getting to enjoy some wild company. “Betty has a beautiful backyard with a number of wild animals visiting,” her rep “Today.” “Two ducks always come by to say hello. They waddle up to her glass door and look in. “The animal community is watching over her,” said White’s publicist, who checks in with the star several times a week. “The virus is afraid of Betty!”

FRANKFURT – German authorities are trying to trace everyone who attended a church service in Frankfurt this month after more than 107 people tested positive for the coronavirus. Churches in the state of Hesse, where Frankfurt is located, have been able to hold services since May 1 following the easing of coronavirus lockdown restrictions, provided they adhere to official social distancing and hygiene rules. “This situation shows how important it is that all of us stay alert and avoid becoming careless, especially now during the easing of restrictions. The virus is still there and will spread,” Hesse state health minister Kai Klose said. He said the authorities hoped that identifying those who attended the service at a Baptist church on May 10 would help prevent others being infected. It was not immediately clear whether all the 107 with the coronavirus attended the service, or whether the tally includes people who were infected by those who did. The number of confirmed coronavirus cases in Germany has risen to 178,281, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed on Sunday. The reported death toll rose by 31 to 8,247.

A Chinese-American advocacy group says that having city Schools Chancellor Richard Carranza oversee instruction to fight bias against Asians “is like having the KKK run training on anti-black bigotry.” The Chinese American Citizens Alliance Greater New York issued the statement ripping the “race-trafficker-in-chief’’ after the Department of Education told The Post on Saturday that Carranza now wants his controversial training programs — which seek to end anti-Latino and anti-black- bias — to also fight bigotry targeting Asians. “Unbelievably, the man who commits explicit anti-Asian bigotry just added anti-Asian bigotry to his implicit-bias training for Department of Education staff,’’ the group charged. “This is, after all, the man who smears Asians [by claiming] they think they ‘own’ admissions to Specialized High Schools, while he pursues policies that seek to exclude large swathes of Asians from these schools,’’ according to the statement. A rep from the DOE called the remarks “toxic rhetoric” that just creates division. “We’re going to continue implicit bias training because it is not about any one race or ethnicity — it is about giving people the tools to prevent and confront bigotry, and as a city, it’s something we need now,” the rep, Nathaniel Styer, said. “This is a distraction rooted in baseless attacks while the chancellor is working around the clock to keep students and staff safe and engaged in learning during this crisis. We invite everyone to join us.” The advocacy group had been referring to Carranza’s push to eliminate entrance exams involving the city’s elite high schools, tests on which Asian-American students have traditionally scored high. “This is, after all, the man whose DOE sponsored the Center for Racial Justice in Education that declared that Asian Americans ‘benefit from White Supremacy’ by ‘proximity to White privilege,’ ” its statement added. The Center for Racial Justice has been paid about $400,000 by the DOE to helm workshops, including in communities, as part of Carranza’s anti-bias initiative. The claims that “white supremacy’’ and “white privilege’’ have aided Asian-American students were made by CRJ presenters at a gathering with Manhattan parents in 2019. “To have Carranza run training on anti-Asian bigotry is like having the KKK run training on anti-black bigotry,’’ the CACAGNY added of the chancellor’s latest move. “Anti-Asian bigotry is a serious problem for Asian Americans, not to be used for such exploitation. “The first step for the DOE to address anti-Asian bigotry in NYC is to get Carranza out of NYC.” The scathing release came a day after The Post reported that Carranza was starting up his “implicit-bias’’ training again — this time remotely because of the coronavirus pandemic — and that it was so sorely needed because of rising bias against Asian Americans. Tensions between Carranza and Asian-American parents have been high for months. In February, a group of parents who had been calling for Carranza’s ouster was initially blocked from attending a town-hall meeting with him in Brooklyn. “He wanted to shut us up and shut us down,” organizer Linda Lam told The Post at the time. “This sets a dangerous precedent to silence Asians or any other groups opposed to his policy.” The group was eventually admitted.

With Nassau County beaches closed to non-residents, a Long Beach man got himself into hot water for trying to scalp passes to outsiders on Craigslist, according to cops. Damian Davidson, 32, bought four season passes to the Nassau County beach for $140 each, then tried to peddle them on Craigslist for $250 a pop, police said on Facebook. “With city beaches closed and island beaches being resident only I have family beach passes for Long Beach for sale 250$ (sic) price negotiable passes good all summer,” the ad allegedly said. Davidson allegedly sold two of the passes to an undercover cop for $260 — then took off running when police tried to arrest him. When cops caught up to him, he was taken into custody and charged with a second-degree scheme to defraud. He was released pending a future court appearance. According to the Long Beach website, the city’s beaches opened this weekend for residents only, although non-resident passes purchased before May 20 will be honored. Family beach passes sell for $70 each, and non-resident family passes for $140 each, according to the site. Davidson could not be reached for comment Sunday.

A California company has invented a high-tech suit with a filtration system that it says could protect party animals itching to let loose without catching the coronavirus, according to a report. Design firm Production Club created the wearable-technology suit, named Micrashell, with clubbing and concerts in mind, news station KNTV reported “Micrashell is a solution for bringing people together safely,” Miguel Risueno, the company’s head of inventions, told the outlet. “It’s a half suit that kind of takes your safety and your security in terms of being close to airborne particles or viruses to the next level.” Described as an offshoot of a hazmat suit, the airtight gear has app-controlled speakers, a microphone and most importantly, an N95 filtration system. Through a rear vent on the helmet, outside air is suctioned through the filtering system and directed at the wearer’s face, the company said. It is then filtered a second time before being expelled out into the room. Drinking and vaping are still possible while wearing the suit through nozzles attached to snap-in canisters, Risueno said. “It’s another thing you don’t need to remove the helmet for, because if you remove the helmet and the shield, you are now compromised,” Risueno said. Risueno said the company plans to rent the suit to venues, which would then be responsible for sanitizing the gear after each use. “With our solution we are trying to make space available for everyone,” Risueno said, adding that it may allow venues to safely allow for more people inside. Though a patent is pending, Risueno said the firm hopes to have a prototype soon so people can return to partying in crowds again. “We said we still need to find a solution because people are still going out,” Risuneo told KNTV. “People are still going to party and still skipping social distance measures.”

The post-coronavirus world could be a real rat race. With humans all stuck inside under stay-at-home orders, rats and other rodents have become more aggressive while scavenging for food, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned in a new advisory. Now they could be ready to unleash a wave of “aggressive rodent behavior” on an unsuspecting public as society begins to reopen. “Community-wide closures have led to a decrease in food available to rodents, especially in dense commercial areas,” the CDC said. “Some jurisdictions have reported an increase in rodent activity as rodents search for new sources of food.” “Environmental health and rodent control programs may see an increase in service requests related to rodents and reports of unusual or aggressive rodent behavior,” the advisory said. The CDC urged residents and restaurant owners to seal up holes where the hangry rats could get inside and to clear up debris and garbage. “Follow established guidelines when cleaning up after rodent infestations to prevent exposure to rodent-borne diseases,” the advisory said. “Fleas are common on rodents. In area of heavy rodent infestations, workers should consider using a repellent registered by the US Environmental Protection Agency…” Urban rats struggled to find food during the lockdown, and in some cases even resorted to rodent cannibalism. “They’re mammals just like you and I, and so when you’re really, really hungry, you’re not going to act the same — you’re going to act very bad, usually,” Bobby Corrigan, an urban rodentologist, told NBC News last month. “So these rats are fighting with one another, now the adults are killing the young in the nest and cannibalizing the pups.”

The White House national security adviser on Sunday compared China’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic to the then-Soviet Union’s response after the Chernobyl nuclear disaster in 1986. “The cover-up that they did of the virus is going to go down in history, along with Chernobyl. We’ll see an HBO special about it 10 or 15 years from now. And so we’re in a different place with China as we speak today,” Robert O’Brien said on NBC’s “Meet the Press.” O’Brien was responding to a question from host Chuck Todd about whether the Trump administration was tough enough on Beijing as it tried to hammer out a trade deal with the country. “We want good relations with China and with the Chinese people, but unfortunately we’re seeing just action after action by the Chinese Communist Party that makes it difficult. And with respect to the trade deal, we’ll see if they live up to it. But we’re dealing in a new world now with corona,” O’Brien said. “They unleashed a virus on the world that’s destroyed trillions of dollars in American economic wealth that we’re having to spend to keep our economy alive, to keep Americans afloat during this virus.” President Trump has blasted China and its President Xi Jinping for misleading the US and other countries about the coronavirus outbreak that began in the city of Wuhan in December and for failing to accurately report the number of cases it had. Those actions by China, Trump said, allowed the coronavirus to spread widely before countries could take effective steps to combat it. O’Brien described Trump’s Jan. 30 order banning travel from China as a “profile in courage” that “saved countless lives.” He said China continues to block doctors from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention into China to gather information about the virus that has caused more than 5.3 million cases around the world. “Unfortunately, China did none of that. And so, look, we’re in a very different place with China right now, and the president’s made that clear. But, you know, the Chinese didn’t do what they said. We’ve also learned that at the time, that they cracked down internally and refused to allow people from Hubei and Wuhan to travel throughout China, they allowed those folks to travel to Europe,” O’Brien said. He was asked on CBS News’ “Face the Nation” whether he thought China would share a coronavirus vaccine with the US if it developed one first. “I think we’re going to develop a vaccine first,” O’Brien said, but added “there’s a chance, and it’s been reported, that the Chinese have been engaged in espionage to try to find the research and the technologies that we’re working on both for a vaccine and a therapy … they’ve got a many-year history of stealing American intellectual property and knocking off American technology and I wouldn’t be surprised if they did that with the vaccines.”

Michigan may not even try to compete with Ohio State this season. While Ohio State is allowing its athletes to return for voluntary workouts beginning June 8 — the SEC announced the same plan for its schools — Michigan president Dr. Mark Schlissel told the Wall Street Journal that the Wolverines will sit out the college football season if the Ann Arbor campus remains closed to students. The state of Michigan’s stay-at-home order has been extended through June 12 and the flagship school has not announced a potential reopening date. “If there is no on-campus instruction then there won’t be intercollegiate athletics, at least for Michigan,” Schlissel, a trained immunologist, told the Wall Street Journal. While Schlissel has “some degree of doubt as to whether there will be college athletics (anywhere), at least in the fall,” several schools nationwide have already announced plans to allow students to return in the fall, including football powerhouses like Clemson and Notre Dame, as well as fellow Big Ten schools, like Illinois. Schlissel said Michigan will make a decision regarding the fall semester in the “coming weeks.” “Any decision we make for this coming fall is likely going to be the case for the whole academic year, Schlissel said. “What’s going to be different in January?” Even if students are allowed back on the Ann Arbor campus, don’t expect to see many — or any — of them at the Big House. “I can’t imagine a way to do that safely,” Schlissel said.

New coronavirus hospitalizations and the daily death toll have ticked up slightly, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday — troubling blips amid the disease’s overall decline. Some 229 New Yorkers have been hospitalized with COVID-19, according to the three-day rolling average through Saturday, Cuomo said in a press briefing at Jones Beach Theatre in Wantagh, Long Island. That represents a jump of 21 from the 208 new hospitalizations under the previous three-day rolling average, according to statistics from the state Department of Health. “The new cases are up a little bit on the rolling average, but all part of the decline,” said Cuomo. Additionally, 109 New Yorkers were confirmed to have died from the virus statewide on Saturday, up from 84 fatalities recorded Friday and equaling the lives lost Thursday. “The number of deaths ticked up, which is terrible news, but the overall line is still good,” the governor said. Other metrics showed more promising signs for the state. The number of total hospitalizations saw a net decline of 249 on Saturday, a sharper drop than the net drop of 202 the day prior. With a net drop of 76, the number of intubated patients also continued to decline, albeit at a slower rate compared to Friday, when 111 fewer New Yorkers were intubated. Overall, 361,515 people have now tested positive for the virus statewide, and 23,391 confirmed deaths have been reported — though the number of presumed fatalities, in which the deceased displayed telltale signs of COVID-19 but was never officially tested, is at least in four-digits. Meanwhile, the number of diagnoses in the five boroughs stood at 195,452 as of 1:15 p.m. Sunday, according to the city’s Department of Health. The Big Apple has now seen at least 21,216 deaths — 16,469 confirmed to be from the coronavirus, and another 4,747 presumed to be connected.

Americans eager to spend a day outdoors are flocking to beaches for Memorial Day Weekend after enduring lengthy coronavirus lockdowns. Beach-goers showed up in throngs to popular summer destinations throughout the US — forcing some areas to start turning people away. Beaches in Pinellas County, Fla., reached an “unprecedented level of closures” over the weekend — with more than 60 access points shuttered by 1 p.m. Sunday to help control crowds, the sheriff’s office said. “I have never seen this many umbrellas,” one beachgoer, Tiffany Mathers, told the Tampa Bay Times. “This is not social-distancing at all. There’s way too many people.” Others said they just needed to get some fresh air, and were still trying to maintain distance from other people on the beach. “I’ve been in the house for months and had to get out for some fresh air … But I’m not socializing or sitting close to people,” said Michael Montoya, who was sitting in a beach chair on Sunset Beach, according to the outlet. Meanwhile, beaches in Galveston, Texas, drew large crowds, snarling traffic for miles, according to the Galveston Daily News. “When I say it was busy today, it’s really busy, because we’re talking about the first day of the holiday weekend, which is usually the lighter day,” Galveston Island Beach Patrol Chief Peter Davis said of Saturday’s turnout, according to the report. In Missouri, partiers packed restaurants and bars at the Lake of the Ozarks, a popular summer destination for Chicagoans. Footage posted to Twitter showed dozens of revelers drinking in an unidentified poolside bar in the area. “No covid concerns at the lake of the ozarks,” wrote KTVK anchor Scott Pasmore on Twitter. Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said she was “very concerned” about the report of people crowding together to mark the start of summer. “We really want to be clear all the time that social distancing is absolutely critical. And if you can’t social distance and you’re outside, you must wear a mask,” Birx said on ABC’s “This Week.” The US is expected to surpass 100,000 coronavirus deaths in the next few days, with more than 1.6 million cases already recorded as of Sunday afternoon, according to the latest figures from Johns Hopkins University. With Post wires

Actress Alyssa Milano was criticized Saturday on Twitter after sharing a picture of herself and her family wearing coronavirus face masks and encouraging others to do the same — but hers appeared to have holes in it, as it was crocheted. Milano posted a photo of herself in a car with her husband and two children, who were all wearing facial coverings. “Show me your masks! Masks keep people safe and healthy. Show me yours! Ready? Go!” she tweeted. Twitter users were quick to point out how Milano’s crocheted mask had holes in it and likely wasn’t doing anything at all. “Your mask is exactly what this fence does to keep mosquitoes out,” one user wrote, along with a photo of a fence with many openings in it. Others also posted photos bashing Milano’s choice of mask. And social media personality Mark Dice posted a comment indicative of the backlash the actress received and wrote, “You should try this one on.” After multiple Twitter users critiqued her, Milano replied saying there was a filter inside the mask. “A–holes, mask has a carbon filter in it. So, yes, it might be crochet but totally safe,” Milano wrote. “Mask has a filter in it for f–k’s sake. A carbon one. My mom makes them. #WearAMask” As of Saturday evening, there have been more than 1.6 million confirmed cases of coronavirus in the U.S. and over 97,000 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University.

Long Island Rail Road trains will run with extra cars to accommodate social distancing in time for the island’s anticipated reopening from the coronavirus this week, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Sunday. “Long Island is on track to meet the numbers on Wednesday,” said Cuomo, referring to the seven state metrics for reopening measuring hospital admissions, deaths, available beds, testing and tracing. “We’re preparing for Long Island to open.” Cuomo also announced a handful of other reopenings: Campgrounds and RV parks can reopen Monday, while veterinary practices can resume service on Tuesday. Part of the effort to re-open Long Island is shoring up the LIRR to ensure that they can safely serve those cleared to head back to work under the first phase, which includes such sectors as construction, manufacturing, landscaping and curbside pick-up retail, Cuomo told reporters at the Jones Beach Theatre in Wantagh, LI. “They’re going to add more cars to the trains, so people can space out and socially distance when Long Island opens,” said Cuomo. “I want people to remember that a mask is mandatory on public transportation. “I think you’re making a mistake, a grave mistake if you don’t use a mask in your own personal life.” The extra trains are a precaution in addition to the efforts to disinfect every MTA train and bus every day. While Long Island is expected to reopen Wednesday, the Mid-Hudson is on track to ease back into normalcy even earlier, Cuomo said, with the metrics pointing to a Tuesday reopening. That leaves just one of the state’s 10 economic regions on the outside looking in: New York City. Mayor Bill de Blasio has said that the Big Apple is on pace to catch up as early as June 1, and Cuomo has said nothing to dampen that expectation, so long as the Big Apple meets the metrics. Still, the governor urged caution. “Everybody’s paid a high price for what we’ve gone through,” he said. “Some people have paid an extraordinarily high price.” None has paid a higher price than the 23,391 New Yorkers now confirmed to have died to the coronavirus, including 109 in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Sunday. After the state logged 84 deaths in the period prior — the lowest single-day total since late March — the toll jumped back up on Saturday, a stark reminder that the battle is not yet won.

It suddenly feels like much more than semantics that the Giants and Jets are based in New Jersey, not New York. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo announced Sunday morning that the state’s “professional sports leagues can begin spring training” in accordance with the proper health protocols. Good news for the Bills — as well as teams in the NBA and NHL — but the Giants train in East Rutherford and the Jets in Florham Park, so their facilities remain closed under Gov. Phil Murphy’s instructions. In response to a request for comment from The Post, a spokesperson for Murphy cited a recently signed executive order stating “nothing in this order shall prevent professional athletes from fulfilling their job duties, including when those job duties may require person-to-person contact.” The NFL lifted last week two months of closed-door orders on facilities in states where the government is allowing businesses to reopen, but the Giants’ and Jets’ headquarters remain shuttered. Coaches and players are prohibited at all 32 facilities — the limited permitted personnel are subject to daily temperature screenings — and the league plans to maintain that ban until a simultaneous return is possible to ensure competitive balance. Teams around the NFL are holding voluntary virtual meetings and/or workouts right now as part of OTAs, and mandatory June minicamps could be employed the same way. “They’re just literally in the early stage process of bringing in their non-player community,” Murphy said on Wednesday. “Again, they don’t have to hear from us, they’re already doing [preparations]. There’ll be some folks, they’ll continue to be able to work from home, and others they’ll need to have in the building. They’re very good about saying they’ll comply with all of the social distancing requirements.” Given the language in the executive order plus New York’s softened stance, it stands to reason New Jersey will not block NFL training camps from opening. But Murphy has a built-in cushion: There are no NBA or MLB franchises based in New Jersey, and Giants and Jets do not start camp until the final week of July. Murphy’s office did not offer an update on NFL facilities re-opening to team personnel other than the players and coaches. New Jersey has 154,154 confirmed coronavirus cases, including 11,133 deaths, Murphy announced Sunday.

A White House economic adviser cautioned Sunday that the unemployment rate could grow “north of 20 percent” in May and remain in double-digits through the November presidential election. Kevin Hassett was asked on CNN’s “State of the Union” whether unemployment for this month will surpass April’s rate of 14.7 percent. “Yes, it’s going to be quite a bit higher,” he said, citing some technical miscalculations. “But it could be, if they fix the numbers and fix the thing that they mischaracterized last time, that you will end up with a number north of 20 percent in May.” Asked whether he thinks those levels could continue through the general election with President Trump on the ballot, Hassett said, “Yes, I do.” “Unemployment will be something that moves back slower. I think it could be better than that. But you’re going to be starting at a number in the 20s and working your way down,” Hassett said. “And so, of course, you could still not be back to full employment by September or October,” he continued, adding that he would be more optimistic if a vaccine came out in July. According to federal data released last week, 2.4 million Americans applied for unemployment benefits the week before, bringing the total jobless number to more than 38 million in the past nine weeks.

Anna Wintour’s team at Vogue has been reaching out to ticket holders to the canceled Met Gala and urging guests to make donations rather than get refunds. The Metropolitan Museum of Art this week called off the gala that’s known as fashion’s Super Bowl — where guests traditionally range from Rihanna, Lady Gaga, Katy Perry and Kim Kardashian to Jeff Bezos and CAA’s Bryan Lourd. The black-tie extravaganza raises money for the Met’s Costume Institute. Sources said that this gala season, most canceled events are asking guests not to get their money back, but to make the money laid out for tickets donations instead. But unlike other gala events, prices at the Met Gala — one of the world’s toughest tickets — go for up to $300,000 a table or $30,000 for a single ticket. Also unlike other stuffed shirt charity galas, for which some donors might be happy to part with the ticket prices in exchange for not having to show up to another staid high-society black-tie dinner, the Met Gala is about the party. Vogue had no comment. A source familiar with the museum’s programs told us: “As the global arts and culture community, and the Met, suffer huge losses as a result of the pandemic, and as the Met Gala is the Costume Institute’s primary source of annual funding, they hope guests will consider generously turning their tickets to this fundraiser into a donation or transfer tickets toward next year’s gala. If that is not possible, money will, of course, be refunded.” Last year, the gala raised a reported $15 million. This year’s Costume Institute exhibition (which would have been the theme for the party) is called, “About Time: Fashion and Duration.” The exhibition is still scheduled to open on Oct. 29. When the gala was called off, pregnant Perry revealed the look she planned to wear, while Billy Porter launched a social media challenge for fans to recreate looks from past galas.

The head of a California hospital’s trauma team says his area has seen more death from lockdown suicides than from the pandemic itself. “We’ve never seen numbers like this, in such a short period of time,” Dr. Mike deBoisblanc of John Muir Medical Center in Walnut Creek, just outside of Oakland, told ABC7 of the apparent mental health crisis. “I mean, we’ve seen a year’s worth of suicide attempts in the last four weeks,” he told the station, which did not give figures to back the claims. Walnut Creek is in Contra Costa County, which as of Saturday had recorded 1,296 coronavirus cases, with 36 deaths. DeBoisblanc believes the mental health cost proves “it’s time” to end the shelter-in-place in the county of more than a million people, he told the station. His colleague, Kacey Hansen — a trauma nurse at the hospital for 33 years — says the focus on treating COVID-19 has also meant they have not able to save as many suicide patients as usual. “I have never seen so much intentional injury,” she told the station. John Muir Health told ABC7 that it “encourages” its staff to “participate constructively in these discussions,” while stressing it is “supportive of the Shelter-in-Place order” in Contra Costa County. “We all share a concern for the health of our community whether that is COVID-19, mental health, intentional violence or other issues,” it told the station.

Amanda Kloots told fans Sunday not to “take a day for granted,” as husband Nick Cordero continues his months-long recovery against the coronavirus. In a series of Instagram stories, Kloots reflected on Cordero’s “tough week,” in which the 41-year-old Broadway star suffered a setback, but added things are gradually improving. “Nick suffered from some new lung infection in his lungs earlier this week, and since then, he’s been slowly recovering, which is great,” Kloots explained. “Day by day, hour by hour, he’s getting better. He’s slowly getting back to where he was before this infection came about.” Earlier this week, Kloots said Cordero’s health was “going a little downhill at the moment.” The news came shortly after the “Rock of Ages” star woke up from his medically induced coma. Kloots remains hopeful Cordero “can come off some more medications and that his settings on machines can come down.” “Right now, we’re just looking for slow, steady, small wins to keep him resting and recovering,” she said. Cordero has been hospitalized since late March and had his right leg amputated in April as a result of coronavirus complications. Kloots, who has been providing fans with updates on social media, shared earlier this month that Cordero is “still having a little bit of an issue with the infection in his lungs.” Over the weekend, Kloots gushed over how “proud” she is of Cordero. “I’m really proud of how strong he is and gosh, what he’s gone through, and his will,” she said. “I’m exhausted, physically, and emotionally and mentally exhausted. This has been the craziest ride ever, but you know, we’re still here, and we’re still fighting.” Kloots then encouraged fans to embrace their loved ones. “I would just encourage you, everyone, to hug your loved ones,” Kloots said. “Go really give them a really good love hug, and let them know, ‘I love you.'” “If you have somebody going through it, hug your people,” she continued. “Do it for me, do it for Nick. Don’t take a day for granted, guys.” Kloots and Cordero share an 11-month-old son named Elvis.

President Trump repeated his warning Sunday that voters should not be allowed to use mail-in ballots, contending that November’s election could be the “greatest Rigged Election in history.” “The United States cannot have all Mail In Ballots. It will be the greatest Rigged Election in history. People grab them from mailboxes, print thousands of forgeries and ‘force’ people to sign. Also, forge names. Some absentee OK, when necessary. Trying to use Covid for this Scam!” Trump wrote on Twitter. Last week, the president threatened to “hold up” funding for Michigan and Nevada if they carry through with plans to allow residents to cast mail-in or absentee ballots. Officials in those states said they were worried about people risking their health by going out to vote in person during the coronavirus pandemic. Trump backed off the ultimatum a day later. “They’ll be finding out very soon if it’s necessary. I don’t think it’s going to be necessary,” Trump told reporters at the White House Wednesday. Trump cast his vote in March’s Florida primary by mail but said he’s worried about rampant fraud if done on a large scale. “I’m at the White House. And I have to send a ballot to Florida, that makes sense. So if you needed for some reason, or if somebody’s not well, that’s one thing,” Trump said. “But when you send out 7.7 million mail-in ballots there’s forgeries, there’s frankly duplication where they print ballots on the same kind of paper with the same kind of machinery and you can’t tell the difference.”

Two hairstylists at the same Missouri salon tested positive for the coronavirus — and may have exposed as many as 147 people to the deadly bug, according to reports. The Springfield-Greene Health Department reported Friday that a stylist at a Great Clips salon in Springfield tested positive to COVID-19 after potentially exposing 84 clients and seven co-workers between May 12 and May 20. The second stylist tested positive on Saturday after working five days last week and taking care of 56 customers “while experiencing very mild symptoms” but still being “potentially infectious,” the health department said, Fox News reported Sunday. Health officials said they are hopeful that, because the stylists and their customers all wore masks, none will actually contract the virus, and advised them to self-quarantine only if they developed symptoms. “At this time, this is the only other positive result we have had from those tested as a result of the previous exposure,” the department said in a press release. Health Department Director Clay Goddard told Fox News it was helpful that the salon kept detailed records of its customers. “We are hopeful that their strictly enforced policy of masking will prevent any future spread from this case,” Goddard said. “They also kept detailed records that have made contact tracing a speedy process.” Hair salons in Missouri were shuttered as non-essential businesses during a coronavirus lockdown. But they were allowed to reopen on May 4 as restrictions began to gradually ease in the state, the Kansas City Star reported. The Great Clips salon was closed after the stylists tested positive and is now undergoing a thorough cleaning and sanitizing, the Star said.

Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House task force coordinator, said Americans hitting the beaches during the Memorial Day Weekend should wear masks if they are unable to social distance. Birx warned that some people who are infected with the coronavirus but don’t show symptoms are putting others at risk by “spreading the virus unknowingly.” “I think it’s our job as public health officials every day to be informing the public of what puts them at risk,” Birx said Sunday on ABC News’ “This Week” when asked about images of people crowding beaches this weekend. “And we’ve made it clear that there’s asymptomatic spread.” “So we really want to be clear all the time that social distancing is absolutely critical,” she added. “And if you can’t social distance and you’re outside, you must wear a mask.” At the White House coronavirus briefing last week, Birx urged Americans to be careful and maintain social distancing guidelines while soaking up the sun over the weekend. “You can go out. You can be outside. You can play golf. You can play tennis with marked balls. You can go to the beaches if you stay six feet apart. But remember that that is your space, and that’s a space that you need to protect and ensure that you’re social distanced for others,” she told reporters last Friday. ABC anchor Martha Radditz asked Birx about images of beach-goers ignoring social distancing guidelines. “I think that’s our job to continue to communicate,” Birx said. “And I think we have to communicate through different venues, making sure that our generation sees and our Millennials can help us get that message out there, of how to be together socially yet distant. And I think there is a way to do that. Americans are amazingly innovative. And I think we really just need to have better continuous communication on how important that is,” she continued.

Non voyage! France is urging its citizens to vacation near home this summer — and refrain from foreign trips as the coronavirus continues to spread across the globe, an official said Sunday. “We are absolutely not suggesting that the French reserve their holidays abroad. This year, the idea is to holiday in France,” Environment Minister Elisabeth Borne told France Inter radio, according to the Agence Frances-Presse. Borne said that the country will be announcing plans to ease lockdown measures, including the current order that no one travels farther than 60 miles from their homes. “Everyone can begin to reserve their holidays. We will be announcing the new rules during the week,” she told the outlet. Other European countries, such as Italy, Spain and Greece, have announced plans to reopen borders and said they will welcome tourists, according to the report. But French health officials have noted that the pandemic was far from over — even in the country, where there have been fewer cases in recent weeks. Borne said that Paris was still considered a “red zone” and parks will remain closed there to contain outbreaks. The country has reported at least 182,000 confirmed cases with more than 28,000 deaths, according to recent data from John Hopkins University. With Post wires

Coronavirus patients stop being infectious 11 days after contracting the disease — even if they still test positive for COVID-19 on day 12, according to a new study. Singaporean infectious disease experts said they found that the virus “could not be isolated or cultured after day 11 of illness,” according to a joint paper from the country’s National Center for Infectious Diseases and the Academy of Medicine. Researchers looked at the “viral load” in 73 COVID-19 patients to measure whether the bug was still viable and could infect anyone. “Based on the accumulated data since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the infectious period of [coronavirus] in symptomatic individuals may begin around 2 days before the onset of symptoms, and persists for about 7-10 days after the onset of symptoms,” the researchers wrote. Patients may still test positive after two weeks, but tests could be picking up fragments of the virus that are no longer viable for spreading the infection, researchers said. “Active viral replication drops quickly after the first week, and viable virus was not found after the second week of illness,” researchers wrote. The researchers suggested that the findings could inform hospitals’ decisions about when to discharge patients. In the US, many hospitals require patients test negative for the virus twice to be considered recovered from COVID-19. Though the sample size was small, researchers are confident that their findings will be replicated in larger studies, NCID executive director Leo Yee-Sin told Singaporean newspaper the Strait Times. “Scientifically, I’m very confident that there is enough evidence that the person is no longer infectious after 11 days,” she said.

President Trump said the hydroxychloroquine he has been taking for several weeks has been getting “rave reviews” despite health experts claiming the anti-malarial drug can be dangerous or even fatal for people infected with coronavirus. “Hydroxy has had tremendous rave reviews,” Trump told “Full Measure with Sharyl Attkisson” during an interview that was scheduled to air Sunday on Sinclair Broadcasting. “I believe in it enough that I took a program because I had two people in the White House that tested positive.” The president announced earlier this month that he began taking the drug after consulting with the White House physician. Katie Miller, the spokeswoman for Vice President Mike Pence, and the president’s military valet tested positive for COVID-19. At a White House news conference May 18, Trump said he heard “good stories” about the drug, adding “if it is not good, I will tell you, right. I’m not going to get hurt by it. It has been around for 40 years for malaria, for lupus, for other things.” A study in the medical journal Lancet published last week said a study of coronavirus patients found that those treated with hydroxychloroquine have a higher risk of developing an irregular heart beat. The Food and Drug Administration has also warned against using the drug outside of hospitals or clinical trials because of the heart problems. “Hydroxychloroquine [has] not been shown to be safe and effective for treating or preventing COVID-19,” the FDA said last month. In the Sinclair interview Trump also ripped Columbia University after it published a study claiming that if the lockdown had been in effect two weeks earlier, as many as 54,000 lives would have been saved. “Columbia University is a liberal, disgraceful institution, to write that,” he said. “I saw that report from Columbia University and it is a disgrace that they would play right to their little group of people to tell them what to do,” he continued. The Trump administration and states began lockdown efforts on March 15. The US death toll from coronavirus has surpassed 92,000.

Maskless partygoers in Missouri packed into a yacht club to toast Memorial Day Weekend — despite signs warning people to stay six feet apart, a report says. Photos of the Redhead Lakeside Grill and Yacht Club in Lake of the Ozarks showed half-naked revelers Saturday crowding the bar and pool, news station KSDK reported. More shocking footage on Twitter showed that the yacht club wasn’t the only party spot overtaken by crowds in the popular vacation destination. In one clip, dozens of partiers, also without masks, were seen drinking in an unidentified poolside bar in the area. “No covid concerns at the lake of the ozarks,” wrote KTVK anchor Scott Pasmore on Twitter. Another Twitter user shared a video of hundreds at another local bar’s pool, noting it was taken “as the U.S. death toll from #COVID19 nears 100,000.” Camden County Sheriff’s Department said there are social distancing guidelines, but their hands are tied because there are no penalties for disregarding the rules, KSDK reported Redhead Lakeside Grill and Yacht Club didn’t respond to request for comment, the outlet reported.

A California woman is accused of penning racist letters targeting Asian Americans, asking them to move out of one suburb, according to a report. Nancy Arechiga, 52, allegedly left at least five of the handwritten letters on homes and other locations in San Leandro, which is a suburb of Oakland, news station KGO-TV reported. In one letter, Arechiga wrote to foreign-born residents, saying, “You, because we consider you’re a stranger, one bad person for this country, leave, go far away, go back to your country, the place you belong. “You have until the day May 23, 2020, Saturday 10:30 a.m. to leave this country place no Asian allowed. My Country USA,” the letter continued. One resident, who only wanted to be identified as Trinh, said her family found a letter both at their home and a nearby park. “It was shocking and the whole family was really shaken up at it. I can’t comprehend hatefulness reading this letter sent chills down my spine,” she told the outlet. Footage from a Ring doorbell camera allegedly caught Arechiga posting one of the notes on a home, SF Gate reported. Within hours, police located her still in the area with a backpack that contained more letters, the report said. Arechiga was arrested and booked into Alameda County’s Santa Rita Jail in Dublin. “San Leandro is a community of beautifully diverse people, who share a common desire to live in harmony, and free from intimidation,” San Leandro Police Lt. Isaac Benabou told KGO-TV. “We welcome people’s rights to express themselves, but not in a manner that infringes upon a community’s sense of security and wellbeing.”

More than 40 churchgoers have come down with coronavirus after attending a service in Frankfurt, Germany, earlier this month, health officials said. Evangelical Christian Baptist Church, where the service took place on May 10, didn’t violate any of the rules aimed at stopping the spread of the virus, the city’s health department told local newspaper Frankfurter Rundschau. “The situation is very dynamic,” the department’s deputy chief Antoni Walczok told the newspaper. Despite the high number of cases linked to the service, most of the congregants who have been diagnosed do not have severe cases, German outlet dpa agency reported. “Most of them are not seriously ill. As far as we know only one person has been admitted to hospital,” Rene Gottschalk, who is head of the city’s health department, told the outlet. The German state of Hesse, where Frankfurt is located, has allowed churches to hold services since May 1 as long as they follow social distancing and hygiene guidelines. With Post wires

A high school swim party is responsible for a cluster of new COVID-19 cases in Arkansas, officials there said. “A high school swim party that I’m sure everybody thought was harmless,” Gov. Asa Hutchinson told reporters of the gathering. “They’re young, they’re swimming, they’re just having activity and positive cases resulted from that,” Hutchinson said, without elaborating on the number who were infected. The carelessness and resulting infections are “just an encouragement for us to be disciplined in our activities,” the governor added. “During this Memorial (Day) weekend, we want to be out and we want to enjoy ourselves, we want to remember this holiday and those that have served our country and given their lives in service of our country. “But let’s be safe and let’s be disciplined at the same time,” he told reporters. The new cases are part of a “second peak” of infections in the state, he said. Arkansas has dealt with the outbreak by closing schools, but has not required residents to stay at home. Earlier this month, two people infected at least 38 members of a rural church in the state — including three who died.

A post shared by Carrie Underwood (@carrieunderwood) on May 23, 2020 at 9:30am PDT Carrie Underwood is officially ready for summer. The 37-year-old-singer shared a photo to Instagram on Saturday showing off her svelte figure in one of her own Calia bikinis. Underwood captioned the shot, in which she wears a printed top with coral-pink bottoms, “Is it summer yet?” The snapshot cames in between updates on her family, husband Mike Fisher, 16-month old Jacob and 5-year-old Isaiah.

HELENA BONHAM CARTER stars in this groundbreaking Cinema Quarantino Production DAS FONE HELL. At vast expense, filmed on two continents over what (seemed like) five years , this profound and heartbreakingly candid insight into Modern Life will shake you to the core (Pilates 101) pic.twitter.com/aVXCfvAyfd — Sam Neill (@TwoPaddocks) May 23, 2020  Golden Globe nominee Helena Bonham Carter and director Sam Neill have proven that being in quarantine doesn’t mean you can’t still get creative — while self-isolating in separate countries, the duo have managed to produce a short entitled “Das Fone Hell,”  reports Entertainment Weekly. The two-minute short film, which Neill posted to his Twitter, features Carter portraying Neill’s iPhone — who is very upset to be left behind for ten minutes when Neill goes out to get groceries. “This profound and heartbreakingly candid insight into Modern Life will shake you to the core,” Neill jokes of the clip. “Think very carefully what might’ve happened in those 10 minutes,” Carter scolds Neill in the clip. “The Kardashians could’ve had another baby. Ariana Grande could’ve dropped a single. Trump could’ve bombed Beijing for ratings…”

Regardless of the outcome of the match or the quality of the golf played, Sunday’s charity showdown between Tiger Woods and Peyton Manning and Phil Mickelson and Tom Brady figures to be good fun and a great show. It is, after all, live golf featuring the biggest stars of this generation in golf and football at a cool golf course, Medalist, that boasts some of the biggest names on the PGA Tour as members … and it’s set to raise some $10 million for COVID-19 relief. Add to that the curiosity factor of seeing Brady and Manning, out of their sporting element, play golf with Woods and Mickelson, should be pure, raw entertainment. It all adds up to an automatic recipe for success. You know what will make the dish even more delicious, though? Some spirited, if salty, banter among the four players, all of whom will be mic’d up for the match. If there could be one complaint about last Sunday’s COVID-19 relief charity match between Rory McIlroy and Dustin Johnson playing Rickie Fowler and Matthew Wolff, it was that the mic’d up banter between them fell surprisingly flat. When Woods and Mickelson faced each other in that mano-a-mano $9 million winner-take-all match in November 2018, the two players were mic’d up, but the back-and-forth was more awkward than entertaining — particularly as Mickelson took the lead on the back nine and Woods, grinding to stay in the match, clammed up. If the weeks and days leading up to Sunday’s match are any indication, there could be some colorful needling among the players at Medalist. Mickelson, after all, carries one of the sharpest needles on the PGA Tour, and Manning is highly underrated for his comedic appeal, having successfully hosted “Saturday Night Live’’ back in the day and currently hosts the entertaining “Peyton’s Places” shorts on ESPN. Woods is more guarded with his barbs, but has an understated way about getting his points across. Of the four participants, Brady probably comes off as the most serious, so his contribution to the banter is less certain. What is certain is this: Phil Mickelson is primed. In an interview with The Post this past week, he was jumping out of his skin over the phone with his smack talk, taunting Woods in particular.  “I’m excited to go to Tiger’s home course,’’ Mickelson said. “He was insistent on us doing this at his home course. He was not happy about losing the first time [in Las Vegas]. And he wants to win badly the second time, so much so that everyone else wanted to play elsewhere and he insisted that we do it at his home course. That just makes me and Tom more motivated to go to his home course and beat him. “Tiger thinks he has a huge advantage playing there. That’s fine. We’ll take it to him and Peyton, and there will be no excuses. Tom and I are going to go down there and put it to them. We’ll make it so that every time Tiger shows up at his home course, he’ll have a bad memory.” Mickelson is embracing the fact that him and Brady are the betting underdogs. “We should absolutely be underdogs,’’ he said. “We’re going to be at Tiger’s home course, and you’ve got Peyton [two] shots lower than Tom on his handicap. … So absolutely, they should be favored, but that motivates Tom and I even more. They’ll have no excuses when we dominate them.’’ In a recent TV interview with the four players to promote the event, when Mickelson bragged about his $9 million win in Vegas, Woods got up from his chair and fetched the green jacket from his fifth Masters victory (Mickelson has three) and jokingly used it as a blanket. Let’s hope for more of that Sunday. Mickelson appears poised to provide it. Hopefully Woods will bring his sharp-tongued A game. “Phil thrives in the smack-talking repartee,’’ Golf Channel analyst Brandel Chamblee told The Post this past week. “He loves to get the needle in, so I suspect Phil will be the one that needles the most.’’ As for Woods? “Throughout my life watching Tiger, listening to him and even playing against him, I’ve always been amazed at how humble he is,’’ Chamblee said. “He’s never really talked smack. He doesn’t walk around like a peacock, doesn’t big-time players. By all comparisons, he’s been pretty darned humble. Tiger has never needed to needle.’’ Hopefully, Woods and the rest of the players will use the needle generously on Sunday. It’ll only add to what already figures to be a fun watch.

The New York Times has dedicated its entire Sunday front page to naming — and humanizing — U.S. coronavirus victims. The unusual, chilling, text-only front page includes heartbreakingly sweet, one-line anecdotes of the lives lost to the virus — some of them young and just finding their footing in life, and others of advanced age whose biographies could have filled an entire Sunday edition. There’s Denise Camille Buczek, 72, from Bristol, Conn., who “loved writing birthday and holiday cards, poems and lists.” And Romi Cohn, 91, New York City, who “saved 56 Jewish families from the Gestapo.” And then Leo Sreebny, 98, of Seattle, who “preferred bolo ties to neckties, suspenders to belts.” The 1,000 miniature obituaries fill six full columns of the broadsheet and then continue inside, yet account for a fraction of the nearly 100,000 U.S. deaths due to the virus. Simone Landon, an assistant editor of the Gray Lady’s graphics desk, explained the front page was a way to find a more personal commemoration of the approaching grim benchmark. “We knew we were approaching this milestone,” she said. “We knew that there should be some way to try to reckon with that number.” Tom Bodkin, the chief creative officer of The Times, said he did not remember a text-only front page in his 40 years at the paper. He believed it was the first such design in the paper’s “modern” era. The paper said that its researcher, Alain Delaquérière, scoured “various sources online” for obituaries and death notices with COVID-19 written as the cause of death. A team of editors and three graduate journalism students then worked to craft the personal phrases for each victim, according to The Times. But one of the first names on the paper’s earlier editions of the front page, Jordan Driver Haynes, 27, didn’t actually die from the virus. He was murdered, according to local reports. Haynes’ body was found in a vehicle left in a wooded area off a highway in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, the local NBC affiliate reported. A spokeswoman for the paper said the error was corrected for subsequent editions.

For socialists and those who lean that way, pandemic time is boom time. Washington is printing and spending money like never before and both parties support sending cash to businesses and the unemployed. Rent and mortgage payments are being deferred, Medicare-for-all is getting a second look and support is growing for a program that would take the nation across the economic Rubicon — a guaranteed basic income. Seldom is heard those cautionary words of yesteryear, “moral hazard.” A time of great need and fear is shattering any stigma about being on the dole. A logical conclusion is that politics will follow culture and Bernie Sanders- and AOC-types will call the shots in America. Unless ­Republicans and conservatives get on board, they will be consigned to history’s dustbin. Perhaps. But pay attention to another potential reaction to the pandemic. Think of it as the revenge of the nonessentials. In early 2016, Peggy Noonan wrote a prescient column in The Wall Street Journal about the battle unfolding in the presidential race. “There are the protected and the unprotected,” she wrote. “The protected make public policy. The unprotected live in it. The unprotected are starting to push back, powerfully.” Hillary Clinton later would call Donald Trump supporters ­“deplorables,” reflecting her elitist disdain for those who didn’t share her advantages. Happily, the unprotected and deplorables carried the day and gave themselves a fierce advocate in the 45th president. Yet the 2020 election presents a similar divide, albeit with different language. The Trump revolution, for all its progress, clearly has more work to do. For by hook and crook, the protected managed to hang on to power. This time they call themselves “essential.” Among the many actions governors and mayors took in the last three months, the decisions about working, shopping, swimming and even praying were hugely consequential. They were also arbitrary and often foolish. Just as the Founders and countless guardians of liberty warned, those with too much power inevitably go too far. Just as inevitably, when government picks winners and losers, the unprotected are the losers. Being designated an “essential” business or employee meant you could keep working, keep your paycheck and standard of living. If you were unfortunate enough to be labeled “nonessential,” you could lose your business, your home and your nest egg. Unless you worked for the government. Despite shutdown orders in New York and other blue states, municipal and state workers continued to get paid even as most didn’t have to work. Although there was bluster from Mayor de Blasio about furloughs and layoffs, there have been none. He even gave raises to his staff, and unionized city workers have not missed a paycheck. While most had nothing to do, some got the merciless tasks of making sure that nonessentials didn’t work. In an especially galling example, Post reporters caught city inspectors staking out upscale neighborhoods to catch contractors working despite a state ban. One inspector said a violation occurs as soon as a contractor “steps onto the property.” “The fine for having any work done is $10,000. First offense. No exceptions,” he said. Carpenters, painters, floor sanders and others are subject to fines of up to $5,000 for each employee. A contractor said he was working in Brooklyn when an inspector “boxed in my truck” with his car “and ran into the house I was working on.” “He told the homeowner he was getting a $10,000 fine and I was getting fined $5,000 for each employee,” the contractor said. “I had to prove I was fixing the heat before he let us off.” The arbitrary distinction between essential and nonessential recalls the gag about the difference between a recession and a depression. A recession is when your neighbor loses his job, a ­depression is when you lose your job. De Blasio, predictably, has been consistently erratic. He ruled that wading and surfing in the Atlantic Ocean are fine, but swimming is not. At one point he threatened to put up fences to keep people out of the water. Many governors drew similarly ridiculous red lines, with nearly all states with stay-at-home orders allowing liquor stores to open but banning AA meetings. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer made it legal to buy and sell lottery tickets but not carpets, furniture and paint. Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker said private motorboats could carry two people, but not three or four. Bans against large gatherings are a flashpoint for the faithful as well as First Amendment advocates. New York, New Jersey, Illinois, Oregon and Vermont are among those states where stay-at-home orders do not exempt religious institutions, and court fights are erupting around the country. In California, more than 1,200 pastors signed a “declaration of essentiality” and an attorney said he expects 3,000 churches to open May 31 “with or without permission.” Naturally, most of Big Media favor extreme shutdowns, which are happening primarily in states with Democratic governors. It’s possible the journalists are genuinely concerned about the health of their fellow Americans, but it’s more likely they see economic ­catastrophe as bad for Trump. The New York Times, which congenitally opposes good news with Trump in the White House, said in a recent Page One headline: “New Cases in U.S. Slow, Posing Risk of Complacency.” Concerned about the sweeping stay-at-home orders, Attorney General Bill Barr appointed a task force to see if they are infringing on constitutional rights, especially regarding religion. A department statement said, “There is no pandemic exception to the Constitution and its Bill of Rights.” Trump weighed in Friday and used the magic words to boost religious freedom, declaring that churches, synagogues and mosques are “essential places that provide essential services” and urging governors to open them. As the president put it, “In America, we need more prayer, not less.” Finally, somebody in government sees the light: Praying is ­essential. Reader Ruth Ort writes: “Tonight I read the article about the conditions at the Roosevelt Island hospital and wept. What those nurses found should have been documented. These images are what nightmares are made of and there should be public outcry for change.” Joe Biden deserves the pounding he is getting for his condescending “you ain’t black” statement about black Americans who even consider voting for Trump. In truth, his attitude reflects a larger problem on the left: the view that race, gender and other identities are more important than individual liberty. Recall Madeleine Albright’s line that there is a “special place in hell” for women who didn’t support Hillary Clinton. And Clinton blamed her defeat on women who voted as their husbands ordered, the implication being that all women should have voted in lockstep for her. Forget the Declaration of Independence. These Dems endorse the Declaration of Conformity.

The percentage of people coming up positive for the coronavirus in Missouri was artificially low because the state combined two kinds of testing results, according to a report. The state was mixing the results of tests for the COVID-19 virus, which show active infection, with those from antibody testing, which demonstrate prior infection, the Kansas City Star reported. State data as of Friday showed about 6.5 percent of tests were positive. But after separating the two types of tests, the data revealed 8.3 percent of tests for active infection were positive along with four percent of antibody tests, the newspaper reported.

One minor league team is thinking outside of the box to make money during the novel coronavirus pandemic. The Pensacola Blue Wahoos, the Twins’ Double-A affiliate, are offering up their stadium in Pensacola, Fla. on Airbnb. For $1,500 (plus fees) a night in which a group of up to 10 people can have their run of the Blue Wahoos Stadium. According to the team, this is the first time a baseball stadium has ever been put up for a rental service. If purchased, fans will get access to the stadium and all of its amenities, such as the clubhouse, batting cage, field and batting practice setup. There is a bedroom next to the clubhouse that can fit 10. “Guests are welcome to hit from home plate, play catch in the outfield, run the bases, enjoy a picnic in the outfield, or find other creative uses for the field!” reads the listing. The team has been busy trying to make money without a minor league season. It has hosted a nine-hole disc golf course on the weekend and there will be a movie and fireworks night coming up.

A testy Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Saturday again blamed federal guidance — not himself — for New York’s deadly policy of shunting thousands of coronavirus patients from hospitals into nursing homes. “New York followed the president’s agency’s guidance,” Cuomo said during his daily briefing on Saturday, in response to questions about his March 25 directive that nursing homes not turn down COVID-19 patients. “What New York did was to follow what the Republican administration said to do. Don’t criticize the state for following the presidents policies,” he said. There are 3,094 confirmed nursing home COVID-19 deaths in New York, a lower number than in any of the surrounding states, officials say. But the governor insisted he would not be drawn into a grudge match with the federal government. “I’m a big boy. I refuse to politicize this discussion,” he said. “I have no political agenda, I have no political aspirations, there’s no politics here.” Blame for the nursing home deaths and the misguided policy that contributed to them have been a longstanding thorn in the governor’s side. “They should ask President Trump,” about the deaths, Cuomo griped Wednesday. “I think that will stop the conversation.” According to an Associated Press tally, more than 4,500 COVID-19 patients were sent to nursing homes under the state directive — a tally the wire service says Cuomo has not addressed.

Wearing a face covering to stop the spread of coronavirus should not be a political issue, said North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum, who pleaded for folks to “dial up your empathy.” He wants his state to skip what he called a “senseless dividing line” around wearing masks, Burgum said. “If someone is wearing a mask, they’re not doing it to represent what political party they’re in or what candidates they support. They might be doing it because they have a 5-year-old child who’s been going through cancer treatments,” Burgum said Friday, his voice breaking as he became emotional. “They might have vulnerable adults in their life who currently have COVID and they’re fighting.” Burgum, a Republican, said he wanted his state to be “North Dakota kind” and “North Dakota empathetic.” The state does not have a requirement to wear masks. A clip of Burgum speaking that was tweeted by The Recount has been viewed more than 1 million times.

Linda Bouferguen may have single-handedly saved the holiday weekend in New York. The young Brooklyn nursing student was twice arrested this month outside City Hall for violating the state’s lockdown on nonessential gatherings during small, socially distanced demonstrations against New York’s shutdown. But the pandemic-induced ban violated her First Amendment rights, insisted Bouferguen, who watched Gov. Andrew Cuomo make exceptions this week to the “no gathering” rules for Memorial Day and religious events — but not protests. She sought official permission to hold another demonstration and when she was ignored, Bouferguen went to court. With the help of the New York Civil Liberties Union, Bouferguen filed a federal lawsuit against Cuomo Friday. Hours later, the gov abruptly reversed course on lockdown rules forbidding non-essential gatherings and protests. Of course, the change also means traditional Memorial Day events like barbecues, house parties and other get togethers now have a green light, provided the events have less than 10 people and abide by social distancing rules. “I don’t consider myself a hero,” said Bouferguen, 32. “Any American would have done what I did.” Bouferguen, who was born in the former Soviet Union, was surrounded by 24 police officers as she stood outside City Hall May 8 waving an American flag with a handful of other demonstrators, including her 52-year-old mom, Elena. “This should never happen in America,” she said, describing how she was handcuffed, forced into a police van and issued a summons. When she returned to protest the following day, she was arrested again, Bouferguen said. For Bouferguen, who used to work at a small accounting firm that saw 20 of their clients shutter their businesses as a result of the coronavirus pandemic, the legal victory is bittersweet. “I know people who committed suicide because they lost everything, nurses who lost their jobs and others who suffered heart attacks because hospitals wouldn’t care for them,” she told The Post. “This just has to stop.” Bouferguen moved to the US with her parents 20 years ago after her father, a native of Algeria who had fled to Russia during the Cold War, was “constantly harassed” by police and the military when the Chechen War began, during the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991. “He was dark-skinned, and I guess they thought he was a terrorist,” she said. “We never protested in Russia because we were not allowed, but when the Soviet Union collapsed, my mother went out into the streets,” she said, adding her mother is “very proud” of her determination to protest outside City Hall. RICHARD HARBUS RICHARD HARBUS View Slideshow On Saturday, Bourferguen returned to City Hall carrying the Stars and Stripes, and a hand-drawn placard that said: “This is no longer about the virus. This is about freedom.” She was accompanied by five other demonstrators. “What all of this means is that one person can really change things,” said Bouferguen. “But it’s really a small victory. Imagine what we could do if a lot of people decide to rise up and change things.” As for Memorial Day celebrations, Bouferguen told The Post she is going to a barbecue Monday in New Jersey.

Before quarantine, Jenna McPhail, 26, spent her weekend nights drinking at dive bars in Williamsburg or at concerts. An analyst for a record label, she quit alcohol in February, and said lockdown has helped her stay on the wagon. I’ve always had issues with drinking. I never liked who I was when I was drunk, it was so expensive to maintain, and I wasn’t getting much out of it. I went cold turkey, and it’s helped so much that lockdown has removed the temptation to go out on a weeknight with friends, or to a bar with my boyfriend. I feel more empowered when I don’t have people yelling in my ear or a bartender saying, “Can I get you anything?” I think it would’ve been hard to stay sober without the lockdown. This forced reset is a really good thing for me. I’ve also carefully curated my social media feed with positive messages instead of ones like “I’ve earned a glass of whiskey.” The wine mommy culture is annoying, and when I realized I needed to stop drinking, I pulled myself away from those messages online. I’m reading a ton of blogs and websites, like Tempest, to figure out how other people have done this. I won’t lie: I’m still fighting urges, and it’s a hurdle every single day. This has given me time to build healthy habits. Going to my favorite spots will be a cool test, like, “Can I do this without alcohol?” I think the answer will be Yes. — As told to Suzy Weiss Read more about silver linings from the coronavirus pandemic. 

Joana Silva, 39, co-owns La Bicyclette Bakery in Williamsburg and lives in StuyTown, in Manhattan, with her partner and 3-month-old daughter. In typical New York fashion, we all live one on top of the other — but we don’t talk to our neighbors. I’m part of a Stuyvesant Moms Facebook group. You could just tell people are down. We’re all indoors, and it’s just frickin’ depressing. So I asked if anyone would be interested in getting bread and croissants delivered. A woman in the building next door responded, and when I went to drop off the bread I realized we’ve seen each other around in the joint park area between our buildings. Adva and I both have little babies, you would think we would have spoken. But we started talking that day, and now we talk and text and see each other all the time. I’m so excited to invite her over for a drink when I can. — As told to Marisa Dellatto Read more about silver linings from the coronavirus pandemic. 

It looks bizarre. It looks strange. It looks so very 2020. The German soccer league Bundesliga’s match between Borussia Mönchengladbach and Bayer Leverkusen on May 23 used cardboard pictures of fans to fill the seats at Borussia-Park in Moenchengladbach, Germany. Also included were cutouts of legendary players of Borussia Mönchengladbach’s past. The visitors, Borussia Mönchengladbach, were also represented. In all, there were 20,000 cardboard cutouts, Yahoo Sports reported. The match was played without actual fans due to the novel coronavirus pandemic. Other leagues around the world are discussing similar plans – the Hungarian first division soccer match featuring Ferencvarosi TC against Debreceni VSC had cardboard cutouts as well — plans that may be used in American when professional sports get going again. At least initially, fans aren’t expected to be allowed to attend games. The Post’s Andrew Marchand reported that ESPN, Fox, NBC, CBS and Turner Sports have discussed experimenting with virtual reality to enhance the at-home viewing experience, by superimposing realistic-looking fans onto screens. “How do we produce TV if we were starting from scratch and wanted to take advantage of everything that is out there and we didn’t want the show to suffer?” Fox Sports executive vice president Brad Zager said. Added ESPN’s executive vice president of production Stephanie Druley: “Audio becomes a big issue. Now, you can pick up everything that is being said. We have had discussions about really leaning into the audio as part of the broadcast.” “If you did that, would you put things on a very quick delay? Yeah, you probably would. We learned a lot from the XFL and our ability to mic and have the kind of audio access we had.”

After two months holed up in our tiny Manhattan apartment, my fiancé and I decided to rent a car and skip town for a remote corner of the Outer Banks of North Carolina. What we found was a different world where sweet normalities have been preserved — or returned. Never before have I felt like such a Yankee on the other side of the Mason-Dixon line.  Dare County, where part of Outer Banks are located, has only two active COVID-19 cases. The statewide stay-home order was lifted Friday, and businesses including hair salons and restaurants, were allowed to open at half capacity. When we dined out Friday (for the first time since March 13), our waitress said we were the only customers to wear masks all night. And we walked in five minutes before closing time.  I saw the side-eyes from the other diners, and when staff asked where we were from, I impulsively blurted out: “Ohio!” — my home state where I haven’t lived since 2017. Just three months ago, I’d have been proud to tell the truth that I’m a New Yorker.  Some of the behavior at the Sunset Grille seafood restaurant, which was allowed to open at 50 percent capacity on Friday, would cause a multi-unit police response in New York City. “3, 2, 1, COVID-19!” a man yelled as he snapped a photo for a large group, their arms wrapped around each other as they crowded around the bar along with at least a dozen others.  While some patrons didn’t seem to be practicing pandemic protocols, the restaurant appeared to. We sat outside on a massive wooden deck and the nearest table was more than 20 feet away. The silverware was wrapped in plastic. Our server only once came to our table without her mask, what she said was an accident before nervously pulling one out of her apron. When we left, ketchup bottles marked “sanitized” were set aside and the smell of bleach hit our nostrils. At grocery stores and gas stations, store clerks go bare-faced behind plexiglass. A sign outside Walmart said only that masks were recommended — a far cry from the intimidating warnings posted on the doors of Manhattan grocery stores. Groups of teens gather on the beach and families congregate outside of ice cream parlors.  The scenes are refreshing, but also unsettling.  Was this trip safe? That I don’t know, but I can tell you that the coronavirus turns normal vacation mishaps into awkward and possibly dangerous human interactions.  We had to rely on a sheriff’s deputy and Good Samaritan to pull our SUV out of the sand, and our Airbnb owner let us borrow her 4WD vehicle. None of them wore masks as they leaned in our windows or helpfully hopped in the driver’s seat. I felt a bit strange wearing mine while they went bare-faced — like I was suggesting they were untrustworthy. Now I really need a casserole dish, and the neighbor’s house is a lot closer than the nearest store.  Do we really know which one is “safer” anyway?

Eighty-four people died from COVID-19 in the 24 hours preceding the governor’s late morning press briefing. That’s down from 109 the previous day — and the lowest daily toll since March 24. “If you can get under 100, I think you can breathe a sigh of relief,” Cuomo said from the governor’s mansion in Albany. “It’s still a tragedy, but the fact that it’s down is good.” He continued: “It doesn’t do any good for those 84 families who are feeling the pain. But for me it’s just a sign that we’re making real progress and I feel really good about that.” Single day fatalities in New York peaked on April 7, when 799 died from COVID-19. Statewide, 23,279 people have so far died from the virus. Of Friday’s 84 dead, 62 passed away in hospitals, while 22 others died in nursing homes, the governor said. Cuomo again blamed federal guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention — not himself — for New York’s policy of shunting thousands of coronavirus patients from hospitals into nursing homes. “New York followed the president’s agency’s guidance,” a test Cuomo insisted, in response to questions about his March 25 directive that nursing homes not turn down COVID-19 patients. At least 4,500 infected patients were sent to nursing homes across the state; close to 3,100 people have died of the virus in those facilities so far. The number of patients currently hospitalized fell to just over 4,600; the number intubated dropped by 111 over the previous day, and new cases “walking in the door” at hospitals Friday dropped to 208, from 255 the day before. There were 1,772 new cases reported in the state’s 62 counties, pushing the total to 359,926. At the apex of the crisis, the state reported as many as 3,100 new cases a day. Still, despite the encouraging data, the virus, “can rear its ugly head at any moment,” which is why wearing a mask remains important, Cuomo stressed. “The social acceptance and culture of being New York tough,” is the reason the state has turned the corner, he said. “We’re united, we’re disciplined. This is all about discipline now.” Cuomo said the Mid-Hudson — the area north of the Big Apple along the river and south of Albany — will re-open Tuesday as long as the number of deaths continues to decrease and their coronavirus tracing programs are fully staffed. It will be the eighth region to reopen. “If we can get them trained over the Memorial Day weekend, we can open on Tuesday,” the governor said. Long Island is on track to open Wednesday, Cuomo said. Of the five boroughs, Staten Island has been the most eager to re-open, even though the rate of infection there continues to hover around 3,000 per 100,000, among the highest in the city. State Sen. Andrew Lanza, two assembly members and two council members sent a letter to the governor claiming the borough has met the state’s reopening criteria. A week ago, 200 Staten Island small business owners rallied to demand the lockdown end. Citywide, the daily number of new positive tests, hospitalizations and deaths also continued their downward trend, good news that Mayor de Blasio attributed to increased testing and an adherence to social distancing rules. The city’s 150 testing sites are generating 20,000 tests a day, he said Saturday. That number will rise to 50,000 tests a day soon, he said. Aggressive testing and contact tracing, combined with continuing social-distancing, are key to containing the virus, he said. Nationally, the number of total positive coronavirus cases topped 1.6 million, still more than in any other country. Total deaths approached 97,000 on Saturday. Much of California is reopening business as their numbers, too, level off — but a farming region near the Mexico border has experienced a spike in cases. A spokesman for the largest hospital in the area — the Imperial Valley east of San Diego — said that the spike may be caused by American citizens living in nearby Mexicali, Mexico crossing the border for treatment in the US. Worldwide, there were more than 5 million confirmed COVID-19 cases, and deaths exceeded 340,000 Saturday. In one positive sign, China — where the pandemic originated — reported its first day of what it says are zero coronavirus-related fatalities. Additional reporting by Georgett Roberts and Dana Kennedy

A Bolivian pan flute orchestra has been stuck in quarantine on the grounds of a grand 15th century palace outside of Berlin for two months. Over 20 members of the Orquesta Experimental de Instrumentos Nativos have been stuck on the grounds and buildings of Rheinsberg Palace, a castle, complete with moat, which has housed generations of German royals, according to the BBC. The group arrived in Germany on March 10 expecting to perform at the MaerzMusik festival — the same day Germany announced its ban on large gatherings, swiftly followed by a full country lockdown. A week later Bolivia closed its borders — and the group was stranded at the 600 acre estate surrounded by 23 packs of wolves and haunted by the ghost of Frederick the Great. “We all joke that Frederick’s ghost is following us and trying to trip us up,” Camed Martela told the BBC. “I don’t usually believe in such things but it does feel as if there are ghosts on the grounds.” Tracy Prado, who just joined the orchestra in December, ran into wolves during one of her walks. “I froze in fear but they were just play fighting and moved on,” she said. To pass the time, the group practices up to six hours a day, takes walks (looking out for wolves) and plays soccer. Locals have donated food and clothing but the stay is getting expensive. Berno Odo Polzer, the director of MaerzMusik, estimated to the BBC that costs have exceeded $35,000 a month – and while Germany is allowing international flights, Bolivia’s borders are still shut. The Bolivian embassy told the BBC it is trying to get the orchestra out by early June via Madrid, although they didn’t comment on how the musicians would get from Rheinsberg to Madrid. In the meantime, “there are worse places to be trapped,” Miguel Cordoba told the BBC. “When I wake up, I watch the sun rise over the forest and the lake. Back home, I only hear the sound of traffic.”

Senate Republicans are ridiculing House Democrats for their refusal to return to work on Capitol Hill over COVID-19 concerns. “I hope hand lotion doesn’t cause cancer, because we’ve been using a lot of it,” Sen. John Kennedy (R-Louisiana) joked to Politico about the copious amounts of hand sanitizer and antibacterial wipes stationed throughout the Senate chamber and committee rooms. “The Democratic House of Representatives has essentially put itself on paid leave for months,” Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said on the Senate floor Thursday. “At this point, I’m wondering if we should send senators over there to collect their newspaper and water the plants.” Since the Senate resumed in-person sessions three weeks ago, only one staffer has tested positive for COVID-19 — even though the nation’s capital remains one of its worst coronavirus hot spots, Dr. Deborah Birx of the Coronavirus Task Force said Friday. “To the degree that no one’s gotten ill, we’re safely opening,” Sen. Bill Cassidy (R-Louisiana) said. “We cannot stay locked down for 18 months.” The House last week authorized proxy voting for the first time in its history, allowing almost all of its members to stay home as the pandemic continues — despite Republican objections that the move is unconstitutional. The Senate has plowed ahead on confirmations in the House’s absence. In the past three days the Republican majority awarded top administration positions to two Trump allies and confirmed three nominees to district court judgeships — for a total of 196 new judges since Trump took office.

The federal government is warning that essential workers and authority figures — public and private — are at the highest risk of being attacked by stay-at-home resisters as the coronavirus pandemic drags on. Counterterrorism analysts at the Department of Homeland Security notified law enforcement officials and government leaders of their findings Thursday, according to ABC News, which obtained the report. “Some illicit actors probably will view any continued state-mandated orders as government overreach, and anticipated safety guidelines and policies—specifically the use of face masks—probably also will serve as a driving factor behind continued violent incidents related to the pandemic,” the analysts wrote. Protesters have responded violently to the mandatory lockdowns that virtually all the states imposed — and now are beginning to lift. Early in May, white supremacists posted a sheriff’s private information online because they were angry over the arrest of a Colorado man who had encouraged others to carry firearms at an anti-lockdown demonstration. At the state level, Missouri has notified the customers and coworkers of a hair stylist who had symptoms of the infection. As many as 84 clients and seven employees at a Great Clips in Springfield may have been exposed from May 12 to May 20, according to the Springfield-Greene County Health Department. Health Director Clay Goddard was confident his staff could contain the spread, particularly since everyone had been wearing masks. “But I’m going to be honest with you, we can’t have many more of these. We can’t make this a regular habit or our capability as a community will be strained and we will have to reevaluate what things look like going forward.” Gov. Mike Parson lifted many of the state’s stay-at-home order on May 4; the state has more than 11,500 diagnosed cases and nearly 700 deaths.

Spain, one of Europe’s hardest hit coronavirus hotspots, plans to reopen for foreign tourists, beginning July 1. That was the message directed to foreign travelers from Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez on Saturday, UK’s The Sun reported. “From now, foreign tourists can plan their vacations in our country,” he said. “We will guarantee that tourists will not run any risks and they will not bring us any risks. There will be no opposing forces between health and business.” There are more than 230,000 confirmed COVID-19 cases in Spain and nearly 29,000 deaths, according to data collected by Johns Hopkins University.

Post-pandemic travel in Europe is shaping up as the battle of the quarantines with France imposing two-week reciprocal lockdowns on its neighbors when travel resumes next month. Travelers to France from the UK will have to self-isolate for 14 days from June 8, the French government said last week. The announcement came on the heels of a similar quarantine plan announced by the British government from the same date for travelers from France, the BBC reported. Upon arriving in the UK travelers will be required to inform government authorities where they will quarantine, and face enforcement through random spot checks and fines of more than $1,200, said Home Secretary Priti Patel at a press briefing in London Friday. Truck drivers, health workers, seasonal farm workers and travelers from Ireland will be exempt from the UK quarantine measures, she said.

The Department of Justice moved to intervene in an Illinois lawsuit challenging the state’s right to extend COVID-19 lockdowns. The agency filed a statement of interest Friday on behalf of the complaint by state Rep. Darren Bailey, who says lockdowns imposed by Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker have gone too far. State law allows lockdowns to go for 30 days. “In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Governor of Illinois has, over the past two months, sought to rely on authority under the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act to impose sweeping limitations on nearly all aspects of life for citizens of Illinois, significantly impairing in some instances their ability to maintain their economic livelihoods,” the agency said in a statement obtained by Fox News. “According to the lawsuit, the Governor’s actions are not authorized by state law, as they extend beyond the 30-day time period imposed by the Illinois legislature for the Governor’s exercise of emergency powers granted under the Act,” the statement continued. Months of lockdown around the United States has succeeded in flattening the curve of the deadly pandemic, which has suffered the highest death toll of any nation, with more than 1.6 million infections reported and more than 96,000 deaths.

Investigators slapped the Hebrew Home in Riverdale with several violations after a Post report revealed scores of coronavirus deaths there went uncounted by state officials. The state Department of Health said it issued a “statement of deficiencies” to the nursing home with violations that included “infection control concerns, failure to report accurately upon request by the department, and failure to communicate with families and residents in a timely fashion regarding COVID-19 deaths.” The 751-bed nursing home has to submit a correction plan to be reviewed by the DOH. It could face fines ranging up to $10,000 if any violation directly resulted in patient harm, the DOH said. The agency’s probe came after The Post reported that 119 people had died at the home from March 1 through early May, although the home said it had just 14 COVID-19 related deaths at the facility and another 11 residents who died in the hospital. After the DOH launched its probe, the Hebrew Home was forced to go through the records of everyone who died and substantially revised its count. It said as of Monday 28 deaths were reclassified as possibly COVID-19 related bringing the total to 63 since March 1. A Hebrew Home spokesman said the DOH found only “minor deficiencies” after its inspection, including problems related to signs on residents’ doors and the types of questions asked of staff about exposure to COVID-19. The communication lapses were tied to the reclassification of the COVID-19 deaths, spokeswoman Wendy Steinberg said. “Since these were not classified as COVID-related cases, we did not communicate about them at the time. All reclassified residents have been reported,” she said. She said the home had been adhering to federal regulations to notify families of COVID-19 deaths at the facility, which took effect on May 8.

Queens lawmaker Eric Ulrich is demanding the City Council investigate Gov. Cuomo’s handling of the COVID-19 crisis in nursing homes, where thousands of residents have perished. Specifically, the Republican councilman wants to probe Cuomo’s controversial executive order mandating that nursing homes and other longterm care facilities admit seniors still positive for coronavirus after being discharged from hospitals. Ulrich said the decision was deadly to the “most vulnerable among us.” “As a body, we should immediately commence an investigation into the Governor’s handling of the nursing homes throughout this crisis,” the legislator wrote Friday in a letter to Council Speaker Corey Johnson and Councilman Ritchie Torres, who chairs the Committee on Oversight and Investigation. “If he tries to impede that investigation in any way, the City Council should utilize our subpoena power to compel testimony,” Ulrich continued. “Thus far, the Governor has avoided answering tough questions about his decision. His recent appearance on CNN’s Cuomo Prime Time was equally disgraceful,” Ulrich blasted, mocking the frequently silly and un-substantive interviews Cuomo regularly gives on the CNN primetime show hosted by his brother, serial non-social distancer, Chris Cuomo. The call for a probe follows New York’s GOP Congress members demanding an inquiry by Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar and Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services administrator Seema Verma. Though his initial response to the pandemic had been widely praised, Cuomo has come under growing scrutiny for the March 25 executive order which allowed COVID-19 to spread rapidly in nursing homes. So far at least 5,800 seniors have died in nursing homes and other longtime care facilities. Florida — which issued an order around the same time keeping COVID-19 patients out of nursing homes — has seen one-seventh of the nursing-home deaths New York has suffered.

A couple of months ago, the media, almost as one, decided that Gov. Ron DeSantis was a public menace who was going to get Floridians killed with his lax response to the coronavirus crisis. In an interview with National Review, DeSantis says he was surprised at “how knee-jerk” the hostile coverage was, but he “also knew that none of these people knew anything about Florida at all, so I didn’t care what they were saying.” The conventional wisdom has begun to change about Florida, as the disaster so widely predicted hasn’t materialized. It’s worth delving into the state’s response because it is the opposite of the media narrative of a Trump-friendly governor disregarding the facts to pursue a reckless agenda. DeSantis and his team have followed the science closely from the beginning, which is why they forged a nuanced approach, but one that focused like a laser on the most vulnerable population, those in nursing homes. An irony of the national coverage of the coronavirus crisis is that at the same time DeSantis was being made into a villain, New York Gov. Cuomo was being elevated as a hero, even though the DeSantis approach to nursing homes was obviously superior to that of Cuomo. Florida went out of its way to get COVID-19-positive people out of nursing homes, while New York went out of its way to get them in, a policy now widely acknowledged to have been a debacle. The media didn’t exactly have their eyes on the ball. “The day that the media had their first big freakout about Florida was March 15th,” DeSantis recalls. “There were people on Clearwater Beach, and it was this big deal. That same day is when we signed the executive order to, one, ban visitation in the nursing homes, and two, ban the reintroduction of a COVID-positive patient back into a nursing home.” DeSantis is bemused by the obsession with Florida’s beaches. When they opened in Jacksonville, it was a big national story, usually relayed with a dire tone. “Jacksonville has almost no COVID activity outside of a nursing-home context,” he says. “Their hospitalizations are down, ICU down since the beaches opened a month ago. And yet, nobody talks about it. It’s just like, ‘OK, we just move on to the next target.’ ” So how did DeSantis go about responding to the epidemic? It began with the data … Learn from the Evidence At the outset, DeSantis looked at South Korea’s experience, which he says “had no fatalities under 30, and then 80 percent of them were 70 and above or something like that. It was really, really dramatic.” Then there was Italy: “I think the median age of fatality was something like 82 in some of those areas in Northern Italy … That really helped inform the strategy to focus most of our efforts on the at-risk groups.” The DeSantis team also didn’t put much stock in dire projections. Instead, “we started really focusing on just what we saw.” Florida was better able to do that than many states because of its routine experience dealing with natural disasters. “Many states simply did not have the data infrastructure that Florida has,” says Mary Mayhew, secretary of Florida’s Agency for Healthcare Administration. “We have an emergency status system that gets stood up in the case of a hurricane. Hospitals and nursing homes and other long-term-care providers are required to submit data on a daily basis, twice-daily basis, regarding their bed availability.” The Florida Department of Health produces a report that DeSantis sees every morning: new cases, number of tests, positivity rates, etc. He also gets a rundown of the people who have gone into hospitals and of ICU usage. He can follow the key indicators down to the county level. He cites the example of rural Hamilton County. It had 67 cases the other day. DeSantis was able to call the surgeon general of the state to find out what was going on and learn it was an outbreak in a prison rather than a wider community spread. His focus has been on “clinically significant cases” and that pointed to the nursing homes. First, Protect the Nursing Homes  Florida has roughly 350,000 residents and staff at more than 4,000 long-term-care facilities, and the state took precautions with its seniors generally. “We advised, before there was even mitigation,” DeSantis points out, “if you’re 65 and older, stay home as much as possible and avoid crowds.” Inspectors and assessment teams also visited nursing homes. Florida, DeSantis notes, “required all staff and any worker that entered to be screened for COVID illness, temperature checks. Anybody that’s symptomatic would just simply not be allowed to go in.” And it required staff to wear PPE. “We put our money where our mouth is,” he continues. “We ended up sending a total of 10 million masks just to our long-term-care facilities, a million gloves, half a million face shields.” Florida fortified the hospitals with PPE, too, but DeSantis realized that it wouldn’t do the hospitals any good if infection in the nursing homes ran out of control: “If I can send PPE to the nursing homes, and they can prevent an outbreak there, that’s going to do more to lower the burden on hospitals than me just sending them another 500,000 N95 masks.” When the state was seeing infections at nursing homes presumably caused by staff, DeSantis deployed what he calls “an expeditionary testing force” — 50 National Guard teams of four guardsmen together with Department of Health personnel that tested staff and residents. Most facilities haven’t had confirmed cases. “But the ones that have,” he says, “the majority of them have had between one and five infections. So the infections are identified, but then, you’re isolating either the individual or the small cluster before you have an outbreak.” The state has just deployed a mobile testing lab in an RV that has a rapid test with results in an hour or two. It has also started a sentinel surveillance program for long-term-care facilities, routinely taking representative samples to monitor for flare-ups. Finally, it has established several COVID-19-only nursing homes, with a couple more in the pipeline. The idea, again, is to get COVID-19-positive residents out of the regular nursing homes to the maximum extent possible. Diverse State, Diverse Approaches  At the same time, Florida was giving its counties latitude in how they reacted to the crisis. “I said from the beginning,” DeSantis explains, “we’re a big, diverse state. Even at this point, 60 percent of our cases have come from just three counties.” DeSantis issued his own statewide order, but he argues that it was more flexible and less prescriptive than those of other states. “We basically had businesses operating. We had the day cares open, we had recreation open, and my order never actually closed any businesses. We allowed them to operate within the context of just limiting contact between people outside the household.” He was relaxed from the beginning about outdoor activities, even as critics sounded the alarm about the beaches: “I always believed that respiratory viruses were less likely to be transmitted in a hot outdoor environment, and then you started to see the studies come in, in March, saying that that’s what it was.” He thinks that the relatively short, relatively capacious shutdown order has allowed Florida to be ahead of the curve of reopening of the more restrictive states. DeSantis maintains that “what we did in March and April is the equivalent of what New York will be or California, when they go to phase three.” Looking ahead, he says, “being measured and being thoughtful and just following data is important.” But “outside of southeast Florida, we’re not seeing a huge amount of community transmission, which is a good sign.” Of course, testing will continue to be a priority, as it has been all along. Perhaps things will still go wrong in Florida, but no one can say that the state hasn’t taken a thoughtful approach to the crisis. Or, no one can reasonably say that — which, of course, hasn’t stopped many journalists. “I view it more as a badge of honor that I was doing a good job,” DeSantis says, “and that they viewed me as a target, because if I wasn’t, they probably would just ignore me.” This piece has been adapted from the original, first published in National Review, where Rich Lowry is the editor. @richlowry

COVID-19 has sent Americans reeling. We’ve seen things we cannot ignore: the sufferings of our most vulnerable and the understated heroism of our frontline health-care workers. This weekend our country recognizes heroes of another kind: the men and women who gave their lives to protect our country. Memorial Day is not a “holiday” but a sacred day, particularly for those of us who loved or served with people who “gave the last full measure of devotion.” What’s the connection between the heartbreak and havoc of the past two months, and Memorial Day? The pandemic and its global chaos have shown the value of American freedoms. From Crispus Attucks, the African American who was the first casualty in our fight for independence, to Staff Sgt. Marshal Roberts and Specialist Juan Covarrubias, the most recent Americans killed in action overseas, these American heroes are why our coronavirus experience — in all its messiness — is radically different from that of citizens of China, Russia, Iran and elsewhere. Americans can criticize our leaders’ management of the crisis without fear of disappearing like Chinese citizen journalists. Our nurses can alert the public to shortages of medical equipment without suspiciously falling out of windows like Russian doctors. Our government cannot force medical teams to work without masks to prop up the fiction that COVID-19 isn’t spreading, as the Iranian regime did to its emergency room physicians. These are not insignificant matters. Freedom is easily taken for granted in times of health and prosperity, but becomes paramount in times of societal crisis. We owe a debt of gratitude to the heroes resting in Arlington, Normandy and countless local cemeteries across the country where those lives are honored still. Many of our fallen servicemen and women have died in remote locales and with little fanfare — especially in the latter years of the post-9/11 era. There is support from the local community, some news coverage, and then the rest of the world inevitably returns to normal life. But their families don’t. A sudden, uninvited knock at the door changes their lives forever. Memorial Day for them isn’t a federal holiday or a single 24 hours of remembrance — it’s a way of life. These days, that trauma often plays out far from the public eye. But the visible dedication of our medical personnel during this pandemic, who have chosen a profession of healing and caring despite great personal risk, can provide an insight into the sacrifices of America’s fallen warriors and their families. They, too, spend days unable to communicate with loved ones, fearing for their safety, before a notification from a stranger brings that experience to its final close. They, too, are deprived of a final goodbye. Our response to COVID-19 may have been imperfect, but there is still no other country I would rather live in than the United States. And this Memorial Day, perhaps even more than most, we should all take a moment to reflect on the sacrifices of our fallen, be grateful for the freedoms they preserved, and pray for peace and solace for their families. James F. Hasson is a former Army Captain, Afghanistan veteran and the author of “Stand Down: How Social Justice Warriors Are Sabotaging America’s Military” (Gateway Editions), out now.

President Trump is back in the swing. The duffer-in-chief returned to the golf course Saturday for the first time since March 8 — when he abruptly stopped his regular trips to the links amid the coronavirus crisis. After leaving the White House, he spent more than three hours with three unidentified companions and his Secret Service detail at Trump National in Sterling, Virginia. Trump drove the course alone in his own cart – demonstrating the social-distancing precautions that his White House coronavirus adviser, Dr. Deborah Birx, outlined Friday. “You can be outside and you can play golf,” Birx said at a White House press conference – as long as players remain six feet apart. Trump has stuck to the White House for almost every weekend since issuing stay-at-home recommendations to curb the spread of COVID-19 — but has pressed for a national reopening in recent days. His 76-day golf layoff is the longest of his presidency. “I do miss it,” Trump said May 17, when he called in to NBC’s coverage of a charity skins match featuring Rory McIlroy, Dustin Johnson, Rickie Fowler and Matthew Wolff. “I haven’t played really since this problem that we have started,” he said mournfully.

Gamblers, keep your fingers crossed: Las Vegas casinos are slotted to reopen June 4 after shutting down nearly three months ago because of the coronavirus. Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak settled on the date after the number of COVID-19 infections — both confirmed cases and hospitalizations — have continued to drop since he lifted restrictions on a handful of businesses nearly two weeks ago, NBC News reported. Sisolak expects to give more details about the next phase of the reopening Tuesday, provided the number of infections keeps dropping through the Memorial Day weekend. Also Tuesday, state gambling regulators will meet will consider reopening plans that must be submitted by each casino; the Gaming Control Board needs to sign off on a casino’s blueprint at least seven days before guests can walk through the door.

Immunity to the coronavirus could only last up to six months, scientists say. A study at the University of Amsterdam found that those who survived the coronavirus could become reinfected within six months, casting doubt on the concept of “immunity passports” to allow survivors of the virus to return to normal life, according to a report in The Science Times. For 35 years, University of Amsterdam scientists, led by Lia van der Hoek regularly tested 10 men for four coronaviruses that cause the common cold. While most were reinfected within three years, there were “significant” drops in antibody levels after six months, the study found. “Coronavirus protective immunity is short-lasting,” van der Hoek said. “We saw frequent reinfections at 12 months post-infection and substantial reduction in antibody levels as soon as six months post-infection. Achieving herd immunity may be challenging due to rapid loss of protective immunity.”

The COVID-19 pandemic is leading to an outbreak of cybercrime as well. United Nations disarmament chief, Izumi Nakamitsu, told a meeting of the UN Security Council that cybercrime had exploded in recent months with a 600% rise in malicious emails alone. “There have also been worrying reports of [cyber] attacks against health care organizations and medical research facilities worldwide,” Nakamitsu told the body. The UN meeting was organized by Estonia’s Prime Minister Juri Ratas, who also condemned cyberattacks against hospitals, medical facilities and urgent care workers. “Those attacks are unacceptable,” Ratas said. “It will be important to hold the offenders responsible for their behavior.” Russia, a longtime hub for hackers and cybercriminals, did not attend the meeting. With Post wires 

The Department of Justice sent a letter Friday warning Los Angeles mayor Eric Garcetti against keeping COVID-19 lockdowns in place much longer, calling the plan “unlawful” and “arbitrary.” “Reports of your recent public statements indicate that you suggested the possibility of long-term lockdown of the residents in the city and county of Los Angeles, regardless of the legal justification for such restrictions,” Eric S. Dreiband, an assistant attorney general wrote, according to the Los Angeles Times. “Any such approach may be both arbitrary and unlawful.” While some states like Georgia are already opening up shops and restaurants, Los Angeles officials have warned that their city could continue to impose harsh lockdowns until August. The city has so far suffered more than 43,000 infections and at least 2,049 deaths. In a press conference Friday, Garcetti defended his approach. “Together, with science, the numbers will always guide us forward,” he said. “We were able to do this and save lives … There is nothing else. There’s no games, there’s nothing else going on.”

The US could finally be free of the coronavirus in late September, and the whole world can expect to put the pandemic behind them in December, say scientists in Singapore. The rosy forecasts are from the Singapore University of Technology and Design, where researchers are using artificial intelligence to continually update their charting of the pandemic’s “life cycle” by country. At the end of April, predictions showed that the US would be virus-free by Sept. 20 and the UK could see the end of the coronavirus by Aug. 27, Metro.co.uk reported Saturday. But the group has since taken down its country-by-country charts from its website — instead posting a disclaimer that the research was strictly for educational purposes and may contain errors. Scientists at the university caution that their results are continually evolving and inexact–  and that the predictions should not lead to hasty ends of lockdowns around the world. “Over-optimism based on some predicted end dates is dangerous because it may loosen our disciplines and controls and cause the turnaround of the virus,” they said.

A controversial top aide to Boris Johnson is the latest British government official to flout lockdown rules — but he hasn’t had to resign. Dominic Cummings traveled more than 250 miles to his parents’ house at the end of March during the nationwide lockdown, the Associated Press reported. The UK has been under lockdown since March 23 with residents told to shelter in place except for essential errands or exercise. Police visited Cummings in Durham, in northeast England, on March 31 after he was spotted at a property there but did not publicly report him at the time. Cummings, 48, was one of the main leaders behind Brexit and was later named Johnson’s top adviser. Johnson’s office defended Cummings’ trip to Durham, where his wife apparently was, saying she was showing symptoms of coronavirus. The office said Cummings stayed in a house separate from his family and acted “reasonably and legally.” Two other U.K. officials, epidemiologist Neil Ferguson and Scotland’s chief medical officer Catherine Calderwood, both resigned their positions after being caught breaking lockdown rules.

She called me from a one-bedroom apartment two weeks ago, her voice quiet and shaky. “I just cannot take one more minute with him,” she said. “I have to get divorced. Why did I wait? Now I will never be able to get out!” As a clinical psychologist specializing in divorce, I typically get three to five calls a week from people thinking about ending their marriage. But since the coronavirus pandemic first erupted in China and spread all over the world, including New York City where I live and work, I’m now getting these calls three to five times a day. As The Post reported, divorce inquiries among top New York City matrimonial lawyers rose 50 percent during the first week of the “pause” order in New York — double the calls they typically receive. Even “Full House” star Mary-Kate Olsen filed for an emergency divorce from her husband Olivier Sarkozy on May 18, claiming she was afraid she’d lose all access to her belongings and her apartment during the pandemic. This coronavirus divorce surge was first seen in China. Steve Li, a divorce lawyer in Shanghai, which went into lockdown on Jan. 23 after the virus emerged in Wuhan 430 miles away, told Bloomberg News that his caseload has increased 25 percent since his city eased restrictions in mid-March. Meanwhile, the central Chinese city of Xian, and Dazhou, in the Sichuan province, both reported a record number of divorce filings in early March, creating major backlogs at government offices. Evidence from past pandemics shows that divorces increase even after a virus subsides. A study in Hong Kong found that a year after the 2002-03 SARS epidemic, 2004 divorces in that city were 21 percent higher than 2002 levels, Bloomberg News reported. Why do pandemics lead to divorce? Because a lockdown means spending 24/7 together. On weekdays, the typical dual-income couple sees each other for 30 minutes in the morning and two to three hours in the evenings. Time spent together on weekends is greater, but usually diluted by errands, activities and visits from friends. Now many of these couples are at home all day long, watching each other all the time! While the usual issues, including a lack of intimacy, affairs and disputes over parenting styles, are still leading to divorce during the pandemic, I’m getting lots of complaints about how differently people’s partners are responding to the COVID-19 crisis. One woman told me she is exasperated by how controlling her husband is about the cleanliness of their apartment. “He literally wipes up my sweat when I am working out!” she sighed. Another regular complaint I’m getting: “I cannot believe how irresponsible he is being about social distancing and not taking this seriously.” Once people see they have fundamentally disjointed ways of handling this crisis, it underscores other differences in the marriage. “Joe” called me the other day and said he was furious at his wife when she came home with their two kids and his daughter told him, “Daddy, we had such a great time with Oliver and Jane at the park.” He could not believe his wife had allowed their kids to have physical contact with other children. “How can I trust her judgment?” he asked me. Another client, who called 311 on the bar next door for not following social-distancing rules, told me she felt unsupported when her husband shrugged his shoulders over the event and said, “Everyone needs to let off some steam.” Another woman said her “paranoid” partner won’t allow her to go shopping without him and they have to be rigidly careful, including wiping down every box of food before placing it in their recyclable bags. She told me she feels trapped. Divorce rates increase during other times of stress, of course. A chronic illness, the death of a child and deployment in a war are all factors. But lockdown puts what’s missing in a marriage on full display. Patience is short. In the past when you might have excused your partner’s behavior and said, “They did not mean it. They meant well,” it’s now harder to feel compassion for their mistakes. Research shows that how partners communicate, work through arguments and problem-solve will allow a stressor to either wreck a marriage or sustain it. For the most part, the pandemic is dragging all our issues out of our dusty closets and requiring couples to talk about their frustrations, desires and needs. The good news is: If you face this challenge and are willing to work through it with your partner, you will likely come out of this pandemic stronger than ever before. And the couples who break up during lockdown were likely headed that way anyway. Dr. Elizabeth Cohen is a contributor to Psychology Today and the CEO and founder of “Afterglow: The Light at the Other Side of Divorce,” an online divorce course offering a free 14-day guide for couples who are facing tough decisions.

Insult comic Jeff Ross has been roasting people on Instagram Live — including a man on a ventilator battling COVID-19. “I thought it might be the last time he laughed,” Ross said. “Everyone was sending love in the comments . . . It was beautiful.” He’s partnered with Marijuana­Doctors.com, which donated to the First Responders Children’s Foundation’s COVID-19 Emergency Response Fund. “This is a very painful time,” Ross said, adding that comedy can be like medicine.

There have been no new confirmed coronavirus cases logged in China in the last 24 hours for the first time since the pandemic began, according to reports. There has also been a drop of asymptomatic cases in the country, from 35 to 28, said the Chinese National Health Commission, which on Saturday noted just two suspected COVID-19 cases, one in Shanghai and in the northeast province of Jilian. Earlier this month a new batch of infections emerged in Wuhan, where the pandemic first started in December, causing authorities to test the entire population of 11 million. China, which has faced criticism for concealing information about the virus and helping its spread around the globe, has tallied more than 4,600 coronavirus deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University.

San Francisco is giving homeless encampments the social distance treatment. The city is joining others around the world in begrudgingly authorizing its homeless encampments by marking safely distanced spaces for tents and other makeshift shelters. In San Francisco’s Civic Center, about 80 tents are now lined in tidy rows on a wide street near San Francisco City Hall, part of a “safe sleeping village” opened last week. The village is one of two Mayor London Breed has planned to open, with another coming to the Haight-Ashbury neighborhood. Breed reasoned it was better to sanction and contain the homeless rather than letting them sprawl out across the city. “So while in normal times I would say that we should focus on bringing people inside and not sanctioning tent encampments, we frankly do not have many other options right now,” she said in a tweet last week. Homeless advocates across the country have pushed for officials to move homeless into underused hotels. And the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends officials leave tent encampments as they are during the pandemic unless shelter in apartments or hotels could be accommodated. As part of a state initiative, San Francisco has moved 1,300 of its estimated 8,000 homeless individuals into hotels — a strategy also being used in New York City, though it’s not without its detractors, including Mayor de Blasio. But some San Francisco officials have accepted the sanctioned encampments as just something else to get used to during the pandemic. ”It is just a new world that we’re living in,” said San Francisco Supervisor Sandra Lee Fewer, “and it’s going to have to be our new normal.” With Post Wire services

TODAY show co-host and former first daughter, Jenna Bush Hager became emotional Friday as she told viewers about a former butler who’d helped make the White House feel like home — and who died Thursday due to the coronavirus. Wilson Jerman, 91, started working in White House in 1957 and served 11 different presidents, starting as a cleaner. He was promoted to butler by Jacqueline Kennedy, and is the longest-serving employee of the White House. “He was the loveliest. I think ‘lovely’ is a word that can kind of be overused, but … he was always smiling,” Hager recalled, choking back tears at the memory. Jerman made the White House feel like home, she said. “We knew him when my grandpa (George H.W. Bush) was president … I mean, I don’t think his real name was Smiley, but everybody called him Smiley, because he was always smiling.” In a joint statement, Former President George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush said of Jerman that, “He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned.” Former President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton also issued a statement saying that were deeply saddened by his passing. Finishing her tribute, Hager said, “We loved him. He was beloved by my family, and he will be so missed.”

The Trump administration on Friday night accused China of blocking U.S. airlines’ flights to the country as tensions between the nations rise. The Department of Transportation said China has made it impossible for U.S. airlines to resume passenger service there and has demanded Chinese authorities file flight schedules for four of its air carriers still flying to America. The department posted an order on a government website stating that Delta Air Lines and United Airlines hope to resume flights to China in June; meanwhile Chinese carriers continue flying to and from the U.S. throughout the crisis. The flight flap is playing out as China Friday urged the U.S. to keep a landmark trade deal President Trump signed in January on track, and fears of a renewed trade war caused jitters on Wall Street. The DOT issued a statement Friday condemning “China’s failure to let U.S. carriers fully exercise their rights and to the denial to U.S. carriers of their right to compete on a fair and equal basis with Chinese carriers” and called the situation “critical.” Air China, China Eastern Airlines Corp, China Southern Airlines Co, Hainan Airlines Holding Co and their subsidiaries must file schedules and other flight details by May 27, or else their flights could be viewed “contrary to applicable law or adversely affect the public interest,” the DOT said in its order. The coronavirus has led to a steep drop-off in flights between China and the US, from 325 weekly flights in January to just 34 by mid-March — all by the Chinese carriers. The Trump administration on Jan. 31 barred from entry most non-U.S. citizens who had been in China within the previous 14 days — but did not place restrictions on Chinese flights. The major U.S. carriers decided on their own to halt all passenger flights to China in February. Now, Delta had requested approval for daily flights to Shanghai Pudong airport out of Detroit and Seattle. United meanwhile is looking to fly daily to Shanghai Pudong from San Francisco and Newark airports and to Beijing from San Fransisco, as well, according to the US DOT. Delta and United did not immediately respond to requests for comment. Earlier on Friday Secretary of State Mike Pompeo slammed China for its proposed power grab in Hong Kong, with the mainland Communist Party seeking to establish its own intelligence bases in the city. The bases are part of China’s national security legislation for Hong Kong presented to the National People’s Congress in Beijing, which includes several restrictive measures widely viewed as a move to squash Hong Kong’s calls for greater autonomy. Pompeo called the legislation a “death knell” for Hong Kong’s freedoms. With Post Wires

Millions of Americans are getting ready to emerge from coronavirus lockdowns and venture outdoors to celebrate Memorial Day weekend at beaches, cookouts and family outings, raising concern among public health officials that large gatherings could cause outbreaks to come roaring back. Medical experts warn that the virus won’t take a holiday for the unofficial start of summer. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends that people stay home, avoid crowds and connect with family and friends by phone or video chat. Dr. Deborah Birx, coordinator of the White House coronavirus task force, said Friday that people can enjoy the outdoors if they stay at least 6 feet apart. Birx suggested playing tennis with marked balls, one for each player to handle, or not touching flags on the golf course. “That is your space, and that’s the space that you need to protect and ensure that you’re socially distanced for others,” Birx said at a White House briefing. She also suggested disposable utensils for picnics and potlucks. Birx said COVID-19 is declining nationwide, but many healthy-seeming people are unknowingly infected, making social distancing, face coverings and frequent hand-washing necessary. The holiday, which honors fallen service members, arrives amid the bleakest economy in decades. Tens of millions have been laid off since the virus hit hard in March and forced shutdowns. Unemployment has reached its highest level since the Great Depression. Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell warned Thursday that prospects for recovery will remain unclear until the health crisis is resolved. Many Memorial Day commemorations have been canceled or downsized, including concerts and fireworks shows. Parks, beaches, campgrounds and swimming pools remain closed in much of the country. But plenty of popular spaces will be open — with limits. Californians headed into the weekend with both excitement and anxiety after restrictions eased in many areas. The nation’s most populous state has started seeing a decline in COVID-19 hospitalizations after being the first to order a statewide shutdown. David Spatafore, who owns Blue Bridge Hospitality restaurant group, was looking forward to Friday’s reopening of patio seating at the group’s pizzerias and dining rooms at its high-end steakhouse in Coronado, across the bay from San Diego. “I think people are going to be so happy to be able to go back out and not eat out of a plastic container or cardboard box,” he said. “I know I am.” In Virginia Beach, Virginia, the famed 40-block boardwalk and sandy shoreline reopened, but with spacing guidelines and groups limited to 10. Group sports such as volleyball are prohibited, along with tents and alcohol. Mayor Bobby Dyer said about 150 “beach ambassadors” in red shirts will “diplomatically” ask people to follow rules. Without clear federal guidance, state and local officials have been left to figure out how to celebrate the holiday safely. Social distancing and bans on mass gatherings remain in place throughout much of the country. Keeping holidays safe is a challenge worldwide. On the same weekend as Memorial Day, the Muslim world will mark the fast-breaking festival Eid al-Fitr. On Monday, residents in the United Kingdom get a bank holiday. Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious diseases expert at Vanderbilt University, warned that being on holiday can lead some people to drop their guard. “They forget to wear masks,” Schaffner said. “They’re not so keen on 6-foot distancing.” Jersey Shore beaches will be open but there will be no fireworks, Ferris wheel rides, roller coasters, go-karts or arcade games. Atlantic City’s casinos remain closed. Some locals plan to sit this summer out. “The unfortunate thing is that all the out-of-town people have been cooped up the same amount of time that the locals have been here,” said Christine Barthelme of Point Pleasant, New Jersey. “My family will do mostly what we do on every holiday weekend here: relax in our backyard, have a barbecue and light the fire pit.” Beaches, hotels and restaurants remain largely shut down in South Florida. The Urban Beach Week festival, which annually draws tens of thousands to Miami Beach for hip-hop and reggae shows, was called off. “We saw what happened in early March with spring break crowds,” Miami Beach Mayor Dan Gelber said, recalling the raucous scenes of youngsters partying in close quarters. But up the coast in Palm Beach County, officials were preparing for beachgoers. “Lifeguards and other parks staff will be monitoring the beaches and reminding park users to practice social distancing,” said Chris Korbelak, public engagement manager for the county parks department. Theme parks are closed at Walt Disney World and Universal Orlando, but both have reopened their entertainment and restaurant complexes, where guests can expect mandatory masks, hand-sanitizing stations and other measures. For the hard-hit tourism and hospitality industry, there is modest hope Memorial Day will mark the start of something resembling recovery. “This weekend is an early indicator as to how consumers feel about coming back and partaking in normal social behavior,” said Jason Guggenheim of Boston Consulting Group, which has surveyed consumers. Data and consulting firm Tourism Economics projects travelers will spend $4.2 billion on Memorial Day weekend, compared with $12.3 billion last year. Airlines, meanwhile, have largely written off hope of a quick rebound. Air travel in the U.S. remains down about 90% from a year ago, according to Transportation Security Administration figures. Oklahoma resident Seth Rott this week boarded a plane for the first time since the pandemic to visit a friend in Washington for Memorial Day. Rott said he had little concern about social distancing or safety, given airlines’ anti-virus measures. “I think it will probably be the easiest flight that I’ve ever had just because of a lack of traffic,” he said. But for most who leave home, it will be by automobile and for relatively short excursions to places like Washington state’s Mt. Baker-Snoqualmie National Forest. “We’re expecting a bottleneck at some of the popular trails,” spokesman Colton Whitworth said, “especially the lower-elevation ones closer to Seattle.” At an outdoor beach restaurant in San Diego on Friday, a server wearing surgical gloves and a face covering rushed by with a piña colada in a pineapple-shaped cup. Another employee stood by with cleaning supplies in a gloved hand, ready to sanitize empty tables. Customer George Cruz could only imagine what crowds may come over the weekend, when he, his wife and 6-year-old daughter will be staying home. “That’s why we decided to come now,” he said. “There definitely will be a surplus of people at the beach.” “I just hope everybody is smart about how they go out,” Cruz added.

We are reminded, again of our vulnerability, and of the rare power of the coronavirus to turn a blind eye on its victims, unaware of status, unmoved by fame or accomplishment. Late in the afternoon of a Memorial Day Friday comes the word that an old New York hero named Patrick Ewing is in the hospital. And we are reminded, again: this is still with us. We are inching toward our new normal, whatever that may be, but we are not there yet, probably not close to there yet. The weather warms, the beaches invite, the calls for reopening grow louder, and while most of us fight daily inner wars between what we want and what we know we need to do, we can forget why this has all been necessary. And then we find out Patrick Ewing tested positive. And we are reminded: if he can get it, so can we. The fight is not yet over. The sacrifices are not yet complete. This is still with us. It is a stubborn SOB. “I want to share that I have tested positive for COVID-19,” Ewing, who spent most of his Hall of Fame career as a Knick, said Friday in a statement released by Georgetown University, his alma mater, where he is the basketball coach. “This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly. I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones.” We are reminded that just because you are famous, you are not granted a hall pass. Tom Hanks and Rita Wilson tested positive. Donovan Mitchell tested positive. Kevin Durant tested positive. James Dolan tested positive. There are still over 1.5 million cases in this country, over 20,000 new cases reported Friday. There are still over 94,000 deaths, more than 1,000 Friday — this after two months of lockdowns and quarantines. We have grown somewhat numb to the numbers, because it’s impossible not to. We have searched for positive trends, for flattened curves, for hopeful news. And more people keep going to the hospital. Now Patrick Ewing goes to the hospital. “Now, more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines,” Ewing said in the statement. “I’ll be fine and get through this.” His case is no more or less sad or compelling than anyone else’s, we just know his name, as we know Hanks’, as we know Durant’s. By now, this virus has surely cast its dark hand on all of us — someone we know, someone we love, family, friend, neighbor. It doesn’t discriminate. It knows no prejudice. And as bad as we want our old lives back, as much as we want our old world back, we are reminded, still again: it is still with us. It may be in retreat. It may not be as puzzling a foe as it seemed to be two months ago. But it is not defeated. It has not vanished. Ewing, it seems, will recover. The numbers tell us most do. But there is little comfort in those figures because this is also true: some don’t. It is still with us. It is a terrible truth, a lousy element of every day. We need our old lives. We need our old world. We need to craft our new normal, whatever that will be. But every now and again, we need to remind ourselves that we haven’t won yet. This is still with us. Damn it.

Approving a format for the NHL’s contemplated return to the ice this summer should have been relatively easy and the least of the league’s and NHLPA’s problems. It wasn’t easy at all, but it is done. More difficult, complex issues lay ahead, and there may be details still to be hammered out, such as bracketing versus reseeding, but the players association’s executive board comprised of 31 team player reps did authorize the union to move forward and negotiate outstanding issues with the understanding that the league would reopen with an expanded 24-team tournament if the parties are able to surmount massive obstacles to stage a summer comeback following the March 12 pause because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It remains to be seen whether outstanding matters involving health and safety protocols; quasi-quarantine for perhaps up to 10 weeks within a hub city and separation from family; rules of engagement on the ice, and financial considerations including the players’ escrow obligations will be as difficult to navigate as this one that proved difficult. And these would seem to be the most pertinent issues. “The Executive Board of the National Hockey League Players’ Association (NHLPA) has authorized further negotiations with the NHL on a 24-team return to play format to determine the winner of the 2020 Stanley Cup,” read a statement issued by the union on Friday night. “Several details remain to be negotiated and an agreement on the format would still be subject to the parties reaching agreement on all issues relevant to resuming play.” The NHLPA held a conference call Thursday night ahead of a vote to accept or reject the NHL’s proposed return-to-play format featuring a 24-team tournament in which the clubs with the top four records in each conference would receive byes into the first round while the teams seeded fifth through 12th would meet in a best-of-five play-in series. The teams with the NHL’s seven worst records would not reconvene. The Post has been told by several parties familiar with the call that a significant faction of players believe the format does not sufficiently reward clubs for their success before the NHL season was put on pause. These players — or proxies — spoke their piece. The Penguins, for instance, were in third place in the Metro Division, three points behind the Flyers and four points behind the Capitals, all three with 13 games remaining. Pittsburgh was six points clear of a playoff spot. That has become all but irrelevant. Under this format, the Penguins would play a best-of-five against the Canadiens, 12th in the East and 23rd overall, for the right to advance to the first round. The Habs were 10 points out of a playoff berth when the season stopped and at a games-played disadvantage. Still, the motion passed overwhelmingly. Under this scenario, the 11th-seed Rangers would meet sixth-seed Carolina while the seventh-seed Islanders would face 10th-seeded Florida in the play-in round. There is no timetable attached to a contemplated 2019-20 restart, though the consensus is that training camps likely wouldn’t open until late June or early July. In addition to the outstanding issues that must be brokered between the league and the union, there are immigration, visa matters and travel restrictions that must be resolved by government agencies before the NHL can plot its return to the ice.

Could college football actually be starting on time? The nation’s premier conference is taking action to be ready to do so. SEC athletes are being allowed to return to campus for voluntary workouts beginning on June 8, after school presidents voted on the matter in the midst of the novel coronavirus pandemic. This comes after the NCAA voted on Wednesday not to extend its ban on voluntary workouts past May 31. Other conferences don’t have a ban, allowing each school to decide independently. Ohio State announced it would reopen campus on June 9 and Illinois said athletes would be allowed to return to school on June 3. “This is an important first step toward having a season this fall, and we will continue to collectively work together as our top priority is to ensure the safety and well-being of our student-athletes, coaches and staff,” Auburn coach Gus Malzahn said in a school-issued statement. The SEC called it a “transition period that allows student-athletes to gradually adapt to full training and sport activity following a period of inactivity.” Organized practices, however, are still not allowed. Athletes will be “under strict supervision of designated university personnel and safety guidelines” created by each school. As part of the guidelines for reopening, student-athletes will be given a three-stage screening process that includes when they arrive on campus, within 72 hours of entering athletic facilities and on a daily basis of athletic activities. Only those dealing with coronavirus symptoms will be tested.

Hertz filed for bankruptcy protection Friday, unable to withstand the coronavirus pandemic that has crippled global travel and with it, the heavily indebted 102-year-old car rental company’s business. The Estero, Florida-based company’s lenders were unwilling to grant it another extension on its auto lease debt payments past a Friday deadline, triggering the filing in U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware. Hertz and its subsidiaries will continue to operate, according to a release from the company. Hertz’s principal international operating regions and franchised locations are not included in the filing, the statement said. By the end of March, Hertz Global Holdings Inc. had racked up $18.7 billion in debt with only $1 billion of available cash. Starting in mid-March, the company — whose car-rental bands also include Dollar and Thrifty — lost all revenue when travel shut down due to the novel coronavirus, and it started missing payments in April. Hertz has also been plagued by management upheaval, naming its fourth CEO in six years on May 18. “No business is built for zero revenue,” former CEO Kathryn Marinello said on the company’s first-quarter earnings conference call May 12. “There’s only so long that companies’ reserves will carry them.” In late March, Hertz shed 12,000 workers and put another 4,000 on furlough, cut vehicle acquisitions by 90% and stopped all nonessential spending. The company said the moves would save $2.5 billion per year. But the cuts came too late to save Hertz, the nation’s No. 2 auto rental company founded in 1918 by Walter L. Jacobs, who started in Chicago with a fleet of a dozen Ford Model Ts. Jacobs sold the company, initially called Rent-A-Car Inc., to John D. Hertz in 1923. In a note to investors in late April, Jefferies analyst Hamzah Mazari predicted that rival Avis would survive the coronavirus crisis but Hertz had only a 50-50 chance “given it was slower to cut costs.” On May 18, Hertz took the unusual step of naming operations chief Paul Stone as CEO and announced that Marinello would step down as CEO and from the company’s board. Mazari called the change unusual just days before a potential bankruptcy filing. He also noted that CEO changes have been common at Hertz since financier Carl Icahn entered the company in 2014. Icahn’s holding company is Hertz’s largest shareholder, with a 38.9% stake in the company, according to FactSet. Deutsche Bank analyst Chris Woronka credited Marinello with reigniting Hertz’s revenue growth, writing in a note to investors that it rose 16% in 2018 and 2019 combined. Hertz’s bankruptcy protection filing was hardly a surprise. In its first-quarter report filed earlier in May with securities regulators, the company said it may not be able to repay or refinance debt and may not have enough cash to keep operating. “Management has concluded there is substantial doubt regarding the company’s ability to continue as a going concern within one year from the issuance date of this quarterly report,” it said. Under a Chapter 11 restructuring, creditors will have to settle for less than full repayment, but the company is likely to continue operating. Hertz isn’t the first struggling company to be pushed into bankruptcy by the coronavirus crisis. The company joins department store chain J.C. Penney, as well as Neiman Marcus, J.Crew and Stage Stores.

Pastors of city neighborhood churches hard hit by the coronavirus pandemic reacted cautiously to President Trump’s call Friday to reopen houses of worship. Pastor Adolphus Lacey of Bethany Baptist Church in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section Brooklyn said Trump has good intentions, but it’s too risky to have regular services now. “I will not put my congregants in jeopardy,” Lacey said, noting that 600 congregants are participating in virtual livestreaming of prayer services and other events. “Get over the idolatry of a building,” he said. Elaine Flake, co-pastor of the Greater Allen AME Church in Jamaica, which has one of the largest congregations in the city, said she  heard Trump’s call to reopen faith-based institutions just before she participated in a conference call Friday with aides to Gov. Andrew Cuomo and members of his Interfaith Advisory Council. She said Cuomo’s office explained the new state policy of allowing religious gatherings of up to 10 people — though participants must maintain social distancing and wear masks to stave off the coronavirus. “You have to be very careful. Just because the president says something on Friday doesn’t mean you open on Sunday,” Flake said. “I’m going to be very careful. We buried too many people. We have too many people in the hospital. It’s a very delicate situation.” Greater Allen has 10,000 congregants and many are elderly residents who are high risk for COVID-19, she said. But that doesn’t mean churches aren’t itching to reopen — when it is safe to do so. Catholic church leaders — Cardinal Timothy Cardinal Dolan of the Archdiocese of New York and Bishop Nicholas DiMarzio of the Brooklyn-Queens diocese — laid out a five-phase “Faith Forward” plan for reopening church services. In the first phase, churches will open for private prayer and confessions. Phase two will offer celebration of baptisms and marriages — but be limited to no more than 10 attendees. Phase three will allow celebration of Holy Communion outside of Mass. Phase four will permit celebration of daily and funeral Masses with limited attendance and phase five will permit Sunday Mass with limited attendance before resumption of full Mass schedules and sacramental activities. Parishioners must wear masks and hand sanitizer will be available at the entrance of the church. The phase-in will likely vary by region, depending on the COVID-19 cases. Asked about Trump’s directive, Mayor Bill de Blasio’s office said the city will instead abide by Cuomo’s order limiting religious gatherings to no more than 10 people at a time. “Houses of Worship never closed in New York City, but have been under reasonable capacity requirements that prohibit large gatherings,” said City Hall spokeswoman Olivia Lapeyrolerie. “We will continue to work closely with faith leaders to ensure people can safely worship during these stressful times, but will not take any steps that could jeopardize New Yorker’s health.”

Do you remember the 1957-58 Asian flu? Or the 1968-69 Hong Kong flu? I do. I was a teenager during the first of these, an adult finishing law school during the second. But even though back then I followed the news much more than the average person my age, I can’t dredge up more than the dimmest memory of either. I don’t have any memory of schools closing, though apparently, a few did here and there. I have no memories of city or state lockdowns, of closed offices and factories and department stores, of people banned from parks and beaches. Yet these two influenzas had death tolls roughly comparable to that of COVID-19. Between 70,000 and 116,000 people in the US died from Asian flu. That’s between 0.04 percent and 0.07 percent of the nation’s population, somewhat more than the 0.03% of the COVID-19 death rate so far. The Asian flu, unlike COVID-19, was rarely fatal for children and was more deadly for the elderly — and pregnant women. The Hong Kong flu, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention says, had more precisely an estimated U.S. death toll of 100,000 in 1968-70 (years that included the Woodstock festival), 0.05 percent of the total population. Both flus had high death rates among the elderly but, apparently, not as high a proportion as COVID-19 has had. Once again, there were no nationwide school closings, no multi-month lockdowns, no daily presidential news conferences. Apparently, neither the nation’s leaders nor the vast bulk of its people felt that such drastic measures were called for. Perhaps some of this calm reaction can be ascribed to confidence that a vaccine would be developed, as other flu vaccines had been developed after the 1918-19 Spanish flu pandemic. But flu vaccines are never entirely effective, and none were widely available until after the Asian and Hong Kong flus had swept over the nation. Fundamental attitudes can change in a nation over half a century, and the very different responses to this year’s coronavirus pandemic and the influenzas of 50 and 60 years ago suggest that Americans today are much more risk-averse, much more willing to undergo massive inconvenience and disruption to avoid marginal increases in fatal risk. At least some of this can be explained by different experiences. The Asian and Hong Kong flus arrived in an America amid and at the end of what I call the Midcentury Moment. That’s my name for the quarter-century after World War II when Americans enjoyed low-inflation economic growth, and a degree of cultural uniformity and respect for institutions that some yearn for today. Midcentury Americans had living memories of World War II, with its 405,000 American military deaths. They were troubled not so much by the number of military deaths in Korea (36,000) and Vietnam (58,000) but by our leaders’ failure, after years of effort, to achieve victory. Contrast this with the shrillness of outcries over orders of magnitude fewer military deaths in Iraq (4,497) and Afghanistan (2,216). Yes, every death is a tragedy, but those numbers total less than the average number of deaths in America every day (7,707) in 2018. But today’s Americans, beneficiaries of a victory in the Cold War that was almost entirely bloodless, seem to blanch at paying any human price. They seem to also expect any competent leader to come up with policies that preserve every life at any cost. Thus the high approval of New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, who said his lockdown is worth it if it saves just one life — although if he really believed that, he’d impose and strictly enforce a 5 mph speed limit on the New York State Thruway. You can argue that Americans in the Midcentury Moment were too willing to accept pandemic or battlefield deaths, just as they were too willing to accept racial segregation or to stigmatize uncommon lifestyles. But there’s also a strong argument that they had a more realistic sense of the limits of the human condition and the efficacy of official action than Americans have today — certainly more than the governors stubbornly enforcing lockdowns till the virus is stamped out and deaths fall to zero. Behind that stance is the assumption there’s an instant and painless solution for every problem, rather than a need to weigh conflicting goals and make tragic choices amid unavoidable uncertainty.

After Page Six reported on various underground parties going on around town during the lockdown — an editor for Graydon Carter’s Air Mail claims to have infiltrated one. At the illicit basement bash, “tequila shots and dry martinis were being passed around, sweaty hand to sweaty hand. Drinks were $10 a pop, cash only,” and “a long-haired man snorted cocaine-and-ketamine swirlies off of mirrored platters lining the sides of a professional DJ booth.” Writer Elena Clavarino writes that at the same party, “a supermodel and her boyfriend I recognized from Instagram downed shots” and toasted by exclaiming, “Cheers to corona!” Her piece also details underground parties at restaurants everywhere from Soho to the East Village posing as takeout-only spots with secret wild lock-ins. At one, guests “sat at tables, eating food served from the kitchen like they would on a regular night. Later they turned up the music, and booze and cocaine flowed until the early hours of the morning.” Apparently, Air Mail reports, there’s also a weekly “cigar gathering” with performers at a “well-known Lower East Side hotel rooftop.”

A new guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that you’re highly unlikely to contract the coronavirus by touching contaminated surfaces. But will that turn out to be yet another mistake? Because it’s become hard to trust the CDC on anything, given its repeated screw-ups amid the pandemic. Early in February, the agency sent out coronavirus tests across the country — but labs soon found they were unreliable. The CDC had to reverse course and ask labs to send all samples to its Atlanta HQ for testing, setting the nation back days at a crucial time. And it wasn’t until March 3 that the CDC lifted its final restrictions to allow tests beyond its own flawed ones. The missteps kept up. For months, the CDC told Americans that only those who know they’re sick should wear face masks to prevent the virus’ spread. On April 3, it flipped, saying everyone should wear a mask if social distancing isn’t possible. Fresh reason to doubt the agency’s pronouncements came this week, with another unbelievable bungle: It turned out that CDC data — relied on by states for reopening decisions — don’t measure what everyone thought. It’s been mixing the results of viral tests, which show who has a current case of COVID, and antibody tests, which show who has ever had the bug. The tests are administered for different reasons and provide different info. Epidemiologists were flabbergasted that the CDC was combining the two results in its tracking — especially since the agency’s COVID Data Tracker website had claimed as recently as May 18 that the numbers didn’t include the results of antibody tests. Americans are sacrificing a lot based on CDC guidance. It needs to get its act together so the public can trust its edicts.

Imposing coronavirus lockdowns for too long could cause “irreparable damage,” said the White House’s top doctor Anthony Fauci Friday. Fauci believes many parts of the country are ready for “cautious” and “prudent” reopenings, though he warned that guidelines for social distancing and mask-wearing must still be adhered to, he said during an appearance on CNBC Friday. “We can’t stay locked down for such a considerable period of time that you might do irreparable damage and have unintended consequences, including consequences for health,” he said. The National Institutes for Health official has taken heat from Republican lawmakers for appearing to lobby against President Trump’s calls for reopening. Fauci on Friday said that although state lockdowns are effective as long as cases are surging, the country has hit a point where some regions could begin reopening. “We are enthusiastic about reopening and I think we can do it in a pace that would be reasonable and would get us back as a society from a morale standpoint as well as the economy,” he said. “I don’t want people to think that any of us feel that staying locked down for a prolonged period of time is the way to go.” 		  Fauci said he was still worried about localities reopening so long as cases continue to rise; he urged such areas to limit crowds. “If states and cities and counties are going to [open] no matter what, I would recommend that they take very specific precautions in doing that,” he said. “You can still proceed to open, so long as you do those fundamental baseline things. “But in general, I think most of the country is doing it in a prudent way,” he went on. “There are obviously some situations where people might be jumping over that. I just say proceed with caution if you’re going to do that.” Fauci during his Congressional testimony last week predicted greater “suffering and death” from the coronavirus if certain states reopen businesses too hastily. Health experts have dismissed the idea of COVID-19 herd immunity, but the timeline for a vaccine rollout is still uncertain. Fauci has remained upbeat — during an interview with NPR earlier Friday he said it is “conceivable” that a vaccine could come by the end of the year.

Moderation, I can tell you firsthand, is one of the most important and challenging aspects of social media. With the COVID-19 pandemic, social networks have been under greater pressure than ever to police their platforms to prevent the spread of misinformation. As a result, Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and the other social-media giants have cranked up their censorship into overdrive, but they are ignoring the structural problems that allow misinformation to be boosted on their platforms in the first place. These companies are increasingly dictating what their users should and should not see and believe. They are kicking out good users and taking down countless harmless posts, pages and groups simply for asking questions about COVID-19 or presenting opinions that differ with those from the company’s executives and authorities. This widespread censorship of ideas would make George Orwell dizzy and runs counter to the whole purpose of social networking. On May 11, Twitter announced it would add labels to tweets with false or disputed information about COVID-19, and Facebook already started adding similar labels. This is a Band-Aid that does not solve the fundamental issue and can actually create even more problems. According to MIT research, when people see that some posts on social media have warning labels, they’re far more likely to assume, incorrectly, that all the posts without these warning labels have been verified by fact-checkers. This misperception is exacerbated by the fact that only a fraction of posts with false or unverified information are checked and marked as such. The basic problem is the micro-targeting business/revenue model of Facebook, YouTube, Twitter and all current mainstream social networks. These companies allow marketers and purveyors of misinformation to pay to boost content to targeted audiences most susceptible to believing it. Pizzagate is a well-known example of this, and two weeks ago, after Facebook had vowed to prevent misinformation, it allowed marketers to target ads to 78 million users interested in “pseudoscience.” Putting warning labels on certain posts with unverified information is a superficial ­solution that fails to address this structural flaw. In contrast, my company, MeWe, has no targeting, no newsfeed manipulation and no way for advertisers, marketers or political operatives to boost anything to users. This prevents any information or opinion — true or false — from being broadly promoted. Users need to deliberately seek out information for themselves and cannot be targeted by others who wish to reach and manipulate their thoughts. This is not to say that social-media companies should relinquish moderation altogether and institute an “anything goes” policy. If a user, group, page or post is breaking the law or inciting violence, threats, hate, bullying, harassment, etc., companies have a duty to investigate and remove that user or content in order to keep their other users safe. This is how MeWe operates. If users or groups want to have conversations following these basic rules of conduct and share different viewpoints about politics, religion, sexuality, medical treatments, diets, exercise regimens, supplements, lifestyles, etc., it is not the role of social-media companies to censor such discussions. “Rightness” about a position, whether it is related to politics, medicine, health, fitness, science or anything else, has often been reversed or changed over time. In our current period of COVID-19, what information is “true” is changing at an unprecedented pace. In January, the World Health Organization falsely tweeted that COVID-19 could not spread from person to person; in March, it recommended against wearing a mask if you are not sick. In April, President Trump falsely suggested during a White House briefing that COVID-19 might be treated by injecting disinfectant into the body. Should social networks censor the WHO or the president? Of course not. Censorship is often counter­productive and amplifies what was meant to be muzzled. It’s human nature to want to see what’s forbidden, which is why books sometimes become more popular after they’re banned. When it comes to conspiracy theories, this is even more true. Banning content proves to the conspiracy-minded that it must be valuable because the authorities don’t want them to see it. Social media was intended to be a place where good people of all stripes are free to express themselves and share opinions authentically. The widespread censorship we’re currently witnessing runs contrary to this purpose. Mark Weinstein is CEO of the ­social-network company MeWe. 

Nets general manager Sean Marks has given a first clue that Kevin Durant’s Nets’ debut will take place not in Disney World’s fan-less venue Milkhouse Gym in Orlando in mid-July but in Kings County, next season. Speaking to second New Zealand outlet in the past few weeks, Marks praised Durant’s physical condition, but gave the indication a return for the 2020 playoffs wasn’t in the cards. “I can tell you now he looks pretty darn good and I’m excited about him on the floor at Barclays in front of that fan base,’’ Marks said on Sky Sport NZ’s “The Pod” podcast. “But how do they mesh? How do they all play together? That’s the chess game, the intricacies of what a coaching staff does, what the management group does to put the right pieces around them.’’ Marks raised hope three weeks ago when he said a Durant return was “the $110 million question.’’ However, sources told The Post traction on a July 15 return for the season’s resumption is very slow — even if it would mark 13 months since he tore his Achilles tendon. Recovery times are usually 6-12 months. Support for a Durant comeback when training camp opens in mid-to-late June is that he was already doing five-on-five contact scrimmages with several Nets reserves and player developmental coaches in early March. However, the March 11 shutdown made it impossible for Durant to maintain or escalate that routine. While players are all in the same boat having had three months off when training camp opens in late June, Durant was not at the point of being ready for a game when everything stopped. Scrimmaging five-on-five was a key part of the rehab process at that stage, sources told The Post, and that ground to a halt. Reading between the lines, Marks’ remarks also pointed to a desire for Durant to come back when a coaching staff is set and Kyrie Irving (shoulder surgery) is back. Jacque Vaughn is the interim coach and not expected to return next season — with Tyronn Lue, Mark Jackson and Tom Thibodeau figuring to be in the mix. The KD-Kyrie signings were all about winning a championship. Durant’s return for the playoffs would be a delicious, inspirational treat to hungry New York basketball fans — and the NBA — but he’d probably have to play limited minutes and without Irving. The Nets are the seventh seed in the East. “That’s what these guys are fighting for now,’’ Marks told the podcast. “If you talk to Kevin and Ky, they’ve both won —Kevin’s won two championships, Ky’s won a championship — so now, it’s how do we make this ours, how do we take this to the next level and who do we do it with? That’s a big part of their decisions.” Last week, Durant gave a cryptic response, saying he’ll return when “it’s time.’’ His agent, Rich Kleiman, said on Joe Vardon’s Athletic podcast a return was “unrealistic”. KD buddy Jay Williams told The Post a return into the playoff cauldron wasn’t “fair to Kevin.’’ If KD doesn’t play in the 2020 playoffs the downside is he may not officially take the court until Chrismtas.

Patrick Ewing has tested positive for coronavirus, and is sharing his diagnosis to raise public awareness. The Knicks legend and current Georgetown coach is under care and isolated at a local hospital, the school’s athletic department said in a statement. “I want to share that I have tested positive for COVID-19,” the Hall of Famer said. “This virus is serious and should not be taken lightly. I want to encourage everyone to stay safe and take care of yourselves and your loved ones.” Ewing, 57, emphasized that he’ll be OK, and he is the only member of the program to contract the novel coronavirus. A source told The Post the initial tone of the situation “didn’t sound serious.” “Now more than ever, I want to thank the healthcare workers and everyone on the front lines,” Ewing said. “I’ll be fine and get through this.” The diagnosis comes days after the NCAA lifted its moratorium on workouts, allowing voluntary on-campus activities to resume on June 1. On Friday, the SEC announced student-athletes can begin using school facilities beginning June 8 with strict supervision, though the Big East — the Hoyas’ conference — has yet to reveal any plans. Georgetown struggled to a 15-17 record in 2019-20, Ewing’s third season running his alma mater’s basketball program. The coach was forced to kick two of his best players off the team in December over accusations of burglary and harassment, and then lost his two key players to injury down the stretch. Despite keeping the team afloat, the season came to an end with a loss to St. John’s the day before the Big East canceled its remaining tournament games over the coronavirus pandemic on March 12. Ewing, the top pick in the 1985 NBA Draft, has found himself to be among the headlines in recent weeks, with his longtime torment at the hands of Michael Jordan depicted in “The Last Dance” documentary. On Friday, Charles Oakley, who recently blamed Ewing for the Knicks losing to the Bulls in 1993 in an article earlier this month in The Post, tweeted  his support for former teammate, saying, “I went to war with you for ten years. I won’t leave you on the battlefield now. Get well Patrick. More fights ahead. @CoachEwing33 #BrothersFight #PatrickEwing #GetWellBrother.” Oakley’s heart-felt support was a much different tone than his dig at Ewing for failing in the clutch in that key Eastern Conference finals loss to Michael Jordan’s Bulls that was highlighted in the 10-part documentary “The Last Dance” which concluded on Sunday. “Patrick, at the end of the game, he’d get double-teamed,’’ Oakley told The Post. “He’d shoot fadeaways on double-teams and that hurt us as a team.” Oakley added, “The best player won. Michael was a better player than Patrick hands down.” Ewing took the high road, telling “The Good Show,” “I have nothing to say about what Charles has to say. He’s one of my best teammates. We went into a lot of wars and a lot of wars against the Bulls. So everyone is entitled to their own opinion.” Also, multiple pieces of Ewing’s personal memorabilia were stolen during a burglary, he revealed this month. Among the items taken were his 1984 Olympic gold medal and his NCAA title ring from that same year, and his gold medal from his time with the “Dream Team” at the 1992 Games. Ewing’s No. 33 hangs from the Garden rafters, and he’s the all-time Knicks leader in nearly every category — games, points, rebounds, steals and blocks. He played 15 seasons with the Knicks after they won the lottery rights to select him No. 1 overall in 1985, averaging 22.8 points and 10.4 rebounds during his tenure in New York. He also played for the SuperSonics and Magic before retiring.

A roughly $21 million Brooklyn field hospital authorized by the de Blasio administration at the height of the coronavirus pandemic opened and closed without ever seeing one patient, according to city officials. The Brooklyn Cruise Terminal in Red Hook was one of several sites across the five boroughs converted into a medical facility as a way to relieve the city’s overburdened hospital system as the COVID-19 crisis mounted. Mayor Bill de Blasio announced plans on Mar. 31 — a day after the USNS Comfort hospital ship arrived in New York Harbor to aid in the coronavirus fight — for the $20.8 million Red Hook field hospital with an estimated capacity for 750 beds. The field hospital was built by Texas-based construction company SLSCO. “They are going to set it up rapidly and we’re then going to go to the next site, the next site, the next site to meet our goal,” de Blasio told reporters of the site during that press conference in which the mayor also outlined the details to turn Queens’ Billie Jean King National Tennis Center into a 350-bed temporary hospital. The makeshift hospital at the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal was expected to open in April, but was not ready until May 4 – and is now being disbanded after being left unused, The City first reported. “As part of our hospital surge, we expanded capacity at a breakneck speed, ensuring our hospital infrastructure would be prepared to handle the very worst. We did so only with a single-minded focus: saving lives,” de Blasio spokeswoman Avery Cohen told The Post Friday. “Over the past few months, social distancing, face coverings, and other precautionary measures have flattened the curve drastically, and we remain squarely on focused taking that progress even further,” Cohen added. The funding for the Red Hook hospital is expected to be reimbursed by FEMA.

DETROIT (AP) — Former Detroit Mayor Kwame Kilpatrick is being quarantined at a federal prison while awaiting a likely release in June, which would be years before he was scheduled to finish his 28-year sentence for corruption, a pastor said Friday. The U.S. Bureau of Prisons declined to comment about Kilpatrick, saying only that he remains in custody at the prison in Oakdale, Louisiana. Federal prosecutors in Detroit said they had no information about the possible release. The Rev. Keyon Payton, who has urged President Donald Trump to shorten Kilpatrick’s sentence, said Kilpatrick now is being granted relief under a federal policy that gives officials discretion to move some inmates because of the coronavirus pandemic. “To my understanding, after a 25-day quarantine, we are expecting Mr. Kilpatrick to be released to his mother’s home in Atlanta. … We’re just elated to share the news and celebrate his home confinement. We are in constant communication with the White House,” Payton said. It wasn’t immediately known if Kilpatrick would have to return to prison once the coronavirus threat had passed. Payton said he and other Kilpatrick allies hope Trump formally reduces the sentence to time served. Kilpatrick, 49, was Detroit’s mayor from 2002 until 2008. In 2013, he was convicted of racketeering conspiracy, fraud, extortion and tax crimes. The government called it the “Kilpatrick enterprise,” a years-long scheme to shake down contractors and reward allies. Kilpatrick has served only a quarter of his 28-year prison sentence. With good time credits, he’s been listed for release in 2037. The White House declined to comment. Payton, a pastor in Pontiac, Michigan, is national director for community outreach and engagement at the Ebony Foundation, which announced the development. The foundation is the charity arm of the company that publishes Ebony Magazine. Owner Willard Jackson got a phone call from Kilpatrick on Thursday “to let him know he was going straight into quarantine and wanted to hold a press conference when he got out,” Ebony spokeswoman Sabrina Taylor said. Payton said he and others gave a packet of information about Kilpatrick to a Trump aide, Ja’Ron Smith, during a January meeting in Detroit. They believe Kilpatrick’s sentence was excessive and that he deserved a commutation. State Rep. Karen Whitsett, a Detroit Democrat, said Trump told her Thursday that Kilpatrick would be released. He was in Michigan to visit a Ford Motor Co. factory. Under Bureau of Prisons policy, priority is supposed to be given to inmates who have served half of their sentences or inmates with 18 months or less left and who served at least 25% of their time.

It’s time to get funky. With millions of Americans quarantined in their homes during the coronavirus pandemic, there’s no better time to explore some off-the-beaten-path music. YouTube and Spotify are treasure troves for music seemingly forgotten to time. Here are five fun, quirky and wonderfully strange tracks to explore during the lockdown.  This delightfully bizarre track is about two astronauts encountering an alien — and it’s a love song. La Bionda’s techno-pop bliss — laced with one hell of a killer hook — is everything we need right now. The surreal animated music video certainly adds to the experience of “I Wanna Be Your Lover,” which showcases some trippy art and a laser gun battle between our heroes and a lion space-demon. The duo behind the track, brothers Carmelo and Michelangelo La Bionda, are considered touchstones of the Italo disco genre. They’ve released eight albums, most recently 2013’s “Come Back to My Life.”  It’s clear that America wasn’t the only country having a blast with pop music in the ’80s. Italy’s second romp featured on this list is Fun Fun’s “Color My Love.” The music video shows the members of the group trouncing around in a bouncy house wearing white jumpsuits and throwing beach balls. What’s not to love? Good luck getting this European earworm out of your head. “Color My Love” was a minor hit in the States, reaching No. 9 on the US Dance charts. Today, why not make this your song of the summer?  Though the lyrics are in Japanese, the synths and melodies in Akiko Yano’s 1980 track are universal. Yano — a jazz-influenced pianist frequently compared with British art-rocker Kate Bush — delivers the goods on “Hitotsudake,” a gentle ballad with a tempo that builds over the course of the track. Yano’s career spans over four decades and covers a plethora of genres including disco, folk, jazz, rock and pop. Her band, the Akiko Yano Trio, performs periodically in New York City.  Time to get moody — Soviet style. The kicking bassline in “At Dawn” keeps things interesting, along with the lead singer’s vocal style, reminiscent of the Cure’s Robert Smith. Props to the keyboardist’s fabulous sense of style. No one else can rock a pastel Hawaiian shirt and futuristic glasses like that man. According to the music blog the Spinoff, Russian rock music slowly began to trickle into the culture in the early 1980s as the Soviet Union began easing restrictions during the Cold War. Still, the music and lyrics had to be approved by the government before its release.  Hailing from Los Angeles, Sparks lives up to their name. This track — which sounds something like Queen going through a spooky new wave phase — is both a rocking and unsettling time, led by singer Russell Mael’s unconventional, staccato delivery. Though the entire song is a bizarre, theatrical treat, it peaks at its soaring guitar solo. “This Town Ain’t Big Enough for Both of Us” is a strange trip through and through in the best way possible. The audience shown in the video looks understandably perplexed by the song, adding to the track’s mystique. Sparks still perform today and continues to forge a creative path in rock music. Their most recent album came in May, titled “A Steady Drip, Drip, Drip.”

A trio of large Southern states that moved aggressively to reopen during the coronavirus crisis have seen new cases and deaths largely hold steady since then — despite several controversies in regard to their data. Georgia, which scrapped its stay-at-home order on April 24, reported 862 cases Thursday — fewer than the 946 new cases the day before, according to state data. Florida, which began reopening on May 4, reported 1,204 new cases, bringing the total to 48,675. Meanwhile, President Trump says all places of worship should be considered “essential services” and urged governors to reopen them immediately. Get the latest developments on the coronavirus straight to your inbox by signing up for our special edition newsletter. Here’s what else we learned today:

Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday that the Big Apple’s beaches will be open for Memorial Day weekend — but warned there won’t be a whole lot of fun in the sun allowed. “You can walk on the beach. You can hang out on the beach, but do it in a manner that is consistent with everything we’ve been talking about,” de Blasio said. “You go out for the amount of time you need, then you get back home.” With no lifeguards on duty, de Blasio said, beachgoers can forget about one of the main attractions — hitting the waves. “I’ve been really clear about the beaches — they are closed for swimming . . . People are not supposed to go to the beach to swim,” he said during his daily coronavirus briefing at City Hall. Hizzoner also said that sun-worshippers will need to wear a face mask along with their bathing suits, and that social-distancing and other rules would be strictly enforced by about 150 Parks workers — backed up by “hundreds” of NYPD cops. “There’s not going to be anything with group activity. No sports, no volleyball, no gatherings,” he said. “And there will be vehicles constantly reminding people: no swimming, no barbecuing, no sports.” City personnel will be stationed at all entry points, de Blasio said, “counting how many people are going on the beach, checking to make sure that there’s the right number of people, and we don’t see any crowding on the beach, we don’t see any crowding on the boardwalk.” “If we start to see any crowding, we’re going to make sure to limit,” he added. De Blasio called the crackdown on traditional summertime pleasures “smart moves to keep our progress going” in the fight against the deadly coronavirus. Later, during an interview on WNYC radio, de Blasio also called the plan a “modified, lesser version of what we would normally do, because we cannot allow to have happen what happened in Florida and California.” “We cannot see people going to the beaches in large numbers, crowding together. We’re just not doing that,” he said. During a meeting of the City Council’s Public Safety Committee, Deputy Parks Commissioner Margaret Nelson noted that surfing was still allowed because it’s “not considered swimming under the state health code.” And while there will be “people on the waterline” enforcing the no-swimming edict, Nelson said, the water won’t be entirely off-limits. “You can dip your feet into the water,” she said in response to a question from committee Chairman Donovan Richards (D-Queens).

Organizers said Friday they were canceling the 2020 New York auto show that had previously been pushed back until August, citing the ongoing coronavirus pandemic and the venue’s use as a field hospital. The show, which was initially set for early April and is typically used to unveil new vehicles, was set to take place at the Javits Convention Center. However, the center is now being used as an active hospital and is in standby mode for the foreseeable future, organizers said. The next New York show will take place April 2-11, 2021. A string of auto shows have been canceled this year and some automakers — like Toyota — are opting to hold virtual unveilings of new vehicles. Mark Schienberg, president of the Greater New York Automobile Dealers Association, the organization that owns and operates the 120-year-old New York Auto Show, noted that automakers and their exhibit partners needed “immense planning” to construct a show. “Because of the uncertainty caused by the virus, we feel it would not be prudent to continue with the 2020 Show,” he said. Large gatherings in New York have been canceled through at least Labor Day, including Broadway shows. Detroit’s auto show that had been set for June was canceled in March. The Paris Motor show scheduled for late September/early October in March was canceled as were auto shows in Geneva.

Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Friday that the state will continue to include only confirmed coronavirus fatalities and not “probable” ones in its contagion death toll — unlike New York City — because “they’re two different things.” Cuomo — commenting on the topic of confirmed versus probable COVID-19 deaths at a press briefing in Murray Hill in Manhattan — said, “Now some places just put them together, they then get criticized — you can’t put them together. They’re two different categories. “They’re two different answers, and they’re two different questions,” Cuomo told reporters, adding, “Probable is different from confirmed. Probable is ‘probable, but I have to check, I don’t know, I have to do further testing.’” Since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, the state has never listed the number of probable coronavirus deaths, although New York officials at one point said they would. Still, the state does note the number of “probable” virus death cases for nursing homes and adult-care facilities along with their confirmed COVID fatalities, just not for New York in general. New York City started accounting for probable coronavirus deaths in its total COVID-19 death toll in April, and the latest city data shows that 4,753 probable cases make up the 21,086 fatality caseload. “It’s how precise you want to be,” Cuomo said of lumping the categories together, adding, “People who want precision want them separate.” Cuomo said the state has had “many cases” deemed “probable” that “turned out not to be coronavirus. “There are a lot of scientists and experts who say, ‘Don’t put them together ‘cause they’re two different categories, they’re two different answers,’” the governor said. State Health Commissioner Howard Zucker said New York spoke to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recently, “specifically asking them what’s going on in other states where some merge [confirmed and probable deaths] and some don’t. “So just what the governor mentioned here is, we asked some confirmed, some presumed or probable deaths, and they said they need to figure out how to get that information out to the public as well,” Zucker said. Additional reporting by Julia Marsh

Monday morning quarterbacks finally have their chance. The Browns will give two people the opportunity to help script the first 15 plays of one of their preseason games, all for a good cause. The team announced the reward Friday as part of the package for winners of the “All In Challenge,” in which celebrities, athletes and teams have offered prizes to raise money for the hungry during the COVID-19 pandemic. The highest bidder in an auction and one raffle winner will get the chance to help head coach Kevin Stefanski and offensive coordinator Alex Van Pelt pick through the playbook. They will also be invited to the team dinner and team meeting the night before the game, in addition to other perks, with proceeds going to Meals on Wheels, No Kid Hungry, America’s Food Fund, World Central Kitchen and Feeding America. “Giving back is a core component of who we are as an organization,” Stefanski said in a statement. “With the global pandemic, it’s really important we step up when there are others in need. Just look around at the frontline workers, the health care workers. They’re stepping up right now, they’re working tirelessly, they’re working courageously and it’s really inspired our organization to join the All In Challenge.” The Titans offered the same play-calling opportunity to fans for charity in a 2016 preseason game. It might have worked out too well, as the first two plays — called by fans — went for a 15-yard run and a 31-yard pass. The next three plays, called by the coaching staff, went for a total of five yards.

Have you been missing something amid the lockdowns and stay-at-home orders? No, not human contact. Not even toilet paper. Robocalls. Industry experts say robocalls are way down — scam calls as well as nagging from your credit-card company to pay your bill. The coronavirus pandemic has inflicted millions of job losses, and scammers have not been immune. YouMail, which offers a robocall-blocking service, says 2.9 billion robocalls were placed in April in the US, down from 4.1 billion in March and 4.8 billion in February. That’s a daily average of 97 million calls in April, down from 132 million in March and 166 million in April. The main reason: Many global call centers have closed or are operating with fewer workers, said YouMail CEO Alex Quilici. While it may be odd to think of scams being run out of call centers rather than a dark, creepy basement or a garage, that’s often the case, particularly in countries such as India and the Philippines, experts said. That means scammers will probably be back in force once the call centers come back online. Stepped-up enforcement from industry groups and the US government could nibble around the edges of those call volumes when the scammers are back, however. In recent months, federal agencies have focused on going after the small telecom providers that were allowing calls from COVID-19 scammers, citing the urgency of the pandemic. And free blocking tools that were already in place on many people’s phones help consumers dodge unwanted calls, so it’s not clear how many have noticed the lower numbers of scam and telemarketing calls in the past couple months. “What we do hear from consumers is call blocking tools are effective in reducing a significant number of robocalls but some unwanted calls are going to slip through,” said Maureen Mahoney, a policy analyst with Consumer Reports. Complaints about unwanted calls to the Federal Trade Commission have been steadily trending down since late 2018, and dropped by more than half in March from the year before, to 240,000. The Federal Communications Commission gets many fewer complaints overall but says those also fell 50 percent in March, to 10,000, and 60 percent in April, to 7,500. None of which is to say that nuisance calls and phone scams and texts have disappeared. “While reports of robocalls are way down overall, we’re now hearing about callers invoking the COVID-19 pandemic to pretend to be from the government, or making illegal medical or health care pitches,” an FTC blog post declared in mid-April. And Mahoney predicts that calls will pick up again, and it won’t just be scammers back in action. With so many people out of work and behind on their bills, debt collectors will be relentlessly badgering them to pay soon enough, she said.

The first COVID-19 vaccine to reach clinical trials in humans was determined to be both safe and generate an immune response against the virus — a “milestone” in the battle to defeat the deadly bug, a new study found. A single dose of the vaccine was found to produce virus-fighting antibodies and T cells, a type of immune cell, two weeks after it’s administered, according to the peer-reviewed study, published Friday in the journal The Lancet. “These results represent an important milestone,” said the lead researcher on the study, Professor Wei Chen. Producing both antibodies and T cells is an ideal result for a vaccine, the researchers said. A vaccine that does both not only triggers the body to produce virus-specific immune cells, but also supports the body’s innate immune response. But the potential vaccine is far from being made available for widespread use. Further trials are needed to determine whether the vaccine effectively protects against infection — rather than just triggering an immune response to the virus. “The challenges in the development of a COVID-19 vaccine are unprecedented, and the ability to trigger these immune responses does not necessarily indicate that the vaccine will protect humans from COVID-19,” Chen said. “This result shows a promising vision for the development of COVID-19 vaccines, but we are still a long way from this vaccine being available to all.” The study’s authors also noted that their research is limited because of its small sample size and short duration, and it also lacked a control group. The study, conducted in Wuhan, China, by the Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, tested different doses of the vaccine in 108 healthy adults who did not have the coronavirus. The vaccine produced no serious adverse effects at all doses — and was tolerated well among the adults who took it, according to the research. After two weeks, the vaccine produced virus-fighting antibodies across all dose levels, with the highest dose level triggering antibodies in 61 percent of those who took it. A majority of participants also produced virus-fighting T cells two weeks after taking the vaccine, which were also greatest at the higher dose levels. The Beijing Institute of Biotechnology’s vaccine is just one of dozens being studied around the world as public health authorities desperately search for a cure for the pandemic, which has already killed more than 94,000 people in the US alone. Another promising experimental vaccine from Oxford University also reached a milestone Friday, with researchers announcing they will be progressing to advanced stages of human trials in more than 10,000 volunteers.

CASCAIS, Portugal – A popular beach town near Lisbon plans to be the first in Portugal to test all of its 200,000 residents for coronavirus antibodies to try and help them enjoy as normal a summer season as possible despite the crisis. Born and bred in Cascais, loved for its beaches and golf courses, 57-year-old Marina Lima was one of the first to enter the tiny testing room when the initiative began on Thursday. Results take 24 hours and Lima hoped hers may clear her for spending more time with family, including a two-month-old grandson. “Having that information is very good,” she said. The municipality of Cascais hopes to conduct 5,000 tests per week in a deal with pharmaceutical firm Roche. Each test costs five euros ($5.45) and is paid for by the municipality and several patrons, said Cascais’ deputy mayor Miguel Pinto Luz. “These kind of initiatives also increase people’s confidence, which is needed now we are trying to restart the economy,” said Pinto Luz before himself being tested. Mass antibody testing is being considered by many countries to speed reopening of economies. Portugal, which so far has nearly 30,000 cases and 1,277 deaths, is slowly easing restrictions from a mid-March lockdown. Although the tests show who has been infected by COVID-19, it is not yet clear whether the presence of antibodies confers permanent immunity. Retiree Jose Ferreira, 79, will book an appointment to do his free test but has doubts. “Experts say the test itself can give us an idea but not exactly whether we are immune or not,” the 79-year-old said as he walked by one of Cascais’ beaches. “I hope it goes well, for the benefit of all.” To coax people back outside safely, Cascais has come up with initiatives including a carefully-controlled food fair, free buses, vending machines for masks and geometrical figures on grass to help sunbathers and picnickers keep apart. “We miss being outside,” said 33-year-old Gabriela Ferreira at a park. “Here we feel safe and can still have fun.”

Mayor Bill de Blasio insists city businesses forced to close because of the coronavirus outbreak are doing just fine and will be able to stay shuttered for months to come — despite a new report that found the Big Apple’s private sector has shed one in four jobs. “I’ve talked to lots and lots of business leaders, especially the smallest businesses. They’re very worried about their futures understandably, but they also are hanging on and they know it can be a matter of months until they’ll be back in action,” de Blasio said on WNYC Friday. A caller named Cassius from Brooklyn urged Hizzoner to “take a more surgical approach” to the city’s COVID-19 response by finding a way to protect the elderly and health care workers while allowing businesses to reopen. “We’re on the precipice of destroying the whole city basically,” Cassius said. “I couldn’t disagree more with that core analysis,” de Blasio responded. “Rushing back is consistently proven to have the boomerang effect and make things worse and cause bigger shutdowns because it’s not just about a small number of particularly vulnerable people,” de Blasio said. He dismissed the caller’s “doomsday” concerns, even though a new analysis of state Department of Labor data by the independent nonprofit the Empire Center found the city lost 24.5% of private-sector jobs during the crisis. City Councilman Mark Gjonaj blasted the mayor’s remarks. “Out of all the things that have come out of his mouth, this is the most outrageous. He lives in a de Blasio land. That is the furthest thing from the truth,” said the Bronx Democrat, who chairs the council’s small business committee. “He is not in touch with reality and all he has to do is walk down a commercial corridor to understand what is happening to our small businesses,” Gjonaj said. “He is setting up the city for failure. He’s going to leave City Hall in the worse condition that this city has experienced since World War II and the Great Depression,” he said. “That would also explain why he only allocated $49 million in loans and grants, which is a fraction of a fraction of what these small businesses actually need,” Gjonaj said about de Blasio’s limited relief program for the city’s mom-and-pop shops. The National Restaurant Association predicted that 11 percent of New York’s 25,000 restaurants will permanently close by the end of May, according to Eater.com. Iconic Big Apple eateries like Coogan’s Irish pub in Washington Heights and egg cream spot Gem Spa in the East Village have already shut their doors for good. The Empire Center’s E.J. McMahon said the city has taken an unparalleled fiscal hit. “For leisure and hospitality, including restaurants and hotels, the downturn equates to a virtual apocalypse — a job loss of 68 percent,” he said. “There’s a great concern that many of these jobs are lost,” added McMahon, referring particularly to the restaurant and retail sectors whose business models are based on volume. “The slow reopening is not going to help the restaurant sector,” he said.

Ohio leaders announced reopening dates Thursday for several activities such as wedding receptions, bowling alleys and high school athletic training if they can meet required safety protocols. Beginning Tuesday, May 26, miniature golf, batting cages and bowling alleys may resume operations. So can skills training for all sports, including contact sports. Tournaments, games and competitions for contact sports are still prohibited. Beginning Monday, June 1, catering and banquet centers may reopen and hold events like wedding receptions with a cap of 300 people if they meet required safety protocols currently in place for restaurants. “We recognize that people want to go on with life and we are trying to provide guidelines and recommendations as to how you can do so as safely as possible,” Lt. Jon Husted said at Gov. Mike DeWine’s news conference. “We want to proceed with cautious optimism that when we follow the proper protocols, we can resume the activities in life that we love without negatively impacting the health of our loved ones.” The state’s ban on mass gatherings of more than 10 people still remains in place, so tables must be 6 feet apart with no more than 10 people per table, said Dan Tierney, a spokesman in Gov. Mike DeWine’s office. And since congregating is prohibited, that likely would eliminate dance floors in most facilities. Self-service buffets or salad bars also not allowed. Buffets must be staffed by workers serving food. Weddings have always been permitted and that will continue without restriction on the number of guests at the ceremonies, Tierney said. Those are often religious ceremonies, which are protected by First Amendment Rights, he notes. But if you are attending or hosting your own reception outside or in a backyard, the state’s mass gathering ban would cap it at 10 people, Tierney clarified.

Baseball might return to New York this summer, but if spring training resumes, both the Yankees and Mets are expected to be at their sites in Florida, according to sources. While New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Monday that the state would support professional teams’ efforts to reopen their facilities and hold games without fans this season as the number of coronavirus cases falls locally, New York City has not yet hit all the markers to reopen completely. Major League Baseball and the Players Association are still trying to come to an agreement about how to start the season, with questions remaining about health and safety, as well as economics. If they are able to strike a deal by June 1, a spring training 2.0 might begin by mid-June, with the regular season opening on July 1. All MLB teams have the option of having their roughly three-week spring training at their home parks or spring facilities. With the Yankees in Tampa and the Mets in Port St. Lucie, both teams would have multiple fields to use at once. However, they would also have to deal with oppressive Florida summer heat and rainstorms. And the teams would have to institute whatever health guidelines are mandated by any agreement struck between the league and the union. Several Mets and Yankees have remained in Florida during the pandemic, with Yankees hitting coach Marcus Thames working with Giancarlo Stanton and DJ LeMahieu, among others. The hope is to eventually play a schedule about half of the standard length, ideally at the 30 teams’ home ballparks — something Cuomo welcomed this week. “I … have been encouraging major sports teams to plan reopenings without fans. But the games could be televised,” Cuomo said Monday. “New York State will help those major sports franchises to do just that. Hockey, basketball, baseball, football, whoever can reopen. We’re a ready, willing and able partner.”

BANDUNG, Indonesia – A zoo in Indonesia may slaughter some of its animals to feed others, such as a Sumatran tiger and a Javan leopard if it runs out of food in coming months after the coronavirus pandemic forced its to shut it doors. While its 850 animals are being fed smaller portions than usual, the zoo is contemplating a “worst-case scenario” of culling some animals to feed others as it expects to run out of food in July. The Bandung zoo in Indonesia’s fourth-biggest city, which usually earns about 1.2 billion rupiah ($81,744) a month from visitors, shut on March 23 as part of a wider country lockdown to try to contain the outbreak. “We have around thirty dotted deer and we have identified the old and unproductive ones (who can no longer breed) to be slaughtered to save the carnivores, such as the Sumatran tiger and Javan leopard,” said zoo spokesman Sulhan Syafi’i. Some birds including geese may also be culled, he said. Big cats, including a critically endangered Sumatran tiger named Fitri, now get 8 kg (18 lb) of meat every two days, down from 10 kg previously. The zoo needs more than 400 kg of fruit per day and 120 kg of meat every other day, Syafi’i said, noting it is now relying on donations to keep its animals alive. “The crocodiles are fatter and the tigers are healthier too. But the lion is still a bit skinny,” said Fauzan Dzulfikar, who was allowed to visit after a donation. The smaller daily portions have not gone unnoticed by the animals, even though Syafi’i said they still met minimum animal welfare standards. Orangutan keeper Aep Saepudin said the endangered primates can go into a rage and throw things. “The food is finished, but they still want to eat,” said Saepudin. The Indonesia Zoo Association, which has requested help from President Joko Widodo, estimates 92 percent of the country’s 60 zoos can only feed their animals until the end of May.

The puzzling Kawasaki-like inflammatory illness linked to the coronavirus is now affecting young adults — not just children, according to a report. Doctors across the country are now reporting patients in their early and mid-20s, the Washington Post reports. The new illness, recently dubbed multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children, or MIS-C, has impacted a 25-year-old at Northwell Health’s Long Island Jewish Medical Center, a 20-year-old in San Diego and several patients in their 20s at NYU Langone in the Big Apple, according to the outlet. Jennifer Lighter, a pediatric infectious disease doctor at NYU Langone, said MIS-C in younger kids causes symptoms very close to the traditional Kawasaki disease, which leaves blood vessels inflamed. But the teens and young adults who’ve contracted the illness are seeing an “overwhelming” and more serious response that attacks the heart and multiple organs. “The older ones have had a more severe course,” Lighter told the Post. There are at least 157 suspected cases of MIS-C being probed in New York but the cases doctors are seeing now present very differently from those of the few kids who presented with COVID-19 early on in the crisis, the outlet said. Typically, those children had pre-existing conditions, active coronavirus infections and trouble breathing, but the children and young adults who are now being examined for MIS-C were healthy before suddenly developing a fever, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and rashes. Many of the patients have antibodies for the coronavirus, meaning they’d previously been infected with the bug. The prevalence of antibodies in MIS-C cases suggests the conditions could be a delayed immune response, the outlet said. Jane Burns, a physician who runs the Kawasaki Disease Research Center at the University of California at San Diego, is concerned the illness could be underdiagnosed in adults, primarily because children’s doctors are the ones most familiar with it. Further, it’s difficult to get clear images of adult hearts because of thicker chest walls, making ultrasounds harder to read. “[What] internists need to be aware of is that maybe this is coming their way,” Burns told the Post, adding she is working with public health officials to expand warnings about the condition to include young adults. More than 20 states have reported MIS-C cases, with the nationwide total estimated to be several hundred, the outlet reported. While for now the disease appears to be rare, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is alarmed about how quickly MIS-C patients are declining. They’re urging parents to quickly seek medical care if they think their child is affected, the outlet said.

President Trump announced Friday that all houses of worship would be considered “essential services” and urged governors to “do the right thing” and reopen them immediately — adding that he would “override” them if they didn’t.  “Today, I am identifying houses of worship, churches, synagogues, and mosques, as essential places that provide essential services,” Trump declared in a sudden White House briefing.  “At my direction, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is issuing guidance for communities of faith,” he said.  “Some governors have deemed liquor stores and abortion clinics [are] essential, but have left out churches and other houses of worship, it’s not right. So I am correcting this injustice and calling houses of worship essential. I call upon governors to allow churches and places of worship to open right now,” the president said, adding that he’d overrule governors who don’t comply.  “If there is any question, they will have to call me, but they are not going to be successful in that call,”’ he asserted.  “The governors need to do the right thing and allow these very important, essential places of faith to open right now, for this weekend. If they do not do it, I will override the governors. In America, we need more prayer, not less,” Trump concluded before leaving the briefing room without taking questions.  Dr. Deborah Birx of the Coronavirus Task Force said moments later that while the president wants houses of worship opened this weekend, some may want to wait to protect their congregations.  “Certainly, people that have significant comorbidities, we want them protected. I know those houses of worship want to protect them, so really ensuring that maybe they can’t go this week if there’s a high number of COVID cases, maybe they wait another week,” Birx said, adding that faith leaders should contact their local health departments.  “I really firmly believe a knowledgeable community can really make judgments for themselves. I think each one of the leaders in the faith community should be in touch with their local health departments so that they can communicate to their congregants.”  Asked repeatedly what authority the president would use to “override” governors, White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany called the question ­“hypothetical.”  “You are assuming governors are going to keep churches and mosques shut down. That is a hypothetical question,” she said, adding that she believed that “faith communities [would] reopen.”  McEnany declined to respond when pressed further about the commander in chief’s authority to issue such an order.  She also pointed to CDC guidelines on reopening houses of worship.  “There is detailed guidance about the way you can clean your facilities and promote social distancing so this is something we should all look at and be thankful we are encouraging faith communities to reopen and do so in a safe way, McEnany said.  It remained unclear how many governors would comply, and how many houses of worships would reopen despite Trump’s and their governor’s direction.  Trump said Thursday he had planned to take “a very strong position” on church reopenings as the country struggles to deal with the coronavirus pandemic, which has killed at least 95,000 Americans to date.  “The churches are not being treated with respect by a lot of the Democrat governors,” Trump said. “I want to get the churches open . . . including mosques.”  Churches around the country have filed legal challenges to the virus closures.  In Minnesota, after Democratic Gov. Tim Walz this week declined to lift restrictions on churches, Roman Catholic and some Lutheran leaders said they would defy his ban and resume worship services.  They called the restrictions unconstitutional and unfair since restaurants, malls and bars were allowed limited reopening.  Trump’s comments also came after Chicago began fining churches for holding services that do not comply with Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s statewide stay-at-home order.  The Chicago Police Department told Fox News that three churches will be hit with penalties for services that were held Sunday.  Some churches that already reopened later closed after congregants came down with the coronavirus.  A Georgia church that reopened a few weeks ago is closing its doors again after several families came down with ­COVID-19.  Catoosa Baptist Tabernacle in Ringgold welcomed worshipers back into the sanctuary April 26 after shutting down in response to the pandemic, the Christian Post reported.  Two weeks later, on May 11, church leaders announced plans to suspend services after several parishioners tested positive for the virus.  With Wires 

Horndogs on lockdown are hot on sex dolls! Demand for the human-like silicone gals have shot up so much amid the coronavirus quarantine, suppliers are struggling to keep up production, according to a report. The Florida-based company Sex Doll Genie saw orders spike by more than 51 percent during February and March — when lockdowns began in the US and other countries, Forbes reported. “We have lots of products in stock but we can’t work fast enough to keep up with demand,” the company’s co-founder, Janet Stevenson, told the outlet. “We are hiring as quickly as we can and have created several new roles in fulfillment management and customer support in both the US and Europe.” Stevenson said the company — which sells realistic-looking made-to-order dolls — has gotten “hundreds” more inquiries than usual in the past two months. UK-based sex toy manufacturer CMG Leisure has also found themselves short-staffed as sales have skyrocketed amid the pandemic, Forbes reports. And demand isn’t just coming from single men, the demographic traditionally associated with the sex doll market. “What’s interesting about this massive increase in demand is that we are also seeing a changing demographic which is very positive for the sex doll industry and speaks to changing attitudes at home,” Stevenson told Forbes. “What we are seeing now is doll use is going mainstream with men and women both enthusiastic about bringing a doll into their bedroom.” Sex Doll Genie’s other co-founder, Stevenson’s husband, Amit, said couples are also fueling demand. “We are seeing the sex doll industry go through a revolution during the COVID-19 pandemic with a huge increase in orders from both couples and male and single females,” he told the UK’s Daily Star. The company also plans to introduce sex robots that “breathe” and come complete with a heartbeat. “I haven’t seen them used on a person yet, they are still in production, but we are getting to the point where we can call them a sex robot, but technically they are sex dolls as well,” Amit told the publication.

A Florida woman miraculously survived a terrifying attack by a pack of dogs – but ended up contracting the coronavirus while recovering at a rehab center, according to reports. Debbie Beaulieu was in her backyard in Spring Hill on Feb. 7 when the vicious canines attacked her and her own dogs, according to WFLA. “I don’t even know to this day how she survived that,” the woman’s son-in-law, Falcon Dinis, told the station. “Her skull is gone completely from here to the entire back. Her leg, it was pretty much eaten away. They had to shorten her leg two inches to make all of the blood vessel connections,” he added. Beaulieu’s injuries were so severe that she flatlined twice amid several surgeries, Dinis said. But her bad luck turned even worse after she was sent to a rehab center, he said. “She ended up contracting the coronavirus, and at the moment, she fought it through,” Dinis told the news outlet. “And I don’t know how she does it.” Beaulieu’s daughter, Christina Dinis, described the terrifying attack a few days after it happened. “She was pretty much being tossed around like a chew toy by the four dogs,” she told WFTS. “She’s a tiny little woman so the fact that she’s alive is amazing.” Beaulieu has since recovered from COVID-19, but remains hospitalized for the horrific injuries. Falcon told WFLA that she’s worried about how she will pay the bills. “And I tell her all the time, I speak to her, I tell her, ‘You don’t have nothing to worry about, Mom. I got it all,’” he said. “’Just keep fighting and the rest we’ll take care of.’” The Hernando County Sheriff’s Office has said there were no records of complaints for aggressive behavior by the dogs in the previous year, according to WFTS. But neighbors told the station that many people, including Beaulieu, had filed complaints with the county, saying the dogs often roamed freely and posed a threat to the community. Three of the dogs’ owners faced civil citations because the animals were not licensed with the county, were left unrestrained and bit several people, the outlet reported. Beaulieu’s family is urging authorities to take stronger action. “They need to be held 100 percent responsible,” Christina told WFTS. “Jail time, do what you got to do. But this is because of their negligence. I don’t blame any breed dog, I don’t.” She expressed her gratitude for the brave neighbors who fought off the dogs during the attack. “They saved her life. I’m so grateful for them. The bites they took, would have been more on her, could have killed her completely,” Christina said. Meanwhile, Falcon said Beaulieu will be released from the hospital soon. “That day is going to be one of the happiest days of my life — besides seeing my daughters being born. I think that will be the same way,” he told WFLA.

“All I have for you is a word,” says a voice in the new trailer for the upcoming science-fiction movie “Tenet” that dropped Thursday. “It’ll open the right doors, and open some of the wrong doors, too.” Director Christopher Nolan is hoping “Tenet” will also open some cinema doors. Nolan, who is famed for major big-screen films such as “The Dark Knight” and “Dunkirk,” has stayed adamant that “Tenet” will offer a traditional movie-going experience, and not join the throngs of direct-to-streaming releases that have become common during the coronavirus pandemic. In March, Nolan went so far as to write an op-ed for the Washington Post called “Movie theaters are a vital part of American social life. They will need our help.” With that in mind, “Tenet,” a Warner Bros. release, still plans on an ambitious July 17 debut. In a move of defiance, the action-packed new trailer ends saying “Coming to Theaters,” with each word punctuated by booming music. Chances are, if the director gets his dream of reopening brick-and-mortar movie theaters with “Tenet,” it will not be realized in every state. California Gov. Gavin Newsom said in late April that it would be “months, not weeks” before theaters start up again. Mayor Bill de Blasio said Thursday that New York City will likely begin Phase 1 of reopening during the first half of June. Movie theaters are part of Phase 4. Texas has reopened its cinemas, and many states, including New York, have seen a surge in popularity of drive-ins. “Tenet,” which has a vague plot involving international spies and world-saving, stars John David Washington (“BlacKkKlansman”), Robert Pattinson, Michael Caine, Himesh Patel and Clémence Poésy.

Countries across East Africa and the Horn of Africa are witnessing a “triple threat” from overlapping disasters as the coronavirus, locusts and flooding inundate communities across the region. The International Federation of Red Cross (IFRC) said that widespread flooding across Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda has led to the displacement of more than 500,000 and killed nearly 300 people. But the floods have also increased the potential spread of COVID-19 and slowed intervention operations against the most severe locust crisis in the region has seen in decades. “The ongoing flooding crisis is exacerbating other threats caused by COVID-19 and the invasion of locusts,” Dr. Simon Missiri, IFRC’s regional director for Africa, said Wednesday. “Travel and movement restrictions meant to slow down the spread of COVID-19 are hampering efforts to combat swarms of locusts that are ravaging crops.” The floods have forced hundreds of thousands of people to seek temporary shelter and people there are frequently unable to practice social distancing measures. Officials are worried there could be an increase in coronavirus cases in Africa. “We are worried that the number of people who are hungry and sick will increase in the coming weeks as flooding and COVID-19 continue to severely affect the coping capacity of many families in the region,” Missiri said. “Harsh weather conditions are having a multiplier effect on an already difficult situation and this could potentially lead to worrying levels of food insecurity in the region.” Acute food insecurity is already affecting more than 20 million people in the Horn of Africa and officials from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and worried that soon West Africa could be seeing swarms of locust. 400 hectares of land have been protected due to efforts by the FAO, according to Dominique Burgeon, FAO’s director of emergencies. But the FAO has requested over $150 million for “rapid response and anticipatory action in 10 countries.” The World Bank on Thursday announced a $500 million program to help countries in the Middle East and Africa fight the locust swarms. “Together, this food supply emergency combined with the pandemic and economic shutdown in advanced economies places some of the world’s poorest and most vulnerable people at even greater risk,” David Malpass, president of the World Bank Group, said in a Thursday statement.

China on Friday repeated its pledge to implement its landmark trade deal with the US amid growing tensions between the two countries. “China will continue to boost economic and trade cooperation with other countries to deliver mutual benefits,” premier Li Keqiang said at the annual meeting of China’s parliament in Beijing, according to Bloomberg News. American and Chinese officials agreed earlier this month to forge ahead with the phase-one deal that President Trump signed in January even as the White House slammed China’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic. US officials touted progress toward implementing the deal Thursday as they added agricultural products such as blueberries and Hass avocados to the list of items that can now be exported to China. Beijing has also updated its lists of American facilities eligible to export meat and dairy products, officials said. “China has worked with the United States to implement measures that will provide greater access for US producers and exporters to China’s growing food and agricultural markets,” US Trade Representative Robert Lighthizer said in a statement. But Trump has said the trade pact “doesn’t feel the same” now that the coronavirus crisis has roiled the global economy. He suggested last week that the US could “cut off the whole relationship” after the administration accused the Chinese Communist Party of trying to cover up the outbreak. China is now threatening to retaliate if the US passes a law that would let Trump sanction the country over its handling of the virus, according to Singapore’s Straits Times newspaper. “China will never start trouble but will never flinch when trouble comes its way,” Zhang Yesui, a spokesman for China’s National People’s Congress, reportedly said at a news conference. “We will resolutely defend our sovereignty, security and development interests.” With Post wires

GENEVA – The new coronavirus is believed to be spreading throughout Yemen where the health care system “has in effect collapsed,” the United Nations said on Friday, appealing for urgent funding. “Aid agencies in Yemen are operating on the basis that community transmission is taking place across the country,” Jens Laerke, spokesman for the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), told a Geneva briefing. “We hear from many of them that Yemen is really on the brink right now. The situation is extremely alarming, they are talking about that the health system has in effect collapsed,” he said. Aid workers report having to turn people away because they do not have enough medical oxygen or sufficient supplies of personal protective equipment, Laerke said. A flight carrying international aid workers landed in Aden on Thursday as air space opened up for rotations, but Yemeni nationals have been doing most of the on-site work, he said. The main coronavirus treatment center in southern Yemen has recorded at least 68 deaths in just over two weeks, Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Borders), the medical charity running the site, said on Thursday. The figure – more than double the toll announced by Yemeni authorities so far – suggested “a wider catastrophe unfolding in the city”, MSF said. War-ravaged Yemen, whose malnourished population has among the world’s lowest immunity levels to disease, is divided between the Saudi-backed government based in Aden and its foe, the Iran-aligned Houthi group, in the north. Yemeni authorities have reported 184 coronavirus infections including 30 deaths to the World Health Organization (WHO), the latest WHO figures showed overnight. “The actual incidence is almost certainly much higher,” Laerke said. The United Nations estimates that it will seek $2 billion for Yemen to maintain aid programs through year-end, he added. Laerke, noting that the world body and Saudi Arabia will co-host a virtual pledging conference in 10 days, said: “It is very, very critical that the international community steps up now and at the pledging conference on the 2nd of June because we are heading towards a fiscal cliff. “If we do not get the money coming in, the programs that are keeping people alive, are very much essential to fighting back against COVID, will have to close,” he said. “And then the world will have to witness in a country what happens without a functioning health system battling COVID. I do not think the world wants to see that.”

The combined fortunes of America’s billionaires ballooned by $434 billion during the coronavirus pandemic, even as millions of Americans lost their jobs, a new report says. That marked a 15-percent increase in the total net worth of the nation’s more than 600 billionaires between March 18 and May 19 as much of the country was locked down to stop the virus from spreading, according to the report from Americans for Tax Fairness and the Institute for Policy Studies, two left-leaning think tanks. “While millions risk their lives and livelihoods as first responders and front line workers, these billionaires benefit from an economy and tax system that is wired to funnel wealth to the top,” the Institute for Policy Studies’ Chuck Collins said in a statement. The surge in wealth came as more than 38 million people applied for unemployment benefits in nine weeks with widespread lockdown measures forcing businesses to close and lay off workers. The nation’s No. 1 and No. 3 billionaires — Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos and Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg — added nearly nearly $60 billion to their fortunes over two months, representing about 14 percent of the total growth, according to the think tanks’ analysis of Forbes data. Both tech tycoons have benefitted from their companies’ soaring stock prices as the coronavirus crisis has boosted their businesses. Amazon shares rose 38 percent from March 18 to an all-time high of $2,525.45 on Thursday, helping raise Bezos’s net worth by 31 percent, to $147.6 billion. Facebook’s market cap, meanwhile, climbed 61.4 percent in that time to a high of $237.20, raising Zuckerberg’s net worth by a whopping 46 percent, to $80 billion. Other big winners include Jeff Bezos’s ex-wife, MacKenzie Bezos, whose fortune grew by about a third to $48 billion; financial media honcho and former presidential candidate Michael Bloomberg, who saw a 25.7 percent surge to $60.3 billion; and Tesla CEO Elon Musk with a 48 percent jump to $36.4 billion, according to the report. A previous Institute for Policy Studies report showed America’s billionaires getting almost 10 percent richer in three early weeks of the virus crisis from March 18 to April 10.

White House economists say they believe the third quarter of 2020 will be the best in US history — channeling new optimism as states reopen following coronavirus lockdowns. Kevin Hassett, a senior adviser to President Trump, told reporters on Friday that he expects US GDP to drop by about 40 percent in the second quarter before springing back. “There’s a lot of uncertainty, but we expect that, like along with the Congressional Budget Office, they expect that the third quarter will be the highest growth quarter in US history,” Hassett said. On Thursday, White House National Economic Council Director Larry Kudlow also pointed to the CBO report, saying its projected third-quarter growth would be “the biggest growth quarter in American history.” The increasingly optimistic messaging follows Trump’s frequent description of the third quarter as a transition. On Wednesday — before the CBO’s projections were released Thursday — Trump called the third quarter “a great transition period.” The CBO report projected a 37.7 percent plunge in GDP in the second quarter, followed by a 21.5 percent surge in the third quarter and a 10.4 percent increase in the fourth quarter. The budget office’s report wasn’t all good news, however, including an estimate of continued high unemployment as a result of the coronavirus crash, which left nearly one quarter of US workers unemployed. The report estimated that unemployment would average 9.3 percent in 2021. Hassett told reporters that employment would recover more slowly than economic output, and that he expects the US unemployment rate to peak in June. He said there’s no evidence yet that unemployment is dropping in states that are allowing businesses to reopen, but that the growth of unemployment has slowed in those states. “We’re having an episode that will be studied by economic historians forever and ever because we’ve had about the biggest negative shock we’ve ever seen, accompanied by the biggest positive policy response we’ve ever seen,” Hassett said. Hassett, a former Columbia Business School professor, said he doesn’t believe that anything has changed this week as Republicans signal greater openness to a fifth major coronavirus response bill. Trump and congressional Republicans discussed a fifth package on Thursday. “I don’t really feel like something changed in the last 24 hours,” Hassett said. “We’ve been planning for a phase four deal in case one happens. We met with the president last week to go over options, so I think we’re ready.”

Three large Southern states that moved aggressively to reopen amid the coronavirus crisis have seen new cases and deaths largely hold steady since then — despite several controversies over some of their data. In Georgia, where Gov. Brian Kemp bucked the White House and local officials to lift a stay-at-home order on April 24, the state reported 862 cases on Thursday, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. That was less than the 946 new cases counted on Wednesday, but helped spur a slight rise in a seven-day rolling average that’s been basically trending downward since the start of the Peach State’s reopening. Deaths, meanwhile, rose by 78, marking the most since the same number was reached on April 27 and bringing the total toll to 1,775. Georgia set its single-day record for coronavirus deaths — 94 — before the lockdown, on April 20.   Also Thursday, Kemp said he’d ordered an official review into how the state was compiling its numbers, following the revelation that the Department of Public Health included the results of 57,000 antibody tests in its data “since early April.” The snafu produced potentially misleading information because antibody tests can only confirm previous exposure to the coronavirus, not an active infection. “We’re not perfect. We make mistakes,” Kemp said. The bungle followed at least three others involving Georgia’s coronavirus information, including a since-corrected chart that wrongly showed steady declines in new cases because the dates weren’t listed in chronological order. AP EPA View Slideshow In neighboring Florida, which this month saw some beaches abruptly closed after being swarmed by sun-worshippers, the Department of Health on Thursday confirmed 1,204 new cases among the state’s population of 29.5 million, bringing the total to 48,675, according to the Miami Herald. There were also 48 more COVID-19 fatalities, pushing the Sunshine State’s death toll to 2,144. Florida — which was among the last states to impose a coronavirus lockdown, on April 2 — hit a record 1,413 new cases on April 16, followed by a record 83 deaths on April 28, according to the Tallahassee Reports website. Since the state began reopening on May 4, its seven-day average of new cases is essentially flat, according to a chart published by the New York Times. Gov. Ron DeSantis blamed Thursday’s spike in new cases — the highest since April 17 — on “another big dump” of more than 50,000 new test results. A DeSantis spokeswoman also tweeted that Rebekah Jones — who claims she was fired as the architect of the state’s digital coronavirus dashboard for refusing to doctor data to support the governor’s reopening plan — was “erratic” and “exhibits behavior unbecoming of a state employee.” DeSantis said Thursday that Jones was fired for insubordination and was “also under active criminal charges” for “cyberstalking and cyber sexual harassment.” In Texas, there were 945 new cases on Thursday, for a total 52,268, according to the Texas Tribune. The seven-day average of new cases rose fairly steadily from around 1,000 on May 1, when Gov. Greg Abbott began lifting the lockdown he ordered March 19, but began dipping on Sunday and is now around 1,250, according to a chart prepared by the Tribune. There were also 21 COVID-19 deaths in the Lone Star State on Thursday, increasing the total number of fatalities to 1,440, the Tribune said. Meanwhile, Texas Supreme Court Justice Debra Lehrmann became the state’s first high-ranking official to be infected, based on positive test results for her and her husband after they suffered fevers and body aches early last week, the Dallas Morning News reported. Lehrman called the situation “perplexing,” telling the paper, “We have strictly adhered to the stay-at-home order since early March.” Nationwide, the number of confirmed cases increased Thursday by about 25,300, with the total exceeding 1.5 million but new cases basically on the decline since peaking in late April, according to information posted online by Johns Hopkins University’s Coronavirus Resource Center. The American death toll was 94,729, with 28,743, or 30 percent, in New York. 

Long Island and the Mid-Hudson region in New York could start reopening from their coronavirus-induced shutdowns as soon as next week, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Friday. Cuomo, speaking during a press briefing in Manhattan, said those two regions could reopen as long as the number of deaths in both areas continue to decrease and their coronavirus tracing programs come online. “We’re hopeful that the number of deaths continue to decline and then they’ll be reopening,” the governor said. As of Friday, both regions had met five of the state’s seven COVID-19-related benchmarks. New York regions need to tick all seven boxes in order to enter phase one of the state’s four-phase reopening plan. In anticipation of those two areas entering phase one in the days ahead, Cuomo said construction staging will be permitted. Under phase one of the state’s reopening plan, construction, manufacturing and wholesale supply chains plus retail businesses with curbside pickup can reopen. New York City met four of the seven state criteria Friday, and Mayor Bill de Blasio said a day earlier that the Big Apple is on track for reopening in the first half of June. REUTERS/Andrew Kelly REUTERS/Andrew Kelly Ira L. Black/Corbis via Getty Im Ira L. Black/Corbis via Getty Im View Slideshow

Amber Rose is not letting the coronavirus pandemic hold back her beauty routine. The model, 36, revealed on Instagram Thursday that she hit up celebrity favorite Dr. Jason Diamond in Beverly Hills to get a round of Botox injections. “Thank you @drjasondiamond Ur the best! My forehead is so Smooth!,” Rose captioned a photo with the doctor, both wearing face masks. The Beverly Hills Council voted to resume elective and cosmetic surgeries in California earlier this month. Another Kardashian-favorite dermatologist, Dr. Harold Lancer, told Page Six Style that his clients have been calling his office daily, begging for treatments. He even says he has 1,000 appointments already booked for late summer with his regulars, who are all desperate to re-do their Botox, fillers and other rejuvenating treatments. Other celebrities who are willing to go to great lengths for their looks during lockdown include “Bachelor” star Amanda Stanton, who drove to Arizona to get her hair colored, and the cast of “Real Housewives of Atlanta,” who hired hair and makeup teams to come to their homes ahead of the virtual reunion taping. Perhaps Dr. Lancer will be able to open his doors sooner than expected.

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo on Friday ripped China for its proposed power grab in Hong Kong — as the mainland Communist Party sought to establish its own intelligence bases in the city. The bases are part of China’s national security legislation for Hong Kong presented to the National People’s Congress in Beijing, which would also ban secessionist protests and what it calls subversive activity and foreign interference in the city in the wake of last year’s massive pro-democracy protests in the territory. “The United States condemns the People’s Republic of China National People’s Congress proposal to unilaterally and arbitrarily impose national security legislation on Hong Kong,” Pompeo’s statement read. “The decision to bypass Hong Kong’s well-established legislative processes and ignore the will of the people of Hong Kong would be a death knell for the high degree of autonomy Beijing promised for Hong Kong under the Sino-British Joint Declaration, a UN-filed agreement. We stand with the people of Hong Kong.” Communist Party rulers in Beijing unveiled new details about their law on Friday, a day after proposing the legislation that critics see as a turning point for China’s most free-wheeling city, a bustling financial center and former British colony. Pro-democracy activists and politicians have for years opposed such legislation, arguing it could erode its autonomy, guaranteed under the “one country, two systems” agreement under which Britain returned Hong Kong to China in 1997. “Beijing is attempting to silence Hong Kongers’ critical voices with force and fear,” activist Joshua Wong, one of the leaders of pro-democracy street protests in 2014, tweeted. Some pro-democracy lawmakers denounced the plans as “the end of Hong Kong,” and activists called for people to rise up against the proposal. Foreign diplomats fear establishing new Beijing agencies in Hong Kong could give mainland security and intelligence officers enforcement powers that could potentially put rights and freedoms, protected in the handover agreement, at risk. Calls have emerged for flash mobs at night across the territory and democracy activists plan to meet the press to announce “street action.” “This is a great moment to reboot the protest,” said university student Kay, 24, who took part in last year’s often violent anti-government and anti-Beijing protests that entered a lull this year due to the coronavirus. Hong Kong leader Carrie Lam said her government will “fully cooperate” with the Chinese parliament to safeguard national security, which she said would not affect rights, freedoms or judicial independence. The move also comes as the US and China engage in a war of words over the coronavirus pandemic, Taiwan, trade and China’s military buildup in the South China Sea. And experts see the move as an effort by President Xi Jinping to send a message to President Trump that he is not beholden to the administration’s dictates. “Xi feels threatened, the leadership feels threatened — this is a crisis,” David Zweig, an emeritus professor at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and director of Transnational China Consulting, told Bloomberg. “This is, ‘We’re not going to give an inch, we’re going to tighten up, and Hong Kong’s national security as a potential subversive center is greater than its economic value.’” Relations between the world’s two largest economies have soured despite completion of a phase one trade deal after the coronavirus outbreak that began in the teeming city of Wuhan became a worldwide pandemic, which has killed more than 333,000 worldwide, including more than 95,000 in the US. China has been accused by Trump and others of withholding information on the early stages of the coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan and how it handled the outbreak. Xi has denied the charges and said the country shared the virus genome sequence — key for finding treatments and a vaccine — with the world on Jan. 12, about two weeks after scientists first detected a cluster of a new, pneuomonia-like virus in Wuhan. But China does not want to abandon the trade agreement with the US following a trade war that damaged both countries’ economies. “The Chinese leadership does not want to be accused of walking away or reneging on the US-China trade agreement,” James Green, a former State Department official who is now a senior adviser for geopolitical consulting firm McLarty Associates, told Bloomberg. “If it fails, in their view, the US will have to be the one to pull the trigger and walk away.” Trump said Thursday the US would react “very strongly” if China pushed the national security legislation in Hong Kong, without offering specifics. “It is starting to look like a US-China summer of discontent in the making,” said Stephen Innes, chief global market strategist at AxiCorp. The NPC — a rubber stamp for the Communist leadership — is expected to vote on the resolution at the end of the annual session, likely on May 28. With Reuters

A promising experimental vaccine for the coronavirus hit a milestone Friday, with British researchers announcing they will be progressing to advanced stages of human trials. The team from world-renowned Oxford University told NBC News the expanded trial will involve more than 10,000 volunteers in the United Kingdom and will allow doctors to determine how effective the shot is at preventing a COVID-19 infection. The vaccine already showed success in protecting monkeys from “heavy quantities” of the pathogen in earlier trials. “We’re thrilled,” Adrian Hill, one of the researchers leading the project, told the broadcaster. If the trial goes well, the vaccine could be on the market as soon as September, according to pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca, which has partnered with Oxford to manufacture the inoculation. The company has promised to produce at least 400 million doses and secured total manufacturing capacity to produce 1 billion doses by the end of 2021. AstraZeneca scored $1 billion from the US government to help fund the development and distribution of the vaccine earlier this week. But hurdles remain. The initial tests of the vaccine in six rhesus macaque monkeys showed it was able to make COVID-19 infections less severe, but it did not prevent infection. Oxford’s potential vaccine is just one of dozens being pursued by universities, governments and companies around the world as public health authorities desperately search for new tools to contain and eliminate the coronavirus pandemic, which has killed more than 94,000 in the US alone.

Smithsonian curators in Washington, DC, have launched a project to collect artifacts from the coronavirus pandemic, according to a report. Curators on the American History Museum’s COVID-19 task force are seeking handwritten grocery lists, letters from patients, personal protective equipment, test kits and ventilators. “Obviously those are objects we will not collect until the pandemic has really wound down,” said Alexandra Lord, the chair of the American History Museum’s medicine and science division. “We don’t want to put pressure on supplies.” “There’s a whole set of protocol around artifacts that we can’t follow right now,” Lord added. The gatherers don’t want to disturb the here and now, as even museums are closed, but they do want to preserve this living memory. Other museums are trying to preserve these moments in time, as well. Digital photographs are being sought for a new “Moments of Resilience” online collection. “Three, five, 10 years from now, we really don’t want the human impact of this story to get lost. And so that’s what we’re really trying to collect,” said Melanie Adams, the director of the Anacostia Community Museum, which spearheads that collection. Curators at the National Museum of African American History and Culture are collecting oral histories of the black experience. “It’s important to make sure that those stories from African Americans are included in the record,” said Dwandalyn R. Reece, the museum’s associate director for curatorial affairs. Black people are dying in disproportionate numbers from COVID-19 in the United States; people of color are especially exposed because they are more likely to hold many of the jobs that were deemed essential and, as the reopening starts, they are likely to be among those whose workplaces open first. For instance, in New York City — the epicenter of the US outbreak, black people make up just under 25 percent of the population, but more than 40 percent of public transit workers. That has been the question of freedom as America begins a new normal. Delmonte Jefferson, a black public health professional in Atlanta, said African-Americans and other people of color want to mitigate the economic damage as much as anyone else — especially since those groups are among the ones who are suffering the most from the downturn. But they don’t want a return at all costs, he said. “Even the thought of opening the country back up shows that African-Americans aren’t being valued,” said Jefferson, executive director of the Atlanta-based National African American Tobacco Prevention Network.

Families of all city school students will receive a $420 gift card to help cover food costs during the coronavirus pandemic, officials said Thursday. The pre-loaded cards will be distributed as part of the Coronavirus Pandemic Electronic Benefit Transfer drawn from a federal $3 trillion stimulus package passed last month. The cards will provide parents with roughly $5.70 for each day kids were eligible to receive a meal after the closure of the city school system on March 16 through the end of the school year next month. The funds will be available to the families of all city students regardless of income. The city established roughly 500 meal distribution centers to hand out meals to city families after the system’s closure. But with set hours and some families unable to use public transportation to reach them, the sites did not fill the breach entirely. If enrolled in federal school lunch programs, city parochial and private school families will also be eligible for the benefit. Backers of the move said the cards will also benefit local markets, which will see an uptick in business.

Just when you thought you were playing it safe. The Western Lakes Fire District of Oconomowoc, Wisconsin, shared an explosive photograph Thursday as a warning to all you motorists trying to be hyper-vigilant about the coronavirus this summer. Leave your hand sanitizer in a hot car and your vehicle’s interior could end up a fire scene. “By its nature, most hand sanitizer is alcohol-based and therefore flammable,” the fire officials wrote on Facebook May 21, alongside a photo of a driver-side door interior that had been mangled and melted by hand sanitizer. “Keeping it in your car during hot weather, exposing it to sun causing magnification of light through the bottle — and particularly being next to open flame while smoking in vehicles or grilling while enjoying this weekend — can lead to disaster,” they explained. The first responders, who use their social-media presence to educate their community on common fire hazards, added that clear water bottles also pose an explosion risk. They included a link to the National Fire Protection Association’s YouTube video with more warnings on hand sanitizer combustion.  However, a few citizen journalists on social media were dubious of the bizarre claim, asking the WLFD to provide hard evidence of spontaneous hand sanitizer combustion. “Has WLFD seen incidents of either of these two things happening?” asked Jeff Meyers. Others replied to Meyers’ query claiming they had parsed the links provided in the original Facebook post, but none pointed to proof of the hand sanitizer blast theory. Meyers continued, “I’ve found stories of bottles that swelled and ‘exploded’ (due to pressure, not combustion) that were in hot cars, but nothing about bottles of hand sanitizers spontaneously combusting. Additionally I did find some stories that claimed hand sanitizers would lose their effectiveness if left in a hot car. (no mention of fire risk).” “Please quote your sources,” echoed Sara Morgan. Claiming the WLFD has an “ethical duty” to back up this claim, Meyers and others had finally goaded a response. “We thankfully have not and are doing our best to keep it that way,” the fire department wrote. “We would also champion you searching your most trusted and enjoyed sources for more information,” they added in a later response. And Meyers, ever the investigator (apparently), did just that — after digging for an undisclosed amount of time through comments on fire hazard videos. “And from the cited youtube video comments,” he followed up alongside a screenshot, a question to the National Fire Protection Association from one Ken K. “Say my car is sitting in the hot sun in the summer, should I be worried if my hand sanitizer is in the glove box, can it spontaneously combust just from heat?” The NFPA responded, “Thanks for your question, Ken! The vapors generated at the flashpoint of hand sanitizer discussed in this video still require an ignition source (like a flame from a candle) to cause the vapors being released by the liquid to ignite. For it to spontaneously combust with no other, external ignition source other than self-heating alone, you’d have to reach over 700 degrees F!” To recap: Yes, hand sanitizer can explode in a hot car — if it’s as hot as a commercial pizza oven. Otherwise, it’s safe to be sanitary this summer, drivers. Godspeed!

Somalia has witnessed a “massive” rise in female genital mutilation (FGM) as girls are kept home from school due to lockdown restrictions during the coronavirus pandemic, a report said Monday. The charity Plan International, which advocates for children’s rights and equal opportunities for girls, said so-called circumcisers are going door to door offering to cut girls unable to venture outside. The lockdown, which coincided with the Muslim month of Ramadan, when the ritual is traditionally performed, has undermined efforts to eradicate the practice in Somalia. About 98 percent of women and girls there already have undergone FGM, the highest rate in the world, the charity said. “We’ve seen a massive increase in recent weeks,” Sadia Allin, Plan International’s head of mission in Somalia, told the Thomas Reuters Foundation. “We want the government to ensure FGM is included in all COVID responses.” FGM includes many different rituals and usually varies by ethnic group. The most severe form, called infibulation – the practice of excising the clitoris and labia of a girl or woman and stitching together the edges of the vulva to prevent sexual intercourse – is carried out mostly in the northeastern region of Africa in Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and Sudan. Somali parents have taken advantage of school closures amid the pandemic, asking nurses to perform FGM on their daughters now when they have time to stay home to recover. Allin, who herself has been cut and has two daughters, ages 5 and 9, said circumcisers have been more aggressive in promoting their business amid the economic downturn caused by the pandemic. “The cutters have been knocking on doors, including mine, asking if there are young girls they can cut. I was so shocked,” Allin said. “FGM is one of the most extreme manifestations of violence against girls and women. It’s a lifetime torture for girls. The pain continues until the girl goes to the grave. It impacts her education, ambition … everything.” The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) predicts about 290,000 girls in Somalia will be subjected to FGM in the year 2020. Advocacy efforts to raise awareness about the dangers of the practice in local communities have been stifled by the lockdown. UNFPA Somalia representative Anders Thomsen said global efforts to eradicate the practice also have been sidelined to focus on the coronavirus crisis, meaning an additional 2 million girls worldwide could be cut in the next decade. Thomsen said that although Somalia is “ground zero for FGM,” he sees some glimmers of hope that the practice will die down due to influence from neighboring Sudan, where the practice recently was criminalized. Data also suggest Somalia families have switched from infibulation to less severe forms of the ritual. The World Health Organization estimates roughly 200 million women and girls alive today have undergone some form of female genital mutilation. The practice has been documented in more than 30 countries mostly in Africa, as well as in the Middle East and Asia.

It’s decidedly bad news for John Krasinski’s squeaky clean reputation. Ever since news broke that the “Quiet Place” star had agreed to sell his positive story broadcast “Some Good News,” which he developed for YouTube in March, critics have descended on social media to call out the 40-year-old actor/director for “selling out.” Krasinski launched the show at the cusp of the coronavirus pandemic as a distraction from the devastating news coverage. During his first broadcast March 30, he had a request for viewers. “For years now, I’ve been wondering, ‘Why is there not a news show dedicated entirely to good news?’ Well, desperately seeking my fix somewhere else, I reached out to all of you this week, asking — nay, begging — for some good news,” he began. “And, boy, did you deliver.” But earlier this week, Krasinski aired his last installment after 14 episodes. All told, “Some Good News” earned nearly 1 million followers on Instagram and 2.57 million subscribers on YouTube, with each broadcast bringing in between 3 million and 17 million viewers. Now, folks on social media are claiming he’s turned the feel-good program into a cash grab as the show has been officially licensed by ViacomCBS for an undisclosed amount of money after a reported bidding war. Very few details about the new show have been announced — other than the fact that Krasinski won’t be the host. “Remember when he created this free feel good YouTube show to ‘make people feel good’ and now he is…………….selling it for $$$? really cool, 100% honorable,” tweeted entertainment writer Lindsey Weber. ‘Mmmmm taste that sweet sweet capitalism.’ On Twitter, a Florida film professor complained, “You got to love when what seemed like an act of goodwill during a pandemic can be auctioned off to the highest bidder. Mmmmm taste that sweet sweet capitalism.” Before cutting the cord, Krasinski gained traction by flexing his Hollywood ties. His premiere episode featured a rare “The Office” reunion between him and Steve Carell. Since then he has brought in big-star cameos including Brad Pitt and Lin-Manuel Miranda. Krasinski signed off his final episode Tuesday, saying he was “no longer needing to remind you that no matter how hard things get, there is always good in the world. Thank you all for making this show so very special. We will see you again.” With the move to CBS, fans of the show worry that the originally humble production will lose its appeal. “Hahah wth. The charm is watching this particular guy in his house with somewhat amateur production values chatting with friends, family, and fans,” tweeted technology writer Dave Zatz. “I hate this so much. Some Good News was pure and wonderful and ViacomCBS using it as a ‘multiplatform showcase across the conglomerate’s brands’ makes me want to stab myself in the eyeballs,” added Josh Pigford, a tech entrepreneur. “THIS IS WHY WE CAN’T HAVE NICE THINGS.” Krasinski, at least, has high hopes for the new and hopefully improved “Some Good News.” In a statement to the Hollywood Reporter this week, he said, “Could not be more excited and proud to be partnering with CBS/Viacom to be able to bring ‘Some Good News’ to so many more people! From the first episode, our goal was to create a news show dedicated entirely to good news. Never did I expect to be joining the ranks of such a historic news organization as CBS.”

SEOUL – When a man in Seoul tested positive for the new coronavirus in May, South Korean authorities were able to confirm his wide-ranging movements in and outside the city in minutes, including five bars and clubs he visited on a recent night out. The fast response – well ahead of many other countries facing outbreaks – was the result of merging South Korea’s already advanced methods of collecting information and tracking the virus into a new data-sharing system that patches together cellphone location data and credit card records. The Epidemic Investigation Support System (EISS), introduced in late March, effectively removed technological barriers to sharing that information between authorities, by building on the country’s “Smart City” data system. That platform was originally designed to let local authorities share urban planning information, from population to traffic and pollution, by uploading data in Excel spreadsheets and other formats. Now it forms the foundation for a data clearinghouse that has turbocharged South Korea’s response to the virus. While personal location and credit card data has been available for use by South Korean health investigators for years, previous systems required physical paperwork to request the data before it was uploaded to analytical software. That took investigators about two to three days to gather a patient’s personal data to trace their contacts.  The new system digitizes the entire process, including the requests and can reduce that time to less than an hour, officials say. Investigators can use it to analyze transmission routes and detect likely infection hotspots. The system has had some teething problems and has attracted criticism on privacy grounds, but it has been a major factor in the East Asian nation of 52 million keeping virus infections at a relatively low 11,122, as of Thursday, with just 264 deaths. It got its first test with an outbreak in May, traced to the Itaewon district of Seoul known for its nightlife, which ended up infecting at least 206 people. “Faster epidemiological survey means faster discovery of potential patients, which helps contain the spread of the virus even when there’s a massive cluster of infections or people who are asymptomatic, as we’ve seen in the nightclub outbreak,” said Yoon Duk-hee, director for infectious disease management in Gyeonggi Province, a densely populated region near Seoul. Yoon said she and other authorities used the EISS to trace the movements of the first person detected in the Seoul nightclub outbreak, as he visited a number of places including two nightclubs and three bars. The system is still reliant on humans operating it to approve and upload data, which can lead to delays. And in some cases, concerns over privacy and security have led to access being so restricted that some local officials said they had to rely on old-fashioned methods. When another infected person – a 25-year-old man known as Incheon Patient 102 – told health authorities that he did not have a job, city officials said they went to the police because the information they wanted to check was not available in a timely manner on the EISS. The phone’s location data showed he was a teacher at a private academy, where subsequent contact tracing and testing revealed at least 30 other people had been infected, including some of his students and their parents. “There were limitations to the system,” said an official at the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (KCDC), on condition of anonymity because he was not authorized to speak to the media. “We are now trying to address them after the Itaewon outbreak.”     Invasive approach
  The EISS was jointly developed by the KCDC and the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport, with the help of the Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI). Many details of how the system works and some limitations of the program have not previously been reported. A scientific paper on the system was published in a public health journal only on Wednesday. Authorities’ power to get information was established by a 2015 law called the Infectious Disease Prevention and Control Act, introduced after the country was hit by Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS). The law allows South Korean health officials to access a wide range of personal data, including cellphone location information and credit card transactions, without a court order. While many countries are scrambling to develop smartphone apps that can trace the contacts of patients without revealing detailed personal information, South Korea has forged ahead with a more invasive approach. The EISS allows an authorized investigator to log in to a secure web portal and send information requests about specific confirmed cases. Police agencies must approve requests for location data from three telecommunications operators, while the Credit Finance Association handles approval for information from 22 credit card companies. When a request is approved, designated officials at the companies receive alerts on their phones and computers. They then upload individuals’ data in an Excel spreadsheet. The investigator then has temporary access to the information to conduct analysis. There are usually more than 10,000 location data points for each person in a typical 14-day period being analyzed, according to the KCDC. An EISS web portal seen by Reuters showed an interactive map displaying patient movements, with each location data point indicating whether it was collected via credit card or cellphone. The government says access is restricted and authorized investigators must log in through a virtual private network (VPN) and use two-factor authentication to prevent security breaches. Officials told Reuters that developers of the system had considered using surveillance footage and even facial recognition as part of the data the system could access, but decided against it because of privacy concerns. While CCTV is not accessed or uploaded to the EISS portal, health investigators still widely use such footage to track cases. “We spent more time agonizing over privacy than on developing the system,” said Park Young-joon, a director at the KCDC. Still, the system has raised concerns over its use of private data. “It represents a rare non-judicial, non-consensual acquisition of location data, with no judicial oversight for the data collected,” said Deborah Brown, a digital rights researcher with the US-based Human Rights Watch. “There’s a concern that the door is open to abuse.” Swamped with calls
  South Korean officials told Reuters that data on almost every person confirmed to have the virus is entered into the system to allow cross-referencing and analysis of likely hotspots. The KCDC declined to say how many people’s data has been collected in all. People do not have any choice whether their data is collected and accessed, but officials told Reuters that authorities notify anyone whose information is gathered and that all the data will be deleted when the virus is contained. “Such information should only be used for crises like infectious diseases,” said Gyeonggi Province Governor Lee Jae-myung. “But thankfully our people understand that it is inevitable in battling the pandemic.” At a national or global level, lives are more important than personal privacy, said a 64-year-old South Korean woman who asked only to be identified by her surname Jang. “Personal privacy is important, but preventing an infectious disease is even more so.” Some local health investigators said that access to the EISS has been too restricted or too slow, so they have gone back to traditional ways of requesting data. One Incheon health official told Reuters the city did not initially use EISS on Incheon Patient 102 because it took too long to get the person registered. Those concerns have since been addressed by changes that will allow local agencies to register patients themselves rather than waiting for the KCDC, said Kim Jae-ho, a director at KETI. Travel information and medical records may be added to the system, two people working on the project told Reuters. South Korean health ministry official Yoon Tae-ho said at a briefing that they are also looking at the use of Bluetooth and QR codes to log places people visit – such as nightclubs. There was “an inertia in administrative process,” the first KCDC official told Reuters. “But now I am swamped with calls from the local governments about how to use the system.”

The defiant New Jersey gym that was shut down for violating the state’s coronavirus lockdown reopened its doors Friday morning to cheers from over three dozen supporters — but otherwise little fanfare. Thirty gym junkies streamed into Atilis Gym — which has been open for most of the week in defiance of Gov. Phil Murphy’s stay-at-home executive order — for their morning workout, as a handful of patrons waited outside. “My biggest concern is staying in business and standing up for what we decided to stand up for in the first place, which is our constitutional rights,” Atilis Gym owner Ian Smith said outside the Bellmawr gym, alongside co-owner Frank Trumbetti. On Thursday, the owners arrived to find notices from the state and county taped to its doors ordering it shut. But they promised to reopen Friday at 20 percent capacity — 44 people every 90 minutes — and with other strict social distancing measures in place. Smith and Trumbetti have received several disorderly conduct summonses since reopening their gym on Monday amid a tense standoff with police. Patrons are required to wear face masks and undergo temperature scans at the door. Workout equipment has also been spaced out and the gym is cleaning the air with a disinfecting UV light. A bodyguard was also on scene Friday to enforce the gym’s social distancing rules. Stephen Yang	 Stephen Yang	 Stephen Yang	 View Slideshow

NAIROBI, Kenya — On just one day this month, 50 Tanzanian truck drivers tested positive for the coronavirus after crossing into neighboring Kenya. Back home, their president insists that Tanzania has defeated the disease through prayer. All the while, President John Magufuli has led a crackdown on anyone who dares raise concerns about the virus’s spread in his East African country or the government’s response to it. Critics have been arrested and opposition politicians and rights activists say their phones are being tapped. The country’s number of confirmed virus cases hasn’t changed for three weeks and the international community is openly worrying that Tanzania’s government is hiding the true scale of the pandemic. Just over 500 cases have been reported in a country of nearly 60 million people. While many African countries have been praised for their response to the coronavirus, Tanzania is the most dramatic exception, run by a president who questions — or fires — his own health experts and has refused to limit people’s movements, saying the economy is the priority. Fatma Karume, a human rights activist and former president of the Tanganyika Law Society, said authorities are discouraging people from going to hospitals to avoid overwhelming them, but they are not giving adequate guidance about the virus. “When you are disempowering a whole nation by withholding information and creating doubt on how they should respond to the crisis, the outcome can be disastrous,” Karume said. The president has refused to shut churches, mosques and other gathering places, such as pubs and restaurants. He has questioned the accuracy of tests done by the national laboratory, saying the swabs used may themselves be tainted with the virus. He has suspended the head of the laboratory and fired the deputy health minister. On Thursday, Magufuli ordered the Health Ministry and other agencies not to receive personal protective equipment from donors until tests are done to ensure it works and is safe. While Magufuli halted international passenger flights in April, he is now allowing them to resume — and says any visitor who doesn’t have a fever will be allowed in. For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms. For some, especially older adults and people with existing health problems, it can cause more severe illness and lead to death. The president has argued that if restrictive measures are adopted, Tanzanians may have nothing to eat. In fact, rather than urge Tanzanians to keep their distance, one Magufuli ally encouraged them to flood the streets this weekend to celebrate. “Make all kinds of noise as a sign of thanksgiving to show our God has won against disease and worries of death that were making us suffer,” Paul Makonda, the regional commissioner of commercial hub Dar es Salaam, said at a news briefing. In March, Magufuli ordered three days of national prayers against COVID-19 and has since said they have been answered. While health experts say recorded coronavirus cases and deaths the world over are undercounts, opposition leaders accuse Magufuli’s government of hiding the outbreak’s true toll. Government spokesman Hassan Abbas told The Associated Press that it would be impossible to cover up an outbreak. He also dismissed reports that hospitals were overwhelmed, noting that one, which has room for over 160 patients, only had 11. “It is unfortunate that COVID-19 has come up with lots of misinformation, propaganda and false news,” he added. He said Tanzania has taken measures to curb the disease and infection rates are falling, though he gave no data. He said the country’s health officials have been working hand in hand with international experts, including at the World Health Organization. Officials outside Tanzania remain worried. “We strongly call on Tanzania, encourage Tanzania, to share data in a timely fashion,” the head of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, John Nkengasong, said this month, adding that fighting the virus is more difficult without accurate data from all member states. “No country is an island,” he warned. On Thursday, Nkengasong said Tanzania still had not provided the body with any more information — but officials were still hoping the government would eventually cooperate. Kenya closed its border with Tanzania this month except for cargo traffic and imposed stringent testing measures on Tanzanian truck drivers after more than 50 of them tested positive for the virus in a single day. The US Embassy in Tanzania has issued an unusual statement, warning its citizens that “all evidence points to exponential growth of the epidemic” and that hospitals in Dar es Salaam have been overwhelmed with COVID-19 cases. “On Tanzania, yes, it’s very disappointing,” the top US diplomat for Africa, Tibor Nagy, told reporters this week. “Obviously, they are very concerned with the economic impact that the loss of the tourism industry is going to have on them, but I can’t imagine any tourists flocking back there in such an uncertain environment.” In a more subtle note of concern, the British High Commission announced a charter flight for British nationals who want to leave. Meanwhile, the climate of fear has grown inside Tanzania, rights groups and critics say, as Magufuli seeks a second term in an October election that shows no sign of being delayed despite the pandemic. Magufuli has stifled independent journalism since taking office and severely restricted the work of non-governmental organizations, according to rights groups. “People in Tanzania cannot express themselves,” said Roland Ebole, an Amnesty International researcher based in neighboring Kenya. Lawyer Albert Msando was arrested in late April after a video circulated showing him distributing masks to journalists and talking about the importance of the news media’s role in informing the public, according to the Tanzania Human Rights Defenders Coalition. Tanzanian authorities have also targeted media that have attempted to report on the pandemic, according to Amnesty International. Three media organizations were fined for “transmission of false and misleading information” about the government’s response and a newspaper had its online publishing license suspended for publishing a photo that it said showed the president flouting “global social distancing guidelines.” Authorities contend the photo was not recent.

Nearly half of the Twitter accounts spreading messages on the social media platform about the coronavirus pandemic are likely bots, according to researchers. Carnegie Mellon University researchers said Wednesday that they had examined more than 200 million tweets discussing the virus since January and found that about 45 percent were sent by accounts that behave more like computerized robots than humans. “We’re seeing up to two times as much bot activity as we’d predicted based on previous natural disasters, crises and elections,” said Kathleen Carley, a professor in the School of Computer Science’s Institute for Software Research, in a statement. Carley and her colleagues used a bot-hunter tool, which was able to flag accounts that tweet more than is humanly possible or claim to be in multiple countries within a few hours’ period. In order to determine if an account is a bot, they also looked at a Twitter account’s followers, how often it tweets and how frequently the user is mentioned on the platform. Although it’s not known what individuals or groups are behind the bots, researchers said the tweets appeared aimed at sowing division in America. “We do know that it looks like it’s a propaganda machine and it definitely matches the Russian and Chinese playbooks, but it would take a tremendous amount of resources to substantiate that,” said Carley, who is conducting a study into bot-generated coronavirus activity on Twitter that has yet to be published. Among the more than 100 false narratives about COVID-19 that are proliferating on Twitter thanks to accounts controlled by bots: conspiracy theories about hospitals filled with mannequins and conspiracy theories about a connection to 5G wireless towers. Both of these are false. If users are unsure about an account’s authenticity, they should do their own research to the best of their ability, according to researchers. “Even if someone appears to be from your community if you don’t know them personally, take a closer look and always go to authoritative or trusted sources for information,” Carley said. “Just be very vigilant.”

He’s making PPE for VIPs. Brooklyn-based tailor Yosel Tiefenbrun is accustomed to whipping up $8,000 bespoke men’s suits that can require some 80 hours of work to construct. But these days, the Crown Heights-based sewing superstar is switching gears: cranking out bespoke masks that sell for up to $300 apiece. “We have to keep safe, but if you’re going to wear [a mask], you might as well wear it in style,” Tiefenbrun, 30, tells The Post. “You want to look good in it.” Tiefenbrun, a bespectacled Orthodox Jew with a haute hipster edge, is joining the ranks of upscale designers cashing in on the new need for stylish protective gear as their most glitzy endeavors take a back seat due to the coronavirus. While a majority of Tiefenbrun’s orders are for the $50 versions of the face covering, Tiefenbrun also offers up a deluxe $300 option, hand-stitched and custom-designed using exclusive patterns that require a Skype session to design. All are made with cottons imported from Italy and feature flawless seams. Tiefenbrun, a New York native who was raised in London, became a rabbi in Singapore — but a second calling came after he studied at the Savile Row Academy. He went on to launch his namesake business in New York City three and a half years ago, and was the subject of a gushing GQ profile this past September. But when the pandemic struck, business came to a halt for the celebrated tailor, who has a team of six staffers at his East Williamsburg atelier. “We were having our peak as we were going into this time,” he says. “We went two months pretty much without suit sales . . . We said, ‘OK, we can wait, and keep it shut.’ ” Yosel Tiefenbrun Yosel Tiefenbrun Yosel Tiefenbrun  View Slideshow As the lockdown stretched on, he and his staff pivoted to function — made fashionable. “Now we have full long days, starting early, finishing late. I feel like I’m starting a new business. It’s a different ballgame.” The father of two is especially grateful for the new opportunity, having survived a case of COVID-19 in March that left him “out of commission for a week.” “Once I got my antibody test, that’s when I decided to try to keep my business alive,” he says, referring to the tests which could indicate a person has fought the virus, but aren’t yet a proven immunity passport. Now, his company’s motto, “Cloth for every occasion,” is being put to the test. And New Yorkers seem eager to put their money where their mouth is. In the past 10 or so days since taking orders for masks, he’s been buried in requests. “They were raining in — messages left, right and center on social media,” says Tiefenbrun. Last week, one order came in for 30 masks — half male, half female, all seersucker. Another priceless feature of his new specialty? It’s a perfect fit for the bearded and bespectacled. The masks are specifically designed so they alleviate pressure on the beard. They also contour on the nose to minimize fogging up glasses. And while his shirts can go for up to about $600, the relatively affordable masks are finally giving his admirers the chance to own an accessible piece of clothing from his studio. “Yosel’s work is so artistic, but it’s too fancy for me,” says Moshe Frank, an entrepreneur in Crown Heights, who’s loving his green hand-stitched mask. “This is the first affordable piece I could own.” Even though he hasn’t saved up for a Tiefenbrun suit yet, Bentzy Plotkin, a 32-year-old film producer from Crown Heights loves his $50 green and blue seersucker mask, which doesn’t fog up his glasses. “I want to make sure he stays in business so when I do well I can buy a suit,” he says. Tiefenbrun’s customers also say the hefty price tag is more palatable since they’re not exactly going out on the town these days. “People used to say shoes are the most important thing,” Frank says. “Now a mask is what you spend your money on.”

Cannabis company stocks are skyrocketing as investors are high on new hopes that marijuana might help ward off the deadly coronavirus. Shares in major pot firms climbed in late trading Thursday after The Post reported on a Canadian study showing that certain strains of cannabis may help prevent COVID-19 from entering host cells. Canadian pot giant Canopy Growth Corporation saw its stock jump 7.8 percent to close at $18.25 thanks to a spike in the final hour of trading. The shares had climbed another 0.5 percent in premarket trading Friday to $18.34 as of 9:19 a.m. British Columbia-based Tilray’s shares also surged late to close up nearly 20 percent at $9.65, followed by a roughly 2 percent jump before Friday’s opening bell. The ETFMG Alternative Harvest ETF, an exchange-traded fund that targets the global cannabis industry, ended Thursday up 6 percent at $13.47 and climbed another 1.3 percent in premarket trading Friday. And shares in Alberta-based Aurora Cannabis got a late boost to close up more than 36 percent Thursday at $17.40 after it announced it was buying American CBD firm Reliva. The stock was recently down 7.4 percent in premarket trading after Jefferies analysts reportedly cast doubt on the company’s short-term strength. The research inspiring the boost showed that at least 13 cannabis plants could block proteins that create a “gateway” for the new coronavirus to enter host cells. The strains are all high in CBD — the anti-inflammatory found in some consumer products — and low in THC, the psychoactive component of pot, according to the findings. But the study published in the online journal Preprints has not yet been peer-reviewed. It was carried out by cannabis research firms Pathway Rx and Swysh Inc.

A former White House butler who served 11 presidents has died after being infected with the coronavirus, his family said. Wilson Roosevelt Jerman died last weekend of COVID-19, his eldest granddaughter confirmed to FOX 5 DC. He was 91. Jerman began working for the White House as a cleaner in 1957 during the Eisenhower administration, and was promoted to butler during the Kennedy presidency, granddaughter Jamila Garrett told the station. Jerman was one of the few White House staffers trusted to take the Kennedy children to different parts of the residence, she said. “Jackie O actually promoted him to a butler because of the relationship,” Garrett told the station. “She was instrumental in ensuring that that happened.” Born in Seaboard, North Carolina, in 1929, Jerman became one of the millions of African Americans who moved to Northern cities in the early 1950s in search of better work, pay and living conditions, according to NBC News. Garrett grew up with Jerman, as well as her mother, sister, cousins, aunts, uncles and grandparents, in a multigenerational Washington, DC, household. “Even our parties at home looked like White House parties,” she told NBC. “He would scallop radishes and make them look like swans. He would make animals out of watermelon scoops. He was very creative. Presentation was everything.” Former President George W. Bush and wife Laura Bush remembered Jerman fondly in a statement to NBC. “He was a lovely man,” the Bushes said. “He was the first person we saw in the morning when we left the residence and the last person we saw each night when we returned.” Hillary Clinton tweeted Thursday about Jerman’s passing. “Bill and I were saddened to hear of the passing of Wilson Roosevelt Jerman at the age of 91 from COVID-19,” she wrote. “Jerman served as a White House butler across 11 presidencies and made generations of first families feel at home, including ours. Our warmest condolences to his loved ones.” Jerman appears in a photo with Barack and Michelle Obama in “Becoming,” the former first lady’s memoir, according to NBC News. Michelle Obama said in a statement provided to NBC News that the late butler “helped make the White House a home for decades of first families, including ours.” “His services to others — his willingness to go above and beyond for the country he loved and all those whose lives he touched — is a legacy worthy of his generous spirit,” Obama said. “We were lucky to have known him.” Jerman leaves behind four of his five children, 12 grandchildren and 18 great-grandchildren. “I want the world to remember my grandfather as someone who was really authentic,” Garrett told Fox 5 DC. “Always being yourself. That’s what he taught our family, that’s what thrives throughout our family. And that’s what we’ll continue to carry on, his legacy.”

PETA is once again getting some pushback on its billboards. The People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals has put up a billboard in cities in California, Iowa and Nebraska, as well as internationally, featuring a block of tofu with the statement “Tofu never caused a pandemic. Try it today!” The animal rights organization is referencing the COVID-19 crisis, which it alleges “like many other diseases, COVID-19 came from animals confined and killed for food by humans.” An investigation into the origins of the disease is still ongoing. Despite this fact, PETA is moving forward with its claims, touting a vegan diet as a “lifesaving” solution. “The best thing we can do for animals, the planet, our health and our communities is to go vegan and PETA plans to get this lifesaving message out to as many other cities as we can,” a spokesperson for PETA said in a statement to Fox News. Those on social media are not as thrilled with the timing of PETA’s billboards, calling them “disrespectful.” One person responded with a stern, “F— off @peta with your ‘Tofu never caused a pandemic’ billboard.” The organization has previously called on government officials to shut down China’s wet markets, which have been suggested as the origin of COVID-19. PETA released graphic images and video showing these wet markets, which it claimed were recorded in April.

President Trump said the US will not shut down again if a second wave of coronavirus infections emerges. “We’re not going close the country,” Trump told reporters Thursday while touring a Ford plant in Michigan. “We’re going to put out the fires. Whether it’s an ember or a flame, we’re going put it out, but we’re not closing our country.” The commander-in-chief said there’s a “very distinct possibility” that the deadly virus starts to spread again as states lift lockdown measures meant to control it. But he suggested that officials will address new outbreaks individually rather than impose widespread restrictions like those that have hammered the US economy in the past two months. “This is a country that’s meant to be open, not closed,” Trump said. “I want it open, and we’re going to open, and if there’s a fire, an ember, a flame someplace, we put it out.” Experts have warned that Southern states such as Alabama, Florida and Texas are at risk for a second wave of infections as they quickly reopen their economies, the Washington Post reported this week. Dr. Anthony Fauci, the Trump administration’s top infectious disease expert, told the paper there’s “no doubt” the virus will see a resurgence. It has already infected more than 1.5 million people and killed more than 94,000 across the country, according to Johns Hopkins University data. Trump has nonetheless pushed states to reopen as the pandemic led to job losses on a scale not seen since the Great Depression. Unemployment surged to a record 14.7 percent in April as the economy shed more than 20 million jobs.

President Trump slammed Michigan’s attorney general on Twitter after she said she would have a “very serious conversation” with Ford Motor Co. for allowing him to visit an Ypsilanti plant without wearing a mask. “The Wacky Do Nothing Attorney General of Michigan, Dana Nessel, is viciously threatening Ford Motor Company for the fact that I inspected a Ventilator plant without a mask,” the president said in a tweet. “Not their fault, & I did put on a mask. No wonder many auto companies left Michigan, until I came along!” he added. Trump did wear a mask in one part of the plant but refused to wear it in front of reporters, Fox News reported. “I had one on before,” Trump told reporters during his visit. “I wore one on in this back area. I didn’t want to give the press the pleasure of seeing it. In the back area I did have a mask on. I had goggles and a mask right back there.” At least one photographer shot a photo that was posted on social media showing Trump wearing a mask that featured the presidential seal, according to Fox News. Nessel said the state would speak to Ford about the violation of Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s executive order requiring masks in enclosed public spaces. AP/David Eggert AP/Alex Brandon View Slideshow “They knew exactly what the order was and if they permitted anyone, even the president of the United States, to defy that order, I think it has serious health consequences potentially to their workers,” Nessel said on CNN. She also said she hoped Michigan voters “will remember this when November comes, that he didn’t care enough about their safety, he didn’t care about their welfare, he didn’t respect them enough just to engage in the very simple task, the painless task, the easy task of wearing a mask when he was provided one.” In another tweet, Trump suggested that Ford might leave Michigan. “Do nothing A.G. of the Great State of Michigan, Dana Nessel, should not be taking her anger and stupidity out on Ford Motor – they might get upset with you and leave the state, like so many other companies have – until I came along and brought business back to Michigan. JOBS!” he wrote. Nessel later responded to the president on Twitter. “Hi! After struggling with our Gov & SOS, impressed you know my name,” she wrote. “Seems like you have a problem with all 3 women who run MI-as well as your ability to tell the truth. The auto industry has been thriving for years bc of our incredible auto workers & companies.” She added that it was hard to say she’s done nothing “with all the lawsuits myself and the other @DemocraticAGs have filed and won against you.”

As the New York Public Library marks its 125th anniversary, it’s celebrating by giving kids a treat that will have them booked all summer. NYPL released a list of 125 children’s books from the last 125 years to help spark a child’s love of reading. “125 Kids Books We Love” is available to view online and was curated by expert librarians. It’s a follow-up to “125 Books We Love” released by the library on Valentine’s Day featuring titles for adults. This list is geared to help parents encourage kids to keep reading during the coronavirus pandemic while schools are closed. Research from the Northwest Evaluation Association shows that children typically lose about 20% of their literary skills over summer vacations. A recent report from the organization suggests that learning loss due to coronavirus school closures will be even worse, with as much as 30% of literacy gains lost. “The best way to honor our anniversary is to be true to our mission and support the people of our City, who are going through a period of unprecedented challenges,” said NYPL President Anthony W. Marx. “The hope is that these magical, timeless titles provide a much-needed positive distraction, support for remote learning, discussion that brings people together around books, and maybe a challenge goal to achieve over the summer: can you read them all? Children’s librarians across the organization compiled the list to include books — many of which still resonate years later — that inspire a love of reading and remind kids why reading is enjoyable. Elements such as popularity over the last 125 years, diverse voices and opinions of reading experts were taken into consideration. The titles are for children ages 0-12. The list includes a wide range of titles, including “Corduroy,” the “Amelia Bedelia” series, “Charlotte’s Web,” “Goodnight Moon” and the “Harry Potter” series. “This list is tribute to that excitement and nostalgia, but also to our role helping families find their next great reading experience,” said Lynn Lobash, the library’s assistant director of readers services. “For families trying to cope during a difficult time, for kids who want to get lost in a good book, and for parents trying to model readers, we hope this list is a good starting point.” NYPL will release its final “Books We Love” list in the fall, with “125 Books We Love for Teens.” The library will release content around its kids’ list all summer and host virtual activities and programs for young bibliophiles. To stay up to date with NYPL’s schedule, readers can sign up for their newsletter. Meanwhile, check out this special anniversary video, “Reading Brings Us Together,” featuring 125 people — writers, actors, artists, and NYPL staff members — sharing books they love and celebrating the NYPL. 

Dolphins in an Australian coastal town have been bringing ashore “gifts” from the sea — and volunteers say it might be a sign they’re missing human interaction while coronavirus restrictions keep visitors away. People usually line up to feed the school of humpback dolphins at the Barnacles Cafe & Dolphin Feeding at Tin Can Bay, Queensland — but the venue has been closed for weeks. Now, volunteers at the cafe say the dolphins are showing an unusual, very generous, new behavior. “The pod has been bringing us regular gifts, showing us how much they’re missing the public interaction and attention,” said a post on the cafe’s Facebook page Monday. “They are definitely missing you all.” The treasures include sea sponges, barnacle-encrusted bottles and pieces of coral. A volunteer told the ABC the marine creatures have displayed that behavior before, but it has increased since the venue’s closure. Barry McGovern, an expert in dolphin behavior, told 7NEWS.com.au it’s possible the dolphins are trying to express that they miss humans, but it’s unlikely. “Nothing surprises me with dolphins and their behavior anymore,” McGovern, a University of Queensland PhD student, told the outlet. “They do everything — they use tools, they have culture, they have something similar to names in signature whistles,” McGovern said. “In all likelihood, they probably don’t miss humans per se. They probably miss a free meal and the routine.” They might be displaying a “play-like behavior,” or just acting “out of boredom,” he said.

New England Patriots owner Robert Kraft’s Super Bowl 51 (LI) ring just provided provided a big boost to the “All In Challenge,” which aims to be the largest virtual fundraiser in history.  Bidding for the special keepsake closed at $1.025 million on Thursday night, making it one of the most expensive items in the All in Challenge, whose mission is to feed those in need. The auction winner, who was not identified, also will receive a personal visit with Kraft at his Gillette Stadium office in Foxborough, Mass. The Patriots will send its private plane for transportation if needed. Over the past 12 days, there were 35 total bids for the ring, rising from $75,000 to $1.025 million. According to the All In Challenge website, all of the money raised will go directly to Feeding America, Meals On Wheels, World Central Kitchen and No Kid Hungry. The 78-year-old Kraft — who also came up big for New York City when he donated 300,000 masks to city frontline workers in early April — told ESPN why he chose this particular Super Bowl ring.   “What could I do that would be special?” Kraft said after putting the ring up for auction. “I’ve been thinking about it for weeks. I finally thought about our experience in Super Bowl LI against the Atlanta Falcons. We were down 28-3 [in the third quarter] and had 99.6% [odds] to lose. And we came back, and we won [34-28 in OT]. “And I thought about what is going on at this time and wanted to give something of extreme value in support of our health care workers. So I thought it would be good to give this ring, our fifth Super Bowl win, because it showed how we came back.” Many other celebrities and VIPs also are participating, putting up prized possessions for bidding or raffles. One of them includes a private putting lesson from Tiger Woods. As of Thursday night, the All In Challenge had raised nearly $45.7 million, according to its website.

A woman who traveled to Hawaii was caught defying the state’s quarantine order by posting photos of herself at the beach two days after arriving, officials said. Alyza Alder, of Arizona, who went to Hawaii on May 6, was arrested Wednesday at a fast-food restaurant she got a job at in Laie, the governor’s office said in a news release. Between May 8 and Tuesday, Alder posted pictures to social media of herself swimming at beaches in Laie and Hauula, the release said. Alder, under the state’s order, should have been self-quarantining until Wednesday as a precaution against the coronavirus. Somebody reported Alder to authorities, who charged her for the violation. Her bail was set at $2,000. Hawaii’s Attorney General Clare Connors warned against breaking the state’s 14-day self-quarantine order. “If you come to Hawaii with the expectation that you can ignore the self-quarantine order, you very likely will be reported, arrested and end up in jail facing hefty fines,” Connors said in a statement.

A pastor at Calvary Baptist Church in Baltimore, Maryland tore up a cease-and-desist order that he was issued during a sermon on Wednesday night, a report said. Stacey Shiflett, who was threatened with a $5,000 fine if he continued to hold in-person services, tore up the order proclaiming, “We’re going to do it God’s way,” according to The Hill. In a video that was posted online, Shiflett can be heard exclaiming “So I’m tearing up this cease-and-desist order right here, and I’m telling you right now, we’re gonna do it God’s way! God tells us how to worship Him, nobody else gets to do that.” pic.twitter.com/klOrD2Bgn7 — Stacey Shiflett 🇺🇸 (@staceyshiflett) May 21, 2020  On Friday, Governor Larry Hogan said that places of worship are allowed to reopen as long as they were kept 50 percent capacity. According to Fox News, while Calvary Baptist has been complying with state occupancy laws, it has been breaching local ones. Which allows only 10 people to be at a place of worship at the time. “It has become abundantly clear that if we settle for permission, we will never have liberty again,” Shiflet told Fox News. “Either we have liberty to worship or we have permission to worship.” Calvary Baptist Church is not the only church to flout governmental authority. In states such as Texas and Georgia, many churches have opened their doors before being given permission only to have close up again due to pastors and church staff testing positive for the virus.

Forty-seven former Hawaiian inmates released over coronavirus concerns have reportedly been rearrested for new offenses. City and state prosecutors in Oahu revealed the alarming statistic at a Thursday committee hearing where they called for an end to the release of inmates worried about catching the contagion, the Honolulu Star-Advertiser reported. “We don’t have a case of COVID-19 in our prison system, and that’s good,” State Attorney General Clare Connors told the House Public Safety Committee. “But many individuals have been released over the objections of prosecutors, we have had re-offenses, and we do think that it’s time for this effort to stop.” All 47 arrests occurred in Honolulu, the state’s capital. The city’s acting prosecutor, Dwight Nadamoto, highlighted how some of the 503 inmates released from island jails are violent offenders. One example, he said, was a suspect who allegedly assaulted a 74-year-old man with a golf club. Another freed inmate was behind bars for allegedly attacking a woman with a sword.

Gamblers got good news in Florida on Thursday as one casino in the state reopened following the coronavirus closure. The Seminole Hard Rock Hotel & Casino Tampa opened its doors at 7 p.m. — albeit under new guidelines that promote social distancing and hygiene. Masks or other face coverings are required and everybody entering the premises will get their temperature taken. Another noticeable adaptation to the coronavirus age is the use of plexiglass barriers to divide gamblers and dealers at poker and table games. “Hard Rock and Seminole Gaming have made a tremendous commitment to sanitary protocols and a safety-first mentality for both guests and team members,” Jim Allen, CEO of Seminole Gaming and Chairman of Hard Rock International, said in a statement. “We are making sure our resorts are safe and sound so our guests and team members have peace of mind when they return.” Other new safety measures include: a 50 percent reduction in capacity at the resort, casino floor hand-sanitizing stations and the reduction of available slot machines to increase the distance between players.

As comprehensive as the PGA Tour’s plan to return to tournament play is, a plan that almost all players have expressed comfort with, that’s not the case with everyone. Adam Scott, in an interview with Evin Priest from the Australian Associated Press, said he has no plans to come back and play anytime soon because he is not comfortable with the tour’s plan. Scott, ranked No. 6 in the world rankings, said he’ll watch from home in Australia for the first six weeks after the tour resumes on June 11 at the Colonial in Fort Worth, Texas.  “They are being fairly thorough, but my initial reaction was I was surprised it wasn’t tighter than it is,” Scott said. “What concerns me is dialogue that [the tour] is hopeful of returning one- or two-hour test [results]. You’d want that in place before competing [rather than a one- or two-day test result]. The other [concern] is it seems an asymptomatic person could operate within a tournament. “If they’re not showing symptoms and I somehow picked it up inside the course and I’m disqualified, I’m now self-isolating [in that city] for two weeks. I’d be annoyed if that happened. I thought you’d start quite tight and loosen those protocols to normal if appropriate.”
  Scott said he is most likely to return for the World Golf Championships event in Memphis, beginning July 30, for his return. That would be his only warm-up for the rescheduled PGA Championship in San Francisco in early August, the first major of a revised 2020 schedule “I’m definitely going to sit out and see how the first few weeks of the PGA Tour pan out and if things are progressing well, playing Memphis the week before the PGA is a thought,” Scott said. “I would have to think about staying in the United States through the U.S. Open [starting Sept. 17 at New York’s Winged Foot course]. It’s going to turn into like a nine-week trip to do that, maybe more.” Lee Westwood and Tommy Fleetwood, two golfers who are based in England, also have said they don’t plan to return soon because of quarantine rules that are in place for overseas travelers. Westwood, the 31st-ranked player in the world, who has qualified to play the first two tournaments on the schedule, the Charles Schwab Challenge in Texas and the RBC Heritage in South Carolina, told the Golf Channel he’s not going to play for awhile. “Right now, I won’t be playing them — not with having to leave here two weeks before, quarantine, then play the two tournaments, then come back here and quarantine again,’’ he said. “It’s six weeks for two tournaments. To me, that’s just not worth it, and it’s just not worth taking the risk and everyone thinks those kind of precautions have to be in place, I don’t think golf is a priority if it’s that severe.” Fleetwood has expressed similar issues as Westwood. Westwood will likely miss the PGA Championship because he is hosting the British Masters the week prior, which would make it impossible for him to quarantine in the U.S. in time for the week at Harding Park.

A Washington State felon allegedly attacked a woman just 10 days after he was sprung from jail early over coronavirus concerns. Matthew Cory, 33, was back behind bars Friday on charges he assaulted a hiker in Everett, coming up behind her as she rested and choking her, local outlet Q13 Fox reported. The victim, in her 60s, managed to loosen Cory’s grip and scream loud enough that he took off, according to court documents obtained by the outlet. Police found Cory running through the woods, and the woman identified him as her assailant. The alleged attack occurred after Cory was released from jail on May 2, ahead of schedule, because of the virus outbreak. He had been locked up for unlawful possession of a firearm. Authorities said they lost track of Cory because he removed his ankle monitor after being freed. Cory told investigators he’d been using meth for two weeks, hadn’t slept in seven days and didn’t remember attacking the woman, according to the court documents. He has a long rap sheet that includes 11 arrests, seven felony convictions and two misdemeanors. Cory was one of one of about 1,000 Washington State inmates released up to six months early because of the pandemic. “The decision to release individuals from DOC was based on weighing the risk to incarcerated individuals and public safety,” Gov. Jay Inslee’s office said in a statement to the outlet. “This group was chosen to reduce the risk to public safety, but no choice could be made to guarantee that there would never be a new crime committed.”

Columnist David Marcus’ front-page plea in Thursday’s Post — that the lockdown has served its purpose and it’s time to open up New York again — brought in a flood of letters from both sides. Here, a selection of readers’ responses, from praising Marcus to saying that he doesn’t understand the dangers. Thank you, David Marcus! You’ve not only spoken for the working class of New York City, but for the working class of New York state. The collateral damage caused by the continued New York state lockdown (and staged reopening nonsense) is far greater than the viral threat. At a steady pace, working-class New Yorkers are losing their sense of purpose in life. Veronica Hanley, Massapequa Hear! Hear! David Marcus needs to shout this louder for the fools in the back. We New Yorkers are done with this dumpster fire of leadership politicizing and weaponizing a virus. Enough is enough. From being locked down, to taking away our right to attend Mass and walk on a beach, to having to stand in a line to gain entrance to a market — this has gone on for far too long. I want to be able to hug my sister and spend time with her. I want to be able to wander The Book Review in my hometown and buy a book and walk along Main Street. I’m a hugger. I want to hug my peeps. I want to be able to receive Holy Communion with my niece and nephew and my godchildren, as they make their First Holy Communion. I want to stand beside my son and his uncle as he makes his Confirmation. All things I cannot do because they are put on hold indefinitely. I want my community to thrive and be up and running — not closing down. We are all essential. We are all important. We all need to get back to our lives. We also need to rethink who gets our vote. We need to remind these clowns that they serve at our pleasure, and not the other way around. Theresa Caso-O’Brien, Melville Apparently, the Democrats believe by installing their draconian rules, the populace will hold the president responsible and turn against him. We are too smart for that. We watched Democrats and their media co-conspirators call our president a racist when he wisely, promptly stopped admitting people from China while it was dealing with the virus. And he took it further by stopping Europeans from entering the United States once they started to deal with the pandemic. We watched in horror when Democratic governors sent infected patients into vulnerable nursing homes, causing the unnecessary deaths of thousands, in spite of the fact the president had provided the USS Comfort, the USS Mercy and hundreds of beds at the Javits Center. Democratic politicians are gambling with our lives while they live the high life on our dime. This has to end. Our jobs and our very lives depend on voting the Democrats out of power. D.M. Diana, Greeley, Pa. David Marcus hit a grand slam in “It Needs to End Now.” All New Yorkers need to wake up and understand we have three politicians who are idiots. Gov. Cuomo blames President Trump for more than 5,000 nursing home deaths, Mayor de Blasio closed all the city beaches and told residents to go to Long Island, Rep Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez told Amazon to scram as if we didn’t need 28,000-plus jobs. More people are leaving New York every year because it’s expensive to live here. Get ready for more increases in taxes and tolls. Thousands today are working remotely. Why would corporations stay in buildings in Manhattan with expensive leases while the employees are working from home? These corporations will leave, and Cuomo will raise taxes, transit costs and tolls. He needs to go, along with the other two imbeciles. Owen Kelly, Valley Stream I couldn’t agree more with David Marcus. Instead of Gov. Cuomo and Mayor de Blasio grandstanding every day in press conferences and adding to the already increasing anxiety of the public, they should be moving ahead at warp speed to resuscitate the city. They’ve essentially decapitated small businesses, and people are starving. While you’ll always have a handful of those who don’t follow protocol, give the majority of us a little credit. We get it. We’re wearing masks, gloves, social distancing and scrubbing our hands raw. Pretty soon, we’ll be seeing tumbleweeds blowing through Times Square. Judy Petillo Eggert, Long Branch, NJ This title of Marcus’ column is ridiculous. New York isn’t locked down. We can go out, we just have nowhere to go. In another bungled move, Cuomo and de Blasio did not lock us down to supposedly slow the spread. Anyone who was inside any grocery store or subway was a transmitter. They just killed an economy and nursing-home victims, and displaced every child unable to go to school. New York has lost its edge and will to fight. Jackie Toboroff, Manhattan Lockdown measures were imposed to flatten the curve. They were supposed to help our hospitals deal with surging COVID-19 caseloads and preserve limited ventilator resources. This was intended to be only temporary. Yet the goalposts were moved. New reasons to keep them in place included inadequate testing and the spread of the virus. After two months of social distancing, millions of lost jobs and far fewer hospitalizations and deaths than the experts predicted, it is obvious that these lockdown measures were a mistake. Even if they were once justifiable based on limited or inaccurate information, it is now very clear that continuing this path will damage our population worse than the disease itself. Charles Michael Sitero, ­Ormond Beach, Fla. Marcus’ claims of our “preparedness” were insulting to read as a health-care professional. I am a critical-care registered nurse. I am a New Yorker. I realize we’re all entitled to our own opinions; however, it disappoints me that The Post chose to highlight this man’s opinion when it so clearly seems like a slap in the face to the health-care workers of the city. I worked in COVID ICUs in both Brooklyn and Manhattan during this crisis. My response isn’t based only on my personal experience, but those of fellow critical-care nurses working at separate facilities around the city. Marcus states: “In mid-March, we were told we have to endure a lockdown to ensure that hospitals didn’t get overrun. We did. The hospitals were not overwhelmed.” I’m sorry, David: Did you walk into a single COVID ICU in Manhattan, Queens or Brooklyn in the month of April? There is absolutely no way any sane person could make this asinine comment after witnessing what I saw during COVID’s peak in New York City. ICUs citywide experienced doubled to tripled patient-to-nurse ratios. On a normal, prepared day pre-COVID, ICU nurses typically have one to two patients to care for, pending the patients’ severity. During the COVID peak, patients who would typically be a one-on-one were assigned to a nurse who also had to care for two other patients, sometimes those who were equally as sick. This is unsafe. We worked the hardest we could to keep these people alive under the circumstances. I had ICU patients squeezed into rooms together because there wasn’t enough space in the hospital. With three patients, I took the time to FaceTime families from my personal phone because they could not be in the hospital with their loved ones. I heard people say goodbye to their loved ones via telephone and FaceTime. I held their family’s hands because they couldn’t. There was not enough room in the morgues for the amount of fatalities we were facing on a daily basis. How dare you say that the cities hospitals were not overwhelmed? Both of the hospitals I work at received ventilators that were government-distributed. We were running out. New York was saved by the government’s graces. At one point, one of the hospitals I was working at only had two ventilators left in the entire hospital. That’s not two for just COVID. Those two ventilators would be fought after for any trauma, heart attack, mother who had a complicated childbirth or any potential medical crisis that happens on an average day that may require life support. The critical-care teams had to decide which patients would make for the “best” candidates as not everyone who would typically get dialysis right away was able to receive it. To clarify, I understand the side effects that come with our city forever being shut down, and I am not writing to state we should never reopen. I don’t think our economy can continue on the way we’re going, and I unfortunately don’t know what the solution is. However, what I do know is that our hospitals and health-care systems weren’t the least bit prepared, and the only reason it slowed down is because people underwent lockdown. Erica Sheehan, RN, Manhattan Columnist David Marcus says a good rant is sometimes all a writer can offer. He wants the lockdowns to end now. He’s right, New Yorkers are sick of masks, gloves, social distancing and being isolated indoors. But almost a third of the 94,000 coronavirus fatalities in the United States were in New York City. Marcus makes his case for returning to normal with erroneous information. He says the hospitals were not overrun. They were. He says the Javits Center and the Navy Comfort ship to treat New Yorkers were not needed. Yes, they were. Hospitals were overwhelmed while Javits Center and the Navy ship sat nearly empty because of Cuomo’s reckless order to send many infected patients back to nursing homes. A second wave of the virus has been predicted. Return to normalcy has to be done in responsible steps, not based on emotional rants. Manny Martin, Manhattan I was surprised to see The Post’s front page. Dr. Anthony Fauci claims that if we end lockdowns, social distancing and other initiatives that have been taken over the past two months, we could have a second wave and many more deaths. If New York state and New York City take the advice of The Post and open prematurely, and if employees of New York City, visitors and residents start getting sick and dying because they did not listen to the warnings, should the city and state leaders be liable legally for those deaths? They are on notice. Almost 23,000 New Yorkers have already died of COVID-19. I don’t want public officials to make political decisions that could lead to the deaths of tens of thousands more. Paul Feiner, Greenburgh Marcus’ rant is so factually inaccurate as to make it laughable if he did not have The Post’s front page as his soapbox. If one takes the decline of ­COVID-19 cases from New York state away from our gross national figures, the remaining statistics show a continual rise in the number of COVID-19 cases throughout the rest of our country. New York state is doing it right. I am a resident of Florida. The number of cases in Florida was rising before the state started to reopen, and continues to rise as of last night. Not enough time has passed to know the real effects of reopening on the number of cases here. It takes about 14 days for the disease to incubate and for people to start showing up at hospitals. Even the president warned Georgia’s governor that he was reopening too soon. Joseph Harnett, Naples, Fla.

While many Americans have used their stimulus checks to cover basic needs such as groceries and paying off their mortgage or rent, there’s evidence people are also spending the money on non-essentials including electronics, clothes and toys, according to major retailers. “Call it relief spending, as it was heavily influenced by stimulus dollars, leading to sales increases in categories such as apparel, televisions, video games, sporting goods and toys,” Walmart CEO Doug McMillon said during the company’s earnings call Tuesday. Target and Best Buy Co. also saw increased consumer demand for discretionary goods in mid-April as the stimulus payments from the $2.2-trillion CARES Act flowed into Americans’ bank accounts, the companies’ CEOs said this week. Apple saw an uptick in demand for its products “across the board,” CEO Tim Cook said April 30. At Walmart and Target, shoppers bought more TVs, electronics, gaming equipment and apparel. Walmart also saw increased demand for adult-sized bikes. At Best Buy, customers used their stimulus checks to buy computing and gaming equipment, Corie Barry, the company’s CEO, said on it Thursday earnings call. “Like many other retailers, we saw sales benefit during the last three weeks of the quarter as customers undoubtedly chose to spend some of their government stimulus money on the products and services we provide,” Barry said. (Best Buy did not respond to a request for a further comment.) The different phases of the pandemic have shaped shoppers’ choices. As stay-at-home orders were enacted across the country, “parents became teachers,” McMillon said on Walmart’s earnings call. “Adult bicycles started selling out, as parents started to join the kids. An overlapping trend then started emerging related to DIY and home-related activities.” Consumers also bought sewing machines and bandanas to make their own face masks, he said. Sales took off in mid-April when many Americans began to receive their $1,200 stimulus checks. Within 10 days of receiving their stimulus checks, households spent around one quarter to one third of it, research shows. Before the checks were issued on April 15, there was “not as much demand” for discretionary goods at Walmart, said spokesman Randy Hargrove, adding that sales increased “towards the end of the quarter.” Target Corp. also experienced “a rapid increase in traffic and sales” for discretionary goods driven by the distribution of stimulus checks, CEO Brian Cornell said on the company’s Wednesday earnings call. “We certainly saw an uptick as we reported starting on April 15, as those checks arrived across America,” Cornell said on the company’s call. Customers, he said, are “still seeing the benefits of the stimulus check.” People are shopping across all categories including apparel, which has been especially hard hit by the coronavirus-driven economic downturn. (Costco declined to comment on whether it has experienced the same trend in sales related to stimulus payments.) Phone maker Apple also saw sales increase after stimulus payments went out, Cook said on the company’s April 30 earnings call. “A part of it is due to just our new products,” Cook said. But another part of it is also “due to the stimulus programs taking effect in April.” (Apple did not respond to MarketWatch’s request for a further comment.) Unlike Target and Walmart, which have remained open during the coronavirus outbreak and can sell apparel in-stores, “non-esential” clothing retailers including Gap, Nordstrom and Nike have been forced to close many stores across the country. As a result, retailers in the apparel industry have offered consumers online deals comparable to Cyber Monday. Still, many Americans have used their stimulus checks to stock up on essentials. That’s especially true for those who received their checks in the first wave of stimulus payments, said Stuart Sopp, CEO and founder of Current, a New York City-based mobile-banking startup. In mid-April when payments were initially distributed, “most people immediately spent on groceries,” said Sopp. Many Current members, he said, also took cash out of ATMs to “pay friends back and pay their bills.” He added, “People were struggling for basic life essentials and the stimulus payments really helped them, which I think is what it was all about.” In the next wave of payments, which occurred towards the end of April, more people used the funds “for everyday means,” Sopp said. That included ordering more food delivery and takeout, and gas. The $3 trillion coronavirus aid package the House of Representatives passed last week, dubbed the HEROS Act, calls for a second round of stimulus checks. President Donald Trump and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell indicated that they are in no rush to sign the relief package to law. Trump has shown support for a second round of stimulus checks. If people do end up receiving a second stimulus check, Sopp predicts most will use the money for the same purposes. Best Buy’s Barry said Thursday that “the impact of current to potential future government stimulus actions” is something the company will keep an eye on “for the remainder of the year.”

The beaches may be opening in the Hamptons this weekend, but the reading material — at least when it comes to magazines — will be curtailed on the eastern end of Long Island. “Right now, it’s life in limbo in the Hamptons,” said Joan Jedell, founder, publisher and editor-in-chief of The Hampton Sheet, which has been chronicling the pop-culture scene on the East End for 22 years. This year, as the coronavirus continues to upend life as we knew it, she will be skipping her traditional Memorial Day issue and going straight to the July/August issue out just before the Fourth of July. “Charities were a huge part of the social scene,” she noted. “Now many of them are doing events virtually via Zoom.” Social Life owner Justin Mitchell sued his insurance provider for over $197,000 under the business-interruption policy. But the insurer argued the policy did not cover the pandemic because the physical offices were not destroyed. On Friday, Mitchell told Media Ink, “We just withdrew the lawsuit, but I can’t talk right now — my wife is about to give birth to a baby!” The publication, focused on the luxury market, will miss the traditional Memorial Day debut issue, but East End sources tell Media Ink that because so many of the normal restaurant and retail venues are closed, Mitchell is planning to distribute the six-times-a-summer magazine directly to readers’ homes. In contrast, Dan’s Papers carried more than 200 advertisers in its Memorial Day issue that hit this week. “This is not a year when any publisher is going to talk about year-over-year increases,” said Dan’s owner Richard Burns. “While we can’t deliver through some of our traditional retail spots, distribution has been doubled at supermarkets, drug stores and more than two dozen East End restaurants are including the paper with every single takeout delivery,” he said. The granddaddy of East End titles remains Hamptons Magazine, which managed a 220-page issue that counts 72 advertisers. Michael Dickey, chief executive of parent company Modern Luxury, which furloughed many marketing and events people last month, ran with the “Hope” theme across all 40 magazines in the regional publishing empire, and donated $1 million in ad space to the Feeding America charity. More recently, Dickey’s Atlanta-headquartered Modern Luxury was able to obtain a significant check from the Small Business Administration’s Payroll Protection Program. “We got PPP funds,” Dickey told Media Ink. While he declined to disclose the amount, it was a difference-maker. “Without it, I don’t think we would have survived,” he said. While most titles are combining two months into single issues, he said Hamptons is the only title within his company that had not altered its publishing schedule, with plans to do 10 summer issues and an 11th holiday issue. A second title, Modern Luxury Beach, appears to be suspended, with plans to bring it to Martha’s Vineyard and Nantucket, both in Massachusetts, on hold. Cristina Cuomo, husband and CNN anchor Chris Cuomo and their son Mario all famously survived the coronavirus in recent weeks. Now Cristina is fighting off critics of some of the treatments she was advocating through her wellness publication, Purist — scheduled to publish six issues a year, including four on the East End — and in her blog thepuristonline.com. “In April, she described a water-and-bleach bath as an “evidence-based doctor recommendation” for treating the virus,” according to NewsGuard, a media fact-check site. Since there is no known medical cure for COVID-19, Cristina Cuomo says she turned to homeopathic remedies using natural ingredients, which is what her magazine has been about all along, sources said. Elsewhere, off-beat Whalebone is finding innovative ways to continue operating. When Media Ink asked Ed Berrang, a co-founder and president of the publication, if he was going to skip any issues, he responded, “No way, Jose! We’ve found a little wind in our sails and doing what we can with it. Hoping to not totally screw things up.” The magazine just completed its first-ever photo contest, with entrants paying $5 per photo to be involved. The issue, dedicated to the late legendary photographer Peter Beard, is due out in June, with a $25,000 cash prize and a portion of proceeds going to the nonprofit No Kid Hungry. “We raised enough money through the photo contest to keep the ship running,” Berrang told Media Ink. Jedell at The Hampton Sheet said the key is to remain flexible through the current crisis. “I think it will be like those East End brush fires years ago. Eventually everything came back — stronger than ever.”

COVID-19 might not be the only new strain to hit New York. State lawmakers are making a fresh push to legalize pot and expand sports betting, saying tax income from the vices can help fill a gaping budget hole widened by the coronavirus. Democratic state Sens. Jessica Ramos, Brad Hoylman and Jamaal Bailey — representing Queens, Manhattan and the Bronx & Mount Vernon respectively — teamed up with the Legal Aid Society on Thursday to urge state lawmakers to legalize recreational marijuana. The call cited racial and income inequities exposed and exacerbated by the pandemic, but proponents argued that the revenue from sales could help dig New York out of a deficit in this year’s budget more than $13 billion. “It’s not enough to say the state doesn’t have money. We have to find it,” said Ramos. “I believe legalizing marijuana can help.” State Sen. Joe Addabbo, a Queens Democrat, dubbed pot legalization “a tricky subject,” but had his own proposal, calling for mobile sports betting. “Our state is not at the liberty or luxury of declining revenue at this point,” said Addabbo, calling gaming an “easier policy” to push through than legal pot.

An Atlanta-area man is facing federal charges after allegedly faking a coronavirus diagnosis to get out of work. Santwon Antonio Davis, 34, was arrested by the FBI for allegedly submitting a bogus medical excuse record relating to the virus that forced his Fortune 500 employer to close for a cleaning and sent several colleagues into unnecessary quarantine. The cleaning and disinfecting cost the company $100,000. “The defendant caused unnecessary economic loss to his employer and distress to his coworkers and their families,” said U.S. Attorney Byung J. Pak in a statement. “We will take quick action through the Georgia COVID-19 Task Force to put a stop to criminals preying on Georgia companies and the public with Coronavirus-related fraud schemes.” Davis, 34, of Marrow, Georgia, is charged with defrauding his Atlanta-based employer, which was left anonymous in the Thursday announcement from the US Attorney’s Office for the Northern District of Georgia. He has since admitted to never contracting the virus, according to prosecutors. “Scammers continue to take advantage of the COVID-19 pandemic through a variety of means,” said Chris Hacker, the special agent in charge of FBI Atlanta. Davis is a convicted felon who has served three brief stints in prison since 2006, according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. He’s been convicted of theft, criminal trespassing and criminal damage to property.

Don’t you defy his no-swimming edict, Mayor Bill de Blasio warns. “We’re putting fencing in and in reserve that could close off the beaches as needed.” Funny: He used to think barriers didn’t work. For example, Blas told Fox News’ Sean Hannity that President Trump’s proposed wall on the Mexican border wouldn’t work, as illegal immigrants will enter the United States “with a wall or without a wall.” Are fences more effective? Ironically, Hizzoner says the point of his ban is to keep people off the subways — so anyone who owns a car can drive to the beach elsewhere. It’s only those in what he used to call “the other New York” who’ll have to sweat out the Memorial Day weekend. What a pip.

Mayor Bill de Blasio announced Thursday that Gotham might begin — begin — reopening in a few weeks. Why not take some steps now? David Marcus put it well in these pages Thursday: “The Big Apple is ­dying. Its streets are empty. . . . The sweat equity of countless small-business owners is evaporating. It needs to end. Now.” The universally stated purpose of the lockdowns was to “flatten the curve” so hospitals didn’t get overwhelmed. Well: Hospitalizations are now a third of the peak level; daily deaths are down 500 percent. A debate can — must — be had about what to reopen when and how. Yet too many politicos and pundits still insist any hint of ending the 10-week lockdown amounts to a death wish. “People will die because you want a haircut” goes this line. It’s as extreme, and absurd, as the idea that wearing a mask is submission to tyranny. It ignores the more measured arguments of those of us who want to get New Yorkers back to work and back to life safely. A fifth of the state’s workers have lost their jobs. The lockdown has clearly grown untenable: Gothamites are crowding parks and loitering outside bars and restaurants, to-go cocktails in hand. And why not, if they can do it safely? New Yorkers mastered social distancing, with creative face masks replacing designer handbags as the accessory. Businesses routinely require masks for entry, protecting employees and customers. So why can’t more of them reopen? Why can you buy swimsuits and other “nonessential” goods at Walmart or Target but not at a local shop? Because the people elected to serve us just don’t trust us. “If I won’t send my children to day camp, I wouldn’t ask anyone else to send their children to day camp,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo says. No one’s asking you to tell them what to do, sir. They want to make some choices for themselves. Some precautions must stay in place. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report more than 80 percent of COVID-19 deaths are among those over 65 years, and the vast majority of fatalities at all ages had at least one underlying condition. Protect the vulnerable, by all means. Staggered commutes, with many office workers still telecommuting on any given day, are no-brainers. Mask-wearing is a must for a while yet. Gothamites are sick of the isolation from friends and family, of watching neighbors lose jobs and businesses go bust while the COVID-19 numbers move steadily downward. Get us out of this box.

The Trump Administration will order American flags to fly at half-staff on the grounds of federal buildings and national monuments over the next three days to commemorate those who have died from the coronavirus. The flags will remain at half-staff going into Monday, as per Memorial Day tradition, the president announced Thursday on Twitter. “I will be lowering the flags on all Federal Buildings and National Monuments to half-staff over the next three days in memory of the Americans we have lost to the CoronaVirus,” Trump tweeted. The remembrance comes after the US has reported more than 1.57 million coronavirus cases and more than 94,500 related deaths — the most cases and deaths of any country. In New York, the nation’s outbreak epicenter, Gov. Andrew Cuomo last month directed American flags to be flown at half-staff while the state is under lockdown to pay respect to those who have died. Trump’s directive comes as states begin to partially reopen while major metropolitan areas continue to battle outbreaks. The president on Thursday continued to urge states to reopen more counties in his bid to restart the economy. “As one people, we hold in our hearts the precious memory of every person that we have lost,” Trump said during a tour of a Michigan Ford plant. “We have lost too many, one is too many. As one grateful nation, we proclaim God bless our health care workers. They are like warriors.”

It’s not March anymore. The novel coronavirus has taken a heartbreaking health and economic toll in America. But the course of the pandemic isn’t the same as it was a few months ago. We are on the other side of the curve. There are encouraging signs all over the country — and no early indications of a reopening debacle. The question now is whether the media and political system can absorb good news on the ­virus, which is often ignored, if it isn’t buried under misleading storylines. The press has a natural affinity for catastrophes, which make compelling viewing and good copy. The pandemic is ­indeed a once-in-a-generation story. So the media are naturally loath to shift gears and acknowledge that the coronavirus has begun to loosen its grip on our collective life. Meanwhile, progressives and many journalists have developed a near-theological commitment to the lockdown measures, such that any information that undermines them is considered unwelcome, even threatening. This accounts for the widespread sense that no one should say things have gotten better … or people are going to die. Usually, when it is thought the public can’t handle the truth, it is a truth about some threat that could spark panic. The irony is that in this case, the truth is ­information that might make people think it’s safe to go outside again — that is to say, the opposite of panic-inducing information. Almost all of the discussion about reopening is framed by worries that we will reopen too soon, not that we might reopen too late. That is literally ­unthinkable, even as we have entered a new phase. As Nate Silver pointed the other day, the seven-day rolling average for deaths is 1,362, down from 1,761 the week prior and a peak of 2,070 on April 21. That’s still too much too high, but the trend is favorable. Testing capacity, such a concern for so long, has really ­begun to expand after hitting a plateau for weeks. Testing nationally on some days has been in the high 300,000s or more than 400,000. The issue in some states now is not capacity but actually finding enough people to test. Scott Gottlieb of the American Enterprise Institute notes that the positivity rate, or percentage of people testing positive for the virus, has continued to fall throughout May. The reopenings could certainly still go awry, but so far there is no clear indication of it. Cases are still falling in Austria, Denmark and Norway, despite those countries being relatively far along on reopening. Denmark has been mystified why it is almost five weeks into reopening and hasn’t yet seen increases in infections. The press has often, out of sloppiness or willfulness, tried to create negative news around the reopenings. CNN tweeted last weekend: “Texas is seeing the highest number of new coronavirus cases and deaths just two weeks after it officially re-opened.” As Sean Trende of ­RealClearPolitics pointed out, the seven-day rolling average of new cases had indeed been trending up, but the seven-day rolling average of the number of tests had gone up, too — which would naturally turn up more cases. The key indicator is the positivity rate, and it was down in Texas. A North Carolina TV station tweeted, “Breaking News: NC sees largest spike in coronavirus cases since pandemic began.” That referred to 800 new cases over the past 24 hours on May 16. But tests had been going sharply up and the positivity rate trending down. Headlines noted that Florida recorded 500 new cases on one day. It generated fewer headlines, and perhaps none, when Gov. Ron DeSantis explained that the Sunshine State had ­received a dump of 75,000 test results, yielding the 500 new cases, for a minuscule positivity rate of 0.64 percent. It isn’t as though we haven’t had a cataract of unassailably legitimate bad news over the past few months. We’ve been experiencing a wrenching public health crisis and a steep recession on top of it. There shouldn’t be a need to obscure favorable trends. We can handle the truth. Rich Lowry is the author of “The Case for Nationalism: How It Made Us Powerful, United and Free.” Twitter: @RichLowry 

The hottest ticket in New York City this summer? That would be movie screenings in a Queens restaurant’s parking lot, where scoring tickets is now a competitive sport. With quarantine making most real-life gatherings illegal, getting into the al fresco shows at Astoria’s Bel Aire Diner lot involves repeatedly hitting refresh on the eatery’s website — and likely disappointment. “Good luck — my friend tried to go last week. They sell out super fast,” my housemate warned. She was right: I might as well have been trying to score seats for a huge new band in pre-coronavirus times. The words “SOLD OUT” appeared on my screen before I even saw the option to buy. No doubt about it, the drive-in, recently considered a vestige of mid-20th century Americana, is now in the midst of a wheel-to-reel revival. “We’re like the Beatles now,” says Kal Dellaportas, Bel Aire’s manager, where tickets for the most recent drive-in movie on Thursday night sold out in “under a minute.” The Bel Aire only has room for 45 socially distanced cars in the lot adjacent to its restaurant, making its now regular screenings hyper-exclusive. Patrons pay $32 a vehicle to attend and can order diner food to their car. For every bag of popcorn sold, the diner feeds two first responders. Screenings, which are weather-dependent, are only scheduled about a week out, says Dellaportas, with new shows announced on the diner’s Instagram account and ticketing done through its website. “They ask the make and model of your car, so everyone has a clear view,” says Margaret, a 60-year-old Middle Village resident who attended Bel Aire’s screening of “The Sandlot” last Saturday with her husband and declined to share her last name. The screening was a welcome, if surreal, reprieve for the New Yorker, who has been under strict quarantine since the start of the pandemic. “Sitting there watching a movie we had seen in the past, it just brought us down memory lane,” Margaret tells The Post. Since New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo gave drive-ins the green light to reopen earlier this month, established open-air theaters — including the Warwick in Warwick, NY, and Four Brothers in Amenia, NY — and eager organizations with lot access have begun announcing movie nights across Long Island and upstate. And cooped-up New Yorkers are ready to press auto-play on the socially distanced — and suitably nostalgic — form of entertainment. Stephanie Keith/Getty Images Christopher Sadowski Christopher Sadowski Christopher Sadowski Christopher Sadowski Stephanie Keith/Getty Images Annie Wermiel Stefan Jeremiah for New York Pos Stefan Jeremiah for New York Pos AP/John Minchillo AP/John Minchillo View Slideshow “We sold out in less than 24 hours almost entirely by word of mouth,” Southampton Arts Center founding co-chair Simone Levinson tells The Post of its Memorial Day weekend “Raiders of the Lost Ark” screening. “Drive-in movies instantly transport us to easier times, and a community event like this is the perfect way to celebrate the start of summer,” says Levinson. Even Yankee Stadium has gotten in on the trend, with Bronx Night Market and Bronx Beer Festival organizer MASC Hospitality Group announcing an “Uptown Drive-in Experience” to take place at the sports field this summer. “We have created a social distancing playground to serve as the first step to normalization,” reads the festival’s webpage, which promises “live performances from local artists, car side dinner service from our fantastic street vendors, drinks from local and national brands [and] a movie feature presentation.” In NYC, spaces large enough to host such events are limited, but that isn’t stopping one religious group on the South Shore of Staten Island from offering screenings. “We want to give the community something safe to do, so we’re intending on putting on a whole host of them,” says Anthony Rapacciuolo, whose marketing company PRcision is assisting the Catholic Charities of Staten Island in organizing a summer series on the Mount Loretto campus in Tottenville. “We’re going to have one food truck present at each of the events, and guests can pre-order food with their ticket.” Dates and films are still being confirmed (they’ll be posted to the Charities’ event page once set), but the plan is to host two screenings a week, charging $30 for SUVs and $25 for traditional vehicles, with all proceeds benefiting the nonprofit Catholic Charities. Last year, the campus hosted four summer screenings, and every one sold out, so Rapacciuolo anticipates the demand this year to be even greater. Still, no one can say just how long the drive-in craze will last. Dellaportas, for one, suspects it is a passing phase. “I can’t imagine that after social-distancing guidelines are relaxed, it continues to be a thing,” he says. “These things never completely go away, but at this time next year, I’m not gonna be selling out in a minute.”

Rob McElhenney wasn’t going to let a global pandemic stop him from making his Apple+ workplace comedy series “Mythic Quest: Raven’s Banquet.” The show, which follows a zany team of engineers and creatives at a video game studio, has a special episode premiering Friday called “Mythic Quest: Quarantine.” “The motivation was simple — ‘How do I get people back to work?,’ ” says McElhenney, 43, who stars in and co-created the series with Megan Ganz and Charlie Day. “There’s this unfortunate misconception about Hollywood … that it’s just a bunch of millionaire actors all living in beach houses and on boats and on compounds. The truth of the matter is, that represents about .01 percent of the community. “The vast majority are working-class people,” he says, “and I wanted to figure out a way that we could alleviate some of the anxiety and economic concerns by getting people back to work, if only for a couple of weeks, and see if we could pull it off.” Apple+ has already renewed “Mythic Quest,” which premiered in February, for a second season. “Mythic Quest: Quarantine,” shot completely on iPhones, follows the studio’s vainglorious creative director Ian Grimm (McElhenney) and his team as they attempt to continue their work at their own homes via video conferencing. “We wanted it to feel like a premium episode of the show,” says McElhenney, who also created and stars in FXX sitcom “It’s Always Sunny in Philadelphia.” “We wanted to make sure that if you came back in five year’s time, you could watch the episode and say it stands up in terms of quality with any other episode, and that the interface with which we chose to tell the story was a creative choice and not a limitation.” As they work remotely over the course of “Quarantine,” the dysfunctional team has a slew of power struggles. Along with Ian, there’s the brilliant engineer Poppy (Charlotte Nicdao), who’s always being overlooked; insecure producer, David Brittlesbee (David Hornsby); and senior team member C.W. Longbottom (F. Murray Abraham), who struggles with the video conferencing technology. While Ian and Poppy often clash, they also make a surprising emotional connection as isolation takes a toll on each of them. “We didn’t want to just do a bunch of jokes for 45 minutes. We wanted to be authentic to the experiences people are really having out there,” McElhenney says. “One of those experiences, unfortunately, is isolation and loneliness and despair. So how can we do that in a way that doesn’t feel exploitative, that feels like we’re respecting and honoring that, and presenting it in a way that makes people feel less alone?” The episode was filmed over the course of three weeks. By comparison, a standard episode before lockdown took around two months to create, he estimates. No cast member left their house or apartment, which provided some challenges. “Part of the experience that was so profoundly moving for me wasn’t just how the crew came together, but the support system of the crew — whether it was spouses, partners, boyfriends, girlfriends, children or roommates,” he says. “We were asking a lot of people to help out, whether it be help out by simply, ‘Could you hold a camera?’ or ‘Could you press a button for me? or ‘Could you keep it down?’ All the way up to what I asked my wife [‘It’s Always Sunny’ co-star Kaitlin Olson], ‘Hey, sweetie, would it be OK if I disappeared for three weeks and made an episode while you’re homeschooling our children and feeding them 17 times a day?’ and of course she said, ‘Absolutely.’ This simply could not have been done without the people in our lives.” McElhenney describes it as the most difficult production of his entire career. “But it was also the episode of television of which I am most proud,” he says.

Bethenny Frankel helped facilitate the donation of millions of masks to medical workers in need across the country amid the coronavirus pandemic, but she says she encountered a few shysters along the way. According to the New York Times, the former “Real Housewives of New York” star was put into contact with an Idaho man named Jake Uhlenkott, who allegedly said he could get Frankel and her charity, BStrong, access to 500 million medical masks. With the mask supply dwindling in hospitals around the country, Frankel was quick to jump at the opportunity and started looking for funding and coordinating with state officials to distribute the masks in New York, Michigan, Arizona, Louisiana and Chicago. But as she continued to communicate with Uhlenkott, Frankel says she began to doubt the masks existed. “Everybody knew a guy who knew a guy,” she told the Times of her search to acquire the masks. “You feel like you’re in a Moroccan bazaar, and wherever you’re turning, left and right, everybody is holding shiny objects.” The Skinnygirl CEO said that Uhlenkott kept promising more masks that could be delivered from Canada and New York, but Frankel claims he would never offer the exact location of the supply. “My patience is running low,” Frankel reportedly texted him. “I went to bat for you with this whole group. Stakes are high so kick this into gear. I don’t care how.” Uhlenkott said to the Times that his “original source for the 500 million masks was real and reliable, but to find supply already in North America, he went with a new seller who turned out to be slippery.” He eventually backed away from the deal and connected her directly with his mask contacts. Hopeful, Frankel then said she worked with the state of New York to strike a deal with a man named Ralph Frengel to buy 10 million 3M masks for $66.5 million. However, when Frengel refused to allow an inspection of the masks, the city and Frankel exited the deal, the Times reported. “We all were completely gutted,” she said. According to the paper, it turned out Frengel and one of his two associates, Michael Carnicle, were both ex-convicts. The pair both denied any wrongdoing when contacted by the outlet. Fortunately, Frankel’s BStrong charity and partner organization, Global Empowerment Mission, were able acquire and donate more than 2 million masks and isolation gowns to medical workers and other groups in all 50 states, getting their supplies from smaller purchases as well as several big deals like the one million hazmat suits for New York State and more than 200,000 surgical masks for New York City, the Times reports. Throughout the ordeal, Frankel learned that during a crisis, people are either out to help or out to exploit. “It’s so disheartening,” she said. “At the racetrack, you think you might get screwed. But when you’re dealing with the biggest health crisis in 100 years, you have to be a really sick, sick, bad person to exploit that.”

Spencer Dinwiddie may have just spilled the beans on the NBA return date. The Nets scorer, replying to a tweet by sneaker designer John Geiger, wrote that the league’s bubble site games would begin on July 15, with practice starting up on June 21. Whether or not Dinwiddie was being serious or an actual return date has been decided upon, it’s a glimmer of good news in an otherwise bleak sports forecast, thanks to the coronavirus pandemic. It also jibes with long-reported timelines for a mid-July return. With the NBA and NHL still figuring out how to return to their 2019-20 seasons and MLB hammering out the details to begin its year, any pro sports league in North America getting back to business would lead the way for the others. That’s just practice… I heard those last 5 games at bubble site start July 15th. https://t.co/EsF3omehYQ — Spencer Dinwiddie (@SDinwiddie_25) May 21, 2020  A popular idea among the leagues is bubble cities — having all teams housed and playing in a single city with constant testing for COVID-19 — with the NBA’s reported frontrunner being Disney World. Players are allowed to being voluntary workouts, with 20 teams opening their facilities this week. Workouts are limited to four players.

They’re erring on the side of caution tape. A group of transit workers have been roping their operating cabs in caution tape, believing it will help ward off the coronavirus by keeping riders away from them. G train operator and union shop steward Seth Rosenberg provided The Post photos of caution tape blocking off access to the four seats nearest to his cab. “When I put the tape up, I operated with peace of mind,” Rosenberg told NY1, which first reported on the demonstration. Without the tape “[s]omeone could sit literally right behind where the train operator and conductor is, less than a foot away from the wall,” he told the TV station. “I can tell you, you can smell their perfume, you can smell if they’re eating something.” About 10 transit workers put up caution tape in total, a source said. Transit management did not take the move lightly — calling it unnecessary, against-the-rules and detrimental to passengers who need safe space to social distance themselves. “Our train operators and conductors work in enclosed cabs with a physical barrier between them and other people on the trains,” MTA spokesman Tim Minton said in a statement. “What this operator did was unauthorized and compromised customer safety. It reduced available space in that car for essential workers who were exposed to the risk of unnecessary crowding.”

President Trump traveled to Michigan Thursday to visit a Ford plant converted to making ventilators, and thanked employees for their efforts to help save Americans’ lives during the coronavirus pandemic. “With your help, not a single American has been denied a ventilator, not a single one,” Trump said during the campaign-style appearance at the Rawsonville plant in 2020 battleground Michigan. The president said he wore a protective face mask — which photos of the event showed had a presidential seal — while touring the plant but took it off before he spoke to workers. “I didn’t want to give the press the pleasure of seeing it,” Trump said, later donning one of the protective face shields also used at the plant. Asked about the Ford executives wearing masks, which the company requires workers to wear, he said it’s “their choice.” The president also mourned victims of the pandemic, which has claimed nearly 85,000 American lives, and praised health care workers. “As one people, we hold in our hearts the precious memory of every person that we have lost. We have lost too many, one is too many. As one grateful nation, we proclaim god bless our health care workers. They are like warriors,” he said. Trump has urged states to loosen coronavirus-related restrictions so the battered US economy can recover even as public health experts warn that premature relaxation of restrictions could lead to a second wave of deadly infections. Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat seen as a potential vice presidential running mate for presumptive presidential challenger Joe Biden, is facing a backlash from some critics against her stay-at-home orders in a state hit hard by the last recession even though polls show most residents support her handling of the pandemic. Trump on Wednesday threatened to withhold federal funding from Michigan over its plan for expanded mail-in voting, saying without offering evidence that the practice could lead to voter fraud – and said Thursday the threat was still on the table, though he declined to say what funding could be cut. Whitmer told a news conference she spoke with Trump on Wednesday and he pledged federal support in the recovery from flooding caused by dam failures. “I made the case that, you know, we all have to be on the same page here. We’ve got to stop demonizing one another and really focus on the fact that the common enemy is the virus. And now it’s a natural disaster,” Whitmer told CBS News, describing her conversation with Trump. REUTERS/Leah Millis BRENDAN SMIALOWSKI/AFP via Getty Images REUTERS/Leah Millis View Slideshow Trump praised the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s and the Army Corp of Engineers’ efforts to mitigate the damage during his remarks, and said he would visit the stricken areas. Regarding Trump’s funding threat, Whitmer said, “Threatening to take money away from a state that is hurting as bad as we are right now is just scary, and I think something that is unacceptable.” Earlier Thursday, Whitmer announced more steps to re-open the state’s economy on Thursday, offering timelines for the resumption of some businesses and allowing some social gatherings as long as guidelines to curb the spread of the coronavirus are observed. In a news briefing on Thursday morning, Whitmer said effective immediately people could meet in groups of up to 10, so long as they observed social distancing restrictions. Retail stores and auto showrooms can resume operations by appointment beginning on May 26, while increased veterinarian, dental, and medical services will be allowed starting May 29. “We’ve taken significant steps forward to re-engage our economy safely and responsibly over the past few weeks. Now we are going to take some time to ensure that these new measures are working,” Whitmer said. With Post wires

Broadway actor Nick Cordero, whose battle with COVID-19 has made him one of the most public faces of the pandemic, is still “fighting” despite a recent setback, according to an Instagram Stories update from his wife Amanda Kloots. “When things look down, we look up,” Kloots, 38, wrote in a separate Instagram post — “I have my masters in optimism!” Her husband, she says, has “the eye of the tiger,” adding that “the power of prayer is real.” On Wednesday, Kloots updated followers that “things are going a little downhill at the moment” hours after filling them in that Cordero’s right lung was improving, though his left was “still causing issues.” Cordero, 41, had recently awoken from a medically induced coma after weathering the loss of his right leg, two mini-strokes, a septic infection and fungus in his lungs. He was also given a temporary pacemaker for his heart. In March, Cordero, a native of Ontario, Canada, who had acted in “Rock of Ages” and “Waitress” on Broadway, was admitted to Cedars-Sinai hospital in Los Angeles with what he believed to be a case of pneumonia. He and Kloots are parents to a son, Elvis, who is about to turn 1.

WASHINGTON — US Centers for Disease Control Prevention Director Dr. Robert Redfield denied reports he has been sidelined by the White House during the coronavirus pandemic. In an interview with Politico on Thursday, the CDC chief also sought to downplay reports that guidelines his agency wrote on reopening the American economy had been blocked by the Trump administration, instead claiming they received “constructive criticism.” “It really wasn’t delayed,” Redfield said. “Several individuals on the task force said it was hard for the average person to understand,” he added, referring to the White House’s coronavirus task force. Redfield, one of the nation’s top public health officials, had been largely MIA during the health crisis — barely appearing during the president’s nightly briefings at the height of the pandemic in March and April. The virologist did make an appearance at the White House briefing room podium in late April, but only to retract comments he made warning the US could experience a more deadly coronavirus outbreak in the fall. He has also been criticized for his response to the crisis — White House advisor Peter Navarro accusing the CDC of dropping the ball on early testing and lawmakers grilling Redfield on the lack of reopening guidance. It appears the relationship between Dr. Deborah Birx and Redfield has also become strained despite their decades-long relationship, with Birx criticizing CDC data collection as antiquated in a recent meeting.

An FDNY EMT pleaded with Congress on Thursday for hazard pay and a steady supply of protective gear —  saying New York City emergency crews are “mentally and physically exhausted” after 10 weeks battling the coronavirus. Diana Wilson told members of the new House coronavirus committee on a video conference that overworked emergency crews are finding patients dead at their homes, with a notable uptick in heart attacks per shift during the crisis. Wilson likened treatment of first responders handling COVID-19 to cops and fire department staff whose health was ravaged by 9/11. “Let us remember how EMTs and paramedics during 9/11 affected our department,” she said. “Remember how members were being told that the air quality was safe, and still experiencing staff dying to this very day? Fast-forward to today, responding first to this virus: When does EMS get the PPE we need to protect ourselves and save lives? When does EMS get the pay they deserve for being first medical responders?” Wilson, a mother of two who lost her husband last year, said she hasn’t seen her children in weeks for their own safety while she works shifts of up to 16 hours. “On a normal EMS shift we respond to one or two cardiac arrests. Since COVID-19 has ravaged our state, we are now responding to calls by six to 10 cardiac arrests in an eight-hour tour,” she said. “Despite our best efforts to save lives, we are finding patients dead in their homes, sometimes even in their cars. “We are stressed and overworked for the better of 10 weeks,” she said, recalling specifically her concern early in the crisis about not having an N95 respirator mask for protection. Wilson was the only New Yorker to brief committee members, and lawmakers did not ask her followup questions. In her remarks, she urged bipartisan support for emergency workers and didn’t directly criticize any officials — though she gave a harsh assessment of preparedness. “The government failed us by not protecting first responders by providing us with a plan and PPE. We are haunted by our choices, and the patients we do not save,” Wilson testified. “There were other countries who had strategies to respond to this type of scenario, and we were grossly unprepared.” She added: “We trained for Ebola. We train for active-shooting scenarios. We failed on a plan or training for this pandemic at any scale.” The Democratic-led House coronavirus committee is chaired by Rep. Jim Clyburn (D-SC) and geared toward oversight of federal spending on the crisis. Republicans say it’s a stealth attempt to attack President Trump ahead of the November election. On Tuesday, the committee’s five Republicans asked for a focus on China’s role in the pandemic, with requested testimony from China’s ambassador and the director-general of the World Health Organization. A Democratic spokeswoman for the committee promptly shot down the idea, saying: “The Select Committee will follow its mission to ensure that taxpayer money appropriated to address the pandemic is used efficiently, effectively, and equitably. This body is not directed to focus on the origin of the virus.” A witness at the Thursday briefing endorsed the idea of investigating China. “I do believe the Chinese government did not do everything to limit the spread of coronavirus beyond its border,” said New Orleans restaurant owner Steve Pettus, who laid off 500 employees due to the crisis. “I, too, lost love ones, my aunt and friends. But we’ll never get them back and in recognition of the economic damage that China has caused, they should be held accountable.”

Smokers are more at risk from the coronavirus — and more likely to get seriously ill once they are infected, according to a new study. A survey of 2.4 million Britons found current smokers were 14 percent more likely to develop COVID-19 symptoms than non-smokers. The survey, by the Imperial College in London, also found that when smokers do catch the virus, they were more than twice as likely as non-smokers to need hospitalization. The London survey results conform to previous studies showing smokers are more prone to catching respiratory viruses in general, since they touch their mouths more and are more likely to have damaged airways. But the results run counter to other recent studies on smoking and COVID-19. Last month, a study showing lower-than-expected numbers of smokers among hospitalized COVID-19 patients led France to ban the online sale of nicotine gum and patches, for fear of a run on the products. Meanwhile, a team of Canadians recently found that some strains of cannabis could help prevent and treat coronavirus infections.

New York City could awake from its coronavirus-induced coma as soon as early June, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced Thursday. By next month, the Big Apple is expected to meet its own targets for hospitalizations, ICU admissions, and the amount of those testing positive for the bug — as well as the state’s seven COVID-related benchmarks, the mayor explained. “All roads are leading to the first half of June,” Hizzoner said. But city-run beaches still won’t be open for swimming Memorial Day Weekend — and the mayor is urging Big Apple residents to stay off Long Island’s shoreline. Here are all of the beaches that will be open in the area — and here’s some advice on staying safe in the sand. Meanwhile, it could be some time before Broadway returns, according to insiders — but other forms of entertainment are already planning a comeback. Get the latest developments on the coronavirus straight to your inbox by signing up for our special edition newsletter. Here’s what else we learned today: 

Wipe out! City beaches will be a surfers’ paradise, but swimmers will be sidelined under a wishy-washy set of rules dropped by the city and the NYPD on the eve of Memorial Day Weekend. “The beaches are open, but the water is not for swimming,” said Brian Conroy, assistant chief of the NYPD’s Patrol Borough Brooklyn South, in a press briefing at the Abe Stark Sports Center in Coney Island. “You can go in ankle deep, wade in the water,” Conroy continued. “Surfers will be allowed into the water.” The half-measure move was swiftly blasted as all wet. “This is just more mixed messaging,” said City Councilman Justin Brannan (D-Brooklyn). “We need to have very clear guidelines here, because if you don’t you’re just setting yourself up for tragedy and-or confrontation. “If I carry a surfboard, can I go in the water even if I don’t know how to surf?” City Councilman Donovan Richards, a Queens Democrat representing sandy Far Rockaway, said that he was left “scratching my head” over the gnarly policy. “Are they going to give swim tests to surfers before they go into the water?” asked Richards. “If you’re saying the water is closed to anyone then they have to be closed for everyone. “It sends a bad message. It says the waters are open.” Politicians weren’t the only ones who feared that the rules would confuse beachgoers trying to enjoy a little sea air and sunshine amid the coronavirus pandemic. “It’s the same water. If you’re surfing, you have to go out and swim first, right?” pointed out Pat Singer, head of Brooklyn’s Brighton Neighborhood Association. “The mayor ought to rethink that one. It’s going to cause mixed messages.” Even an NYPD source panned the policy, and questioned why the department was wading into the murky waters at all. “That’s like telling a kid you can go into the candy store but you can’t get any candy,” said the insider of the surfing-versus-swimming rule. “This has nothing to do with them,” continued the source. “The NYPD shouldn’t be involved in anything to do with the beach.” And, despite calling the press briefing, they won’t. “We don’t anticipate any plucking out of the water, but the police department doesn’t anticipate any enforcing going into the water,” said Conroy. Rather, Parks Department officers will be on hand to police both surf and sand, where social-distancing rules remain in effect. NYPD cops will hit the beaches only to keep an eye out for any criminal activity, said Conroy. The MTA, meanwhile, called Thursday for any beachgoers to hitch a ride that doesn’t involve mass transit. “We understand people have been cooped up and are going to want to celebrate Memorial Day weekend, but [mass transit] remains for essential workers and those making essential trips only,” said MTA Chairman and CEO Patrick J. Foye said in a statement. “It is not for recreational travel to beaches.” The beaches are technically closed for Memorial Day Weekend anyway, after Hizzoner opted the five boroughs out of a multi-state initiative opening up the sandy stretches for the holiday. But despite closing city beaches, de Blasio earlier this week implored Long Island to welcome wandering Big Apple sunworshippers — only to meekly back down Thursday after the stance was blasted as “irresponsible” by Nassau County Executive Laura Curran. “My advice to people is keep it simple. Keep it local,” de Blasio said during his daily coronavirus press briefing. “Less is more.” The mayor — who previously threatened to pluck swimmers from the water and fence off the beaches if things got out hand — has said that socially-distant exercising and walking are OK, but that the capacity will be closely monitored. “We will keep both spreading people out, but if we have to send people off the beach, off the boardwalk if we have to reduce the number of people, we’ll do that,” he said. City Hall did not respond to a request for comment on the surfer-friendly policy. State-run New York beaches will be open starting Friday for the long weekend, but they will be at only 50 percent capacity. Additional reporting by David Meyer and Natalie Musumeci

Pandemic journal: Lockdowns Were a Mistake At RealClearPolitics, Yinon Weiss outlines why the lockdowns “may eventually be known as one of the biggest medical and economic blunders” ever. Sweden, he notes, “never closed borders, restaurants, businesses or primary schools,” yet warnings that the results would be horrific proved false: The IMHE model (often cited by the White House) predicted a daily death level at peak that proved four times higher than what Sweden actually saw. “Sweden’s short-term results are worse than Norway, Finland and Denmark, but better than the UK, France, Spain, Italy and Belgium. Sweden likely also benefits from longer-term herd immunity, faster economic ­recovery and fewer deaths from lockdown collateral damage.” A more ­“rational strategy,” argues Weiss, “would have been to lock down nursing homes and let young healthy people out to build immunity.” Democracy beat: Call Off the Voting Wars President Trump’s “more than wrongheaded” threats to hold up funds to states that expand mail-in voting are an example of “bipartisan” fears, sighs Henry Olsen at The Washington Post. Trump’s voicing Republicans’ “fear of voter fraud.” Yet that fear is “unsubstantiated,” an excuse to ­explain away Democratic victories. Dems have “fictional monsters,” too, about Republican “voter suppression” by purging voter rolls (as federal law requires) and imposing voter-ID laws (which don’t reduce turnout). Both sides’ claims erode trust in democracy, since transfer of power “can only work if the loser accepts the outcome” and people trust the process. “America’s democracy is imperfect, but it has been a beacon to the world.” Don’t let “partisan bickering throw that invaluable heritage away.” From the right: Pelosi’s SALT-Cap Hypocrisy The state and local tax deduction “overwhelmingly” benefited the wealthy, so capping it in the 2017 tax-cut law didn’t seem controversial, Shay Hawkins, a Senate Finance Committee policy adviser when the bill was drafted, recalls at The Washington Examiner. Until then, nearly 80 percent of the benefit went to those making over $100,000. Yet Speaker Nancy Pelosi’s stimulus bill undoes the cap, restoring that goody for the wealthy. Since she “bemoans tax breaks for the rich,” this exposes her hypocrisy in “blinding fashion.” Nor would the deduction provide stimulus, since it “puts money in the hands of people” already rich. Other measures might work, but Pelosi shouldn’t “rejig our tax code in favor of rich people on the coasts at the literal expense of the heartland.” From the left: The Progressive Trump Self-described “leftist anti-Trumper” John MacArthur admits at Spectator USA that he is “impressed” by President Trump’s “credible, progressive-sounding political analysis.” In a recent Fox Business interview, Trump stated “what is now indisputable — that outsourcing so much production to China and other low-wage countries has come back to haunt us in a time of crisis.” By contrast, Joe Biden voted for NAFTA and Permanent Normal Trade Relations with China. “This should worry the Democrats”: Recall that 8 million Obama voters chose Trump in 2016, and more than 200,000 Bernie Sanders supporters backed him in Wisconsin, Michigan and Pennsylvania. Trump’s boast that he slapped tariffs on China and aided farmers sounds like he believes in “redistribution of wealth.” Biden should realize that “Trump, when it suits him, is smart enough to run to his left.” 2020 watch: Beware Trump’s Trap Democrats are waltzing right into the “Trump Trap,” warns Politico’s John Harris. By constantly denouncing the president’s utterances, liberals and their media allies give Trump’s “provocations the centrality upon which the Trump movement depends.” To wit, “Trump knows that the likelihood that a sufficient number of people will say he’s doing at least an acceptable job during the pandemic increases the more that certain types of people say he’s a terrible person doing a terrible job.” That’s why former President Barack Obama’s recent denunciation of his successor’s pandemic performance left Trump “even more pleased” — because it allowed Trump to achieve “his true objective of drawing lines and creating the kind of chaos in which he has previously thrived.” — Compiled by The Post Editorial Board

Sweden’s decision to go with voluntary lockdowns — instead of the mandatory measures implemented in other countries — has resulted in the highest number of COVID-19 deaths per capita in Europe but little of the hoped-for “herd immunity” benefits. A Swedish study found that only 7.3 percent of Stockholmers had developed coronavirus-fighting antibodies by late April, Reuters reports. The low percentage runs counter to the strategy of the country’s chief epidemiologist, who’d predicted that by keeping schools, restaurants, bars and businesses open, enough people would soon develop immunity to the infection to slow the disease from spreading catastrophically. Sweden’s death toll stood at 3,871 on Thursday afternoon, three times more than in its Nordic neighbors — Denmark, Norway, Finland and Iceland — combined, according to Johns Hopkins University data. The number of confirmed cases in the country is at least 32,172. The World Health Organization has warned against pinning hopes on herd immunity. It said last week global studies had found antibodies in only 1-10 percent of the population, results in line with recent findings in Spain and France.

Dakota Johnson opened up about how she has been coping with her depression while in isolation during the coronavirus pandemic. “You are at home, you’re not with your friends, you’re not with your family, you are not able to do the things that make you feel worthwhile,” Johnson, 30, recently told Extra. “You’re kind of in this costume of depression.” “Right now, there’s also immense pain and sadness ricocheting around the world constantly so it’s hard to feel totally positive all day, every day when the world is sad, it’s dangerous and it’s scary and it’s lonely,” she added. The “Fifty Shades of Grey” actress said she manages her depression by staying active. “Meditation or going for a walk, being kind to your body … Those little things make a difference ultimately.” Johnson also added that she likes to keep herself entertained and busy. “I’ve been reading a lot and watching a lot of movies and working on production stuff, trying to be productive,” she said. Johnson has struggled with depression since her early teen years and revealed in an interview for Marie Claire’s summer 2020 issue that she finds her depression to be “beautiful.”

MANAUS, Brazil – The mayor of the largest city in the Amazon rainforest said the coronavirus pandemic is killing indigenous people and warned of a “genocide” if Brazil’s right-wing government fails to protect vulnerable tribes. So far 25 indigenous people have died in the rainforest as the outbreak slowly penetrates remote villages, but more than 100 have been killed by the virus in urban areas, health authorities and indigenous groups said. “I fear a genocide,” said Arthur Virgilio Neto, mayor of Manaus, a city of 2 million people and capital of Amazonas state, in a video posted on social media late on Tuesday. The mayor said the government of President Jair Bolsonaro was not concerned about the plight of indigenous people and doing nothing to save lives threatened by the outbreak. “It is a crime against humanity what they are doing here in my state of Amazonas, in my region.” he said. Bolsonaro’s office did not reply to requests for comment. Healthcare for indigenous people is the responsibility of the federal health ministry and its indigenous health service Sesai, which does not treat members of a tribe who have migrated away from their ancestral lands. Health experts say the outbreak that first broke out in the cities is now spreading to isolated areas where the population has no access to healthcare. Pan American Health Organization officials said in a virtual briefing on Tuesday they were particularly concerned about contagion in the tri-border area of the Amazon between Colombia, Peru and Brazil.

If you want to work for Facebook from your house in Peoria, Ill., don’t expect a Palo Alto, Calif.-sized paycheck. Chief Executive Mark Zuckerberg on Thursday said half of the social-networking giant’s employees could be working remotely within the next five to 10 years, and that Facebook will begin allowing certain employees to work from home on a full-time basis. But those remote workers will have to alert Facebook if they move to a new location by Jan. 1. and may have their pay adjusted accordingly, he added. Given that Silicon Valley has some of the priciest real estate in the country, that adjustment will likely be downward. “We’ll adjust salary to your location at that point,” said Zuckerberg, adding that the tweak would be necessary for taxes and accounting. “There’ll be severe ramifications for people who are not honest about this.” The shift could help remake the US job market in tech, as Facebook currently has more than 40,000 employees. Zuckerberg said there will be a wide range of jobs eligible to work remotely, beginning with newly-hired senior engineers and then expanding to current employees with strong performance reviews. “I think we’re going to be the most forward-leaning company on remote work at our scale, for sure,” Mr. Zuckerberg told employees on a Thursday live stream. Facebook’s new remote work system is “mostly going to rely on honor code,” Zuckerberg said, but the company will “put in some basic precautions” to make sure that employees are where they say they are. Nevertheless, employees who left the Bay Area when Facebook implemented work-from-home orders in March may be able to eventually stay where they are, he said. Zuckerberg’s surprise announcement — which followed Twitter’s announcement earlier this month that employees would eventually be allowed to work from home indefinitely — will eventually be a “win win” for workers and employers alike, according to one expert. “Depending on how they calculate it, workers may be way better off lifestyle-wise making a little bit less but living where they want,” Michael Solomon, co-founder of tech recruiting firm 10x, told The Post. Solomon, also author of the forthcoming book called “Game Changer,” said that mid-tier candidates will likely be happy to have the choice between a higher salary in the Bay Area or a higher quality of life somewhere else, while the cream of the crop will get their payday regardless. “I think the best people, you’re going to have to pay them regardless of where they live or you’re going to lose them to a competitor,” he said. Shares of Facebook closed up 0.6 percent Thursday, at $231.39.

Adults’ noses may make them more vulnerable to catching coronavirus than kids — possibly explaining why cases are less prevalent among children, according to a new study. The receptors that let the virus inside cells are more common in the noses of adults than children, according to a report published in the Journal of the American Medical Association. Researchers from the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai looked at nasal samples from around 300 people ages 4 to 60 — which were taken for an earlier, unrelated study on asthma. In the new study, the samples were evaluated for the expression of the ACE2 gene, which the virus uses as a receptor to invade the body. The expression of the gene in the cells lining the nose was lowest in younger children, while it was significantly higher in the other age groups and rose with age, the researchers said. “Lower ACE2 expression in children relative to adults may help explain why COVID-19 is less prevalent in children,” the researchers wrote. However, the researchers noted that the study had limitations because there were no samples from people above 60 — one of the most vulnerable groups for the virus. The report comes as the virus has infected more than 1.5 million Americans, resulting in at least 93,000 deaths, according to the latest figures from Johns Hopkins University.

HONG KONG — It took only a few seconds. Shortly after I stepped off a flight from Singapore, an official at the Hong Kong immigration counter gestured for me to extend my arm, then strapped a bulky plastic box to my wrist. And just like that, I had a new companion for the next 14 days of self-isolation — a government quarantine tracker. In online pictures, the trackers were inconspicuous devices almost like a concert wristband. Those didn’t look so bad. What I got, though, was a gadget about the size of a deck of cards that I had to pair with a government quarantine app. After that, if I left my home or stepped more than 30 feet from my phone for a prolonged period of time, the app would alert authorities that I may have broken quarantine. The bulky tracker turned out to be a new version released after Hong Kong admitted that only a third of the first-generation wristbands actually worked. The rest simply never activated. On the taxi ride home, I examined it closely. The tracker hardly looked like a high-tech device meant to keep tabs on me. It was so light that I wondered if maybe it was an empty shell, a cheap fake to trick me into staying put. I wasn’t about to take it off to find out, even though having a tracker branded me as a potential risk to society, at least for two weeks. I found myself trying to hide it when I arrived at my apartment building, afraid others might see and shun me. Over the next two weeks, I wore the tracker in the shower, while exercising, and of course to sleep. Sometimes I’d forget about it entirely. At other moments, the constant presence on my wrist was all I could feel, a perpetual reminder that I was a virtual prisoner in my home. It did make a handy conversation starter. When I showed it off at a friend’s Zoom birthday party, many giggled at the size of it. One attendee called it my ankle monitor. Despite the jokes, I was keenly aware that I was privileged to be in comfortable quarters, unlike some who had to quarantine in Hong Kong’s infamous cage homes — regular apartments effectively subdivided into tiny cells. But being in quarantine also frustrated me. I had to rely on the goodwill of my flatmate to help me buy groceries and the like, and I used food delivery services for most of my meals to avoid having to trouble her. Sometimes, I’d forget which day of the week it was. When I needed fresh air, I’d stick my head out of the one window in my living room that wasn’t grilled shut, envying people walking freely outside. Since neither tracker nor app did much to attract attention, it was easy to forget I was under surveillance — at least, until an alert popped up on my iPhone to remind me the app was watching. On the third day of my quarantine, a government official called to check if I was at home. On the 10th day, two uniformed officers came knocking, asking me to show identification to prove I hadn’t gone anywhere. When the clock struck midnight on Sunday, my quarantine was over. Immediately, I snipped off the tracker and tapped the “Finish the quarantine” button in the app before uninstalling it. What a relief. Just to be sure, though, I got out a hammer and a screwdriver and cracked the tracker open, then removed the small circuit board inside and pulled out its battery. Free at last.

SANTIAGO – Trashpickers in Chile are warning that recycling, never popular in the far-flung South American nation, is poised to become the latest casualty of the coronavirus pandemic. Nearly 5,000 of Chile’s trashpickers, organized under a collective called the “Recycling Movement,” say they fear city dwellers quarantined inside their homes are increasingly opting for the trash can instead of the recycling bin. Few places in Chile pick up recyclables at curb-side. Instead, most citizens must walk or drive to designated drop-off points throughout cities. Many of the sites have been shuttered amid lockdown measures to combat the spread of coronavirus. “The drop in recycling has been shocking,” group leader Soledad Mella told Reuters at a recycling center in the municipality of Maipú, a poor western neighborhood of ​​Santiago. Chile is among Latin America´s biggest trash producers, according to 2018 World Bank statistics, but it recycles or composts less than 1% of that waste. The United States, by contrast, recycles 35% of its rubbish, according to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency figures. Chilean trashpickers, who help sort plastic, metal, glass, paper and cardboard at the local recycling centers, say their livelihoods are also at risk as the relatively few people that once recycled abandon the practice. “The situation is only going to get worse,” said Mella, explaining that the fast-approaching southern hemisphere winter normally sees a sharp drop in recycling even in the best of years. Many of Chile´s trash pickers also roam the streets with ramshackle shopping carts, even in the most upscale of neighborhoods, rummaging through garbage cans, a risky practice made worse by coronavirus. Chile´s environment ministry nonetheless recently declared the collection and processing of recyclables as an “essential” activity that could continue during lockdown periods. “We live from this. If they shut us down, I´ll have no work, with my two children at home,” said Jessica Cataldo, 54, who for a decade has been dedicated to sorting trash. In normal times, Cataldo says she earns about $300 per month, well below the minimum wage. “I hope I am wrong, but I don’t think there is going to be much recycling,” she told Reuters at a recycling center in Maipu, adjusting her mask with gloveless fingers. “I think people are going to throw everything away.”

Life hasn’t exactly been a beach lately. The coronavirus pandemic continues to put a pause on our usual seasonal fun. And in NYC, these few, sacred months of beautiful weather spent on sandy sanctuaries may look a little different this year. But a day at the beach is still within reach. “Everyone is desperate to race to the beach right now,” Dr. Summer McGee, dean of the School of Health Sciences at the University of New Haven, tells The Post. “Both the physical and mental benefits of being outside and getting sun and fresh air can’t be underestimated.” As of now, city beaches like Coney Island, Orchard Beach and the Rockaways remain closed for swimming. The Jersey Shore, Long Island and Jones Beach will open this weekend with new rules and capacity restrictions. And beachgoers also face new questions as we adjust to our new normal. “The salt water is good for the lungs. There are general benefits to the beach air. But all of those are negated if you are on a crowded beach,” says Dr. Tania Elliott, clinical instructor of medicine and immunology at NYU Langone Health. Here, experts dish out tips to reaping the benefits of the ocean while staying safe. “Going to the beach is relatively safe as long as you social distance,” says McGee. “Otherwise, in a few weeks from now, we could see cases rise.” In fact, New Jersey Gov. Phil Murphy issued a warning that beach privileges will be revoked if cases rise. Beach towns across the region each have different methods of enforcement. Some Long Island beaches say they will cut access to nonresidents to control crowds, while Belmar, New Jersey warns that cops on ATVs will be patrolling. Either way, simple beach items such as umbrellas, blankets and coolers can provide space between sun worshippers. The idea of going to the beach with a face mask in the high summer heat would have sounded like a joke months ago. But this is our new reality. “People need to accept that masks are a part of life now,” says McGee. “Regulating capacity at the beach will be a huge challenge. That’s why I think it’s important for people to wear masks outside. You can’t control your environment, but you can be a good neighbor and wear one.” While towns will differ on which facilities they open, Elliott says beachgoers should avoid all public restrooms and plan for only short visits to the shore. “Public restrooms are places where there is high transmission of the virus,” Elliott says. “It can be transmitted in feces and urine and those germs can hang in the air for a number of minutes and possibly an hour of time.” We have to adjust to new ways of utilizing the beach that don’t include lounging all day with our friends, because, as Elliott says, “We’re creatures of habit and we revert to getting close to each other inadvertently. [Moving physically closer] starts with passing a container of food or a bottle of water.” She suggests arriving early in the morning and walking the beach instead of sitting all day. “Walking along the water should be fine,” Elliott says. “It’s simply better than sitting. Right now, the beach is not meant to be a place to congregate.” It’s possible to enjoy a relaxing dip. “The risks are particularly low in the water. Because of the massive volume of the Long Island Sound and the ocean, any particles of the virus are diluted. You still have to have enough contact with the respiratory particles to affect you,” says McGee, who suggests people wear goggles if it brings more peace of mind. “Just be careful when exiting the water that you still stay far from others because you most likely won’t be wearing your mask,” McGee says. When it comes to masks in the sun, Union Square-based dermatologist Dr. Jennifer MacGregor says it’s important to treat our skin as we would even before the pandemic. That means using a broad spectrum mineral sunscreen, which needs to be reapplied after swimming. “That includes under your mask,” says MacGregor, adding that masked beachgoers should chose style over substance. “If you’re using an N95 or surgical mask, remember that sunscreen, makeup, water and sweat will contaminate the mask and compromise its efficacy during use.” She gives a thumbs-up to the “Trikini”, which is a bikini with a matching waterproof face mask made by Italian brand Elexia Beachwear. “Designers are offering cool options to help us stay comfortable and look good.”

Put down the kitchen scissors. As more people experiment with cutting their own hair at home, Sally Hershberger is offering up some advice: Don’t do it alone, and stay away from regular scissors. “I recommend having someone else cut your hair instead of cutting it yourself. When I give virtual cuts, I always have two people involved: the client that wants the cut and their own amateur hairstylist,” the celebrity hairstylist told Page Six Style. Just a few days ago, Hershberger virtually coached client Miley Cyrus and her mom Tish through a pixie mullet chop for the “Slide Away” singer. The Hollywood hair pro also says that the right tools are necessary: “Sharp scissors will be your best friend! For anyone wanting to cut hair at home, please don’t reach for your kitchen shears! A dull scissor can cause uneven cuts and breakage, so a sharp pair will be best,” she said, adding that many salons are selling supplies online. Hershberger, who is known for inventing the shag look in the nineties and counts Meg Ryan, Kate Moss, Jane Fonda, John Mayer and more as past and present clients, is adapting to the times and offering up her talents for charity as well during the coronavirus pandemic. “My first virtual haircut was actually with Miley last month! She commented on my Instagram post that she botched her bangs while doing an at-home trim, so I got on FaceTime with her and walked her through a cut. We had a blast!” Hershberger tells us. “Throughout the quarantine, I’ve also guided Lena Dunham through a shag haircut for Vogue and given Scott Tweedie from E!’s Pop of the Morning a cut as well. They were each super different looks, but all came out fabulously.” Non-famous folks can book a virtual haircut with Hershberger, with 50 percent of the proceeds going to Direct Relief.

President Trump says Republicans are working to draft a new coronavirus bill and that he plans to pressure states to allow churches to reopen as the pandemic ebbs. Trump said he met on Thursday with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) to discuss priorities for the legislation — after Trump and McConnell flatly rejected a $3 trillion bill passed by House Democrats on Friday. “We just had a meeting with Mitch McConnell and the group and we’re working on a package of very positive things,” Trump told reporters as he departed the White House for a trip to Michigan. Trump said he separately plans to push states to allow churches to resume operations as local authorities gradually end two months of mandated business closures and quarantine rules. “The churches are not being treated with respect by a lot of the Democrat governors. I want to get our churches open, and we’re going to be taking a very strong position on that very soon,” he said. After four major coronavirus bills, Trump is pushing for a payroll tax cut in new legislation and McConnell wants liability protections for companies that reopen. But Democrats who hold the House insist on state bailouts, which Trump and Republicans are wary of granting. Republicans also are skeptical of a Democratic proposal to extend a $600-per-week boost in unemployment insurance pay through January. Members of both parties, however, expressed interest in additional stimulus checks and new infrastructure spending. Each of the prior pandemic bills was drafted during late nights of bargaining among the White House, McConnell and congressional Democrats. McConnell’s office and the White House did not immediately offer additional information on the Thursday meeting. In a Thursday morning speech on the Senate floor, McConnell blasted House Democrats for authorizing proxy voting on Friday, saying that “there will be enormous constitutional questions around anything the House does if they fail to demonstrate a real quorum [of 50 percent attendance].” The Democratic reform allows House lawmakers to vote for up to 10 colleagues. McConnell did not mention elements of emerging GOP legislation on the floor, but knocked Democrats for holding few House gatherings, despite senators continuing to show up on Capitol Hill. “I’m wondering if we should send senators over there to collect their newspapers and water their plants,” McConnell said. “About the only product to emerge from their lengthy sabbatical has been an 1,800-page, $3 trillion messaging bill that couldn’t even unite their own conference.”

They have high hopes for a coronavirus breakthrough. A team of Canadian scientists believes it has found strong strains of cannabis that could help prevent or treat coronavirus infections, according to interviews and a study. Researchers from the University of Lethbridge said a study in April showed at least 13 cannabis plants were high in CBD that appeared to affect the ACE2 pathways that the bug uses to access the body. “We were totally stunned at first, and then we were really happy,” one of the researchers, Olga Kovalchuk, told CTV News. The results, printed in online journal Preprints, indicated hemp extracts high in CBD may help block proteins that provide a “gateway” for COVID-19 to enter host cells. Kovalchuk’s husband, Igor, suggested cannabis could reduce the virus’ entry points by up to 70 percent. “Therefore, you have more chance to fight it,” he told CTV. “Our work could have a huge influence — there aren’t many drugs that have the potential of reducing infection by 70 to 80 percent,” he told the Calgary Herald. While they stressed that more research was needed, the study gave hope that the cannabis, if proven to modulate the enzyme, “may prove a plausible strategy for decreasing disease susceptibility” as well as “become a useful and safe addition to the treatment of COVID-19 as an adjunct therapy.” Cannabis could even be used to “develop easy-to-use preventative treatments in the form of mouthwash and throat gargle products,” the study suggested, with a “potential to decrease viral entry” through the mouth. “The key thing is not that any cannabis you would pick up at the store will do the trick,” Olga told CTV, with the study suggesting just a handful of more than 800 varieties of sativa seemed to help. All were high in anti-inflammatory CBD — but low in THC, the part that produces the cannabis high. The study, which has yet to be peer-reviewed, was carried out in partnership with Pathway Rx, a cannabis therapy research company, and Swysh Inc., a cannabinoid-based research company. The researchers are seeking funding to continue their efforts to support scientific initiatives to address COVID-19. “While our most effective extracts require further large-scale validation, our study is crucial for the future analysis of the effects of medical cannabis on COVID-19,” the research said. “Given the current dire and rapidly evolving epidemiological situation, every possible therapeutic opportunity and avenue must be considered.”

When the coronavirus started its deadly rampage against New York City in early March, it was curtains for the city’s entertainment sector.  On March 12, Broadway went dark indefinitely and its storied stages have remained quiet for the longest time since the American Revolutionary War, when they closed for 23 years in 1775.  Broadway has since weathered the 1918 Spanish flu, a series of labor strikes, two world wars, terrorist attacks and two major, city-wide blackouts — but has never closed for this long. So when will Broadway and other entertainment finally return to the Big Apple — and how will it look different in the future? Here’s what the experts say.  Broadway’s reopening could come as late as next year — but other entertainment venues may return earlier, insiders say.  Under Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s four-phased reopening plan, “arts, entertainment and recreation” come last in phase four. The Big Apple will have to meet seven benchmarks before it can begin phase one. It will also have to show a downward trend on three separate indicators — new hospital admissions, ICU patients and the percentage of new COVID-19 positive cases — set by Mayor Bill de Blasio’s office for 10 to 14 days before reopening can begin.  The five boroughs have fluctuated between meeting three to four of Cuomo’s benchmarks and as of Wednesday, the city is still at the starting gate with Hizzoner’s. On May 14, the mayor said he expects the city to be “hitting all our numbers” by the first half of June, and if that holds true, the earliest the entertainment sector could begin reopening would be the last week of July under Cuomo’s plan. While that may mean movie theaters, museums and concerts return in some form, the Broadway League announced on May 12 the show won’t go on until at least after Labor Day, which is the last day Broadway is issuing refunds for canceled shows.  Even then, a reopening is still up in the air, Broadway League president Charlotte St. Martin told The Post.  “We are not anticipating that on Sept. 7 we can come back unless something, I wouldn’t call it a magic bullet, but some health or science thing occurs … that would get us to change our mind, which is why we don’t go further out right now,” St. Martin said. “Every day we get new information, new technology and so it’s one of the reasons we can be cautiously optimistic that at some point this year, we might actually get to reopen, but we can’t confirm that.” Many closed operations, like restaurants and concert halls, are planning to reopen with reduced capacity, but St. Martin said that will be impossible for Broadway.  “We can’t financially make it with a socially distant audience,” St. Martin said, which will add to a reopening delay.  “The Broadway financial model just wouldn’t work at reduced capacity, the margins are very thin.” Not all Broadway shows have been able to pause until it’s safe to reopen — “Frozen the Musical” will close, Disney recently announced, making it the biggest theatrical loss from the pandemic so far. The $30 million musical becomes the third show to prematurely shutter during the crisis, following Martin McDonagh’s “Hangmen” and a revival of Edward Albee’s “Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf?” Some shows, such as the comedy “Plaza Suite,” starring Matthew Broderick and Sarah Jessica Parker, have delayed their openings until 2021. Joshua Morgan, a performer for the Broadway hit “Ain’t Too Proud,” predicted it’ll be a long time before they can welcome fans back.  “Out of everything, we will be in limbo the longest, we are essentially non-essential in a very big way from a business standpoint,” Morgan told The Post. “My job is the riskiest to bring back.”  However, playwright Gary Morgenstein, whose off-Broadway play “A Black and White Cookie” was scheduled to open March 26 at the Theater for the New City, thinks independent theaters will make a comeback before the Great White Way.  “I think independent theater, unlike Broadway, will have a better chance of coming back sooner, the theater we’re in is 88 seats so it’s less people gathering,” Morgenstein said.   Major concert promoter Live Nation announced earlier this month music fans will have to wait until 2021 to see a “full scale” resumption of its shows. But for New Yorkers clamoring for something a little more low-key, the Metropolitan Museum of Art announced a plan Tuesday to open in mid-August, or “perhaps a few weeks later.” Quarantined New Yorkers thirsting for real-life entertainment that doesn’t come in the form of a Zoom session should expect drive-in movies, mosh-free concerts and open-air circuses to be part of New York’s new normal.  When it comes to enjoying live music, it’ll be easier to do at an outdoor theater like Long Island’s Jones Beach Theater than indoors at Madison Square Garden, said Dr. Isaac Weisfuse, a medical epidemiologist from Cornell University Public Health and the former deputy commissioner of the city Health Department. Weisfuse said there’ll likely be an emphasis on “spacing” and face masks and said instrument-only concerts will be safer than those with frontmen belting out lyrics — and spit — from the stage.  He pointed to a Washington state choir that hosted rehearsals in early March and ended up becoming a “super-spreading” event. The CDC found that one symptomatic choir member caused 53 of the choir’s 61 members to become infected, with 33 confirmed cases and 20 probable cases. Two of the members died.  Last week, a national event industry group released a 29-page report detailing a host of recommended changes for concert venues, including absolutely no moshing or crowd surfing — which inherently violate social distancing — different arrival times for guests to prevent crowds, temperature and health screenings for patrons, and a ban on bags in venues. Meanwhile, the Broadway League said it has formed several task forces that have been working with theatrical unions, government officials and health experts to determine the safest ways to restart.   “Masks in the theaters, temperature checks, more frequent cleanings of the theaters,” St. Martin said, adding the task forces are looking into a drone that could quickly clean the theater after each performance. “I do think it would be very logical to assume that you’ll see lots of contactless-type service, whether it’s not taking your ticket but scanning your ticket, not serving you drinks in a plastic cup or a glass in the theaters but in a paper cup that the server will serve and have had on gloves and you’ll throw it away when you finish, things like that.”  St. Martin said it is “virtually impossible” to have a cast and crew socially distance, so they’re looking into rapid COVID-19 tests that can be done before each performance.  When it comes to museums, the Met announced that its capacity will be reduced to comply with social distancing requirements and all tours, talks, concerts and events will be canceled through 2020, with a resumption of these activities in 2021.  Jack Marsh, executive producer of the Big Apple Circus, told The Post about its visions for a promenade-style circus that functions like an amusement park and will likely come sans-big top.  “I’m sure our site would look very different … instead we might put up a bunch of little tents or a bunch of outdoor experiences,” Marsh said, adding he hopes the circus will be back in October in time for its usual start to the season.  “So, for instance, over here you’d have the strongman’s trailer … Over here you’d try out a certain skill like juggling. Over here you’d dress up in your circus finest and take an Instagramable photo,” Marsh explained.  “Things like that, which put you inside the circus world rather than it be a pure sit-down circus performance.”  Long Island water park Splish Splash plans to reopen as soon as possible, and once that time comes, there will be capacity limits, efforts to educate guests on sanitizing, “respiratory hygiene” and social distancing — and hand sanitizer dispensers around the park, a spokesperson told The Post.  In the meantime, the Bel Aire Diner in Astoria, Queens, started hosting a pop-up, drive-in movie theater in its parking lot at the beginning of May, and the socially distant viewings have proved to be major successes, with repeated sold-out shows.  And Six Flags Great Adventure in nearby New Jersey is taking a similar, car-fueled approach, recently announcing plans for a drive-through “Wild Safari,” scheduled to open May 30, that’ll give shut-ins an opportunity to drive past its lions, tigers and bears. Additional reporting by Reuven Fenton and Lorena Mongelli

The global entertainment industry will take a $160 billion hit over the next five years as it slowly recovers from the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new report. The outbreak has already whacked Hollywood studios,  which have been forced to delay the release of top grossing franchises and suspend productions of summer blockbusters under shelter-in-place orders, Ampere Analysis research director Guy Bisson said Thursday. Universal Pictures pushed back the release of “Fast & Furious 9” — the latest installment of its car-chase franchise starring Vin Diesel — from next month to April 2021, as Marvel delayed the premiere of “Black Widow” from May 1 to Nov. 6. Meanwhile, production has been stopped for big flicks like “Mission: Impossible 7” by Paramount Pictures, “The Batman” by Warner Bros, and “Jurassic World 3” of Universal Pictures. “Those decisions will contribute to the global entertainment sector losing $160 billion of growth” over the next five years, according to Bisson, who noted that the bulk of the losses will occur through 2021. “Theatrical will be hardest hit, set to lose $24.4 billion over the next five years,” he said, citing the impact on the closure of cinemas and the “longer term effects” of movies vying for next year’s release window. The competition could lead to a further “slowdown in film production that impacts content acquisition and distribution further down the line,” he said. On the flip side, streaming “will be the big winner,” said Bisson’s report, which cited services like Netflix, Amazon Prime Video, NBC’s Peacock, Disney+ and HBO Max, which will launch on May 27. His firm’s latest forecasts suggest streaming will gain 12 percent of additional growth in revenue over the five year period as global lockdowns have resulted in “a huge surge in streaming consumption and new subscriptions.” Lockdowns around the world have led to “a huge surge in streaming consumption and new subscriptions, benefiting subscription video-on demand, broadcaster video on-demand and other catch-up services,” Bisson said. Meanwhile, the analyst predicts a continued slowdown in the entertainment industry’s advertising revenues, which will hurt broadcast and cable television. The firm estimated that the advertising market across TV and online will lose nearly $40 billion of revenue growth in 2020 and $43 billion in 2021. A recovery will begin in 2022, but come in below the firm’s previously forecast levels for the entire period. “Advertising is hit hardest both near term and overall, but drilling down into entertainment sectors shows that areas like theatrical are hit proportionally harder,” Bisson offered. “The interconnected nature of the entertainment value chain means that will have a number of effects in other areas of the value chain…some of which will not be fully felt for several years to come.” Pay TV, which was losing subscribers as customers opted to stream content before the pandemic amid an absence of live sports, will continue to “lose significant value,” he said.

It’s the coronavirus’ reckoning for Batman fans. The public has turned to an unlikely ally in the fight against COVID-19: Bane. Masks modeled after Tom Hardy’s depiction of the burly “Batman” baddie from the smash-hit movie “The Dark Knight Rises” have been selling like hotcakes since the advent of the pandemic. The bizarre trend comes just as governments around the globe are mandating that citizens don protective gear in public. “The adult mask had quite a sales spike in April and early May, which is unusual for this time of year,” David DeJac, a spokesman for Costume.com, tells The Hollywood Reporter. DeJac says the site still has an extensive inventory of the rest of the Bane get-up, although there’s been a buying binge on the masks. They might not be able to keep up with demand, either. The $20 trademarked masks are manufactured in China, where the supply lines are still reeling from the recent lockdown, according to the costume site. Meanwhile, Etsy, which is a site known for making risqué Halloween costumes, has seen a similar spike in cloth Bane masks while latex versions are also available on Amazon. “Now I can be safe from the pandemic as well as the LEAGUE OF SHADOWS!” writes one satisfied customer in the comment section. Bane wore the elaborate face apparatus in the 2012 film to help numb a childhood injury, however previous versions of the character have used it to supply themselves with a super-steroid called “Venom.” Unfortunately, there’s no evidence that the imitation “Batman” villain mask can slow the spread of the coronavirus. The newspaper Stars and Stripes, which covers the US military, even used Bane masks as an example of ineffective anti-COVID accessories, along with Darth Vader, Hannibal Lecter and Groucho Marx-themed face coverings. “A mask doesn’t have to be the Bane of your existence,” they quipped in the tongue-in-cheek article. Etsy also posted a disclaimer on its site, warning that their masks aren’t “medical grade.”

Do masks protect you against the coronavirus? Depending on when you asked that question you might get a dozen different answers. Between conjecture from health experts, advice from doctors and no shortage of studies claiming one thing or another, the best answer any of us have is “it depends.” We know that some masks work much better than others and there are many factors: The material the mask is made of, how well it fits the wearer and environmental conditions, just to name a few. Now, a new study out of China suggests that yes, one type of mask definitely works as a barrier to prevent the spread of the airborne droplets that carry the virus and we can thank hamsters for sacrificing their health to reach this conclusion. The study was conducted by the University of Hong Kong and while its methods may sound a bit odd, the results provide actionable information. The researchers used hamsters in two separate cages. One group of hamsters was infected with COVID-19 while the other group was healthy. A fan installed on the cages ensured a flow of air and airborne particles between them. The team then conducted three experiments to test the effectiveness of surgical masks in preventing the transmission of the disease. For starters, the left both cages uncovered. After a week, two-thirds of the healthy hamsters were testing positive for COVID-19. Bad news for those hamsters, but an important data point nonetheless. In the second stage of the study, the researchers covered the cage of the infected hamsters with surgical mask material. Allowing another week to pass, the hamsters were again tested. This time, the rate of infection was much, much lower, at just 16.7 percent. That’s an incredible improvement and a big thumbs up for the idea of wearing surgical masks if you’re already sick. The third stage of the study produced what might be the most surprising result of all. After covering only the cage of the healthy hamsters with the mask material, the rate of infection actually went up to 33 percent. This would seem to indicate that wearing a mask if you’re healthy is still a good idea, but isn’t as effective at preventing the spread of the disease as when an infected person wears one. However, there’s another wrinkle to this study that is important to note. In both cases where the mask material was applied to one of the cages, the viral load of the newly-infected hamsters was lower than the infected group. A lower viral load means less of the virus in the body and potentially faster recovery.

No fair! The widely attended Ohio State Fair — scheduled to begin in late July — was cancelled Thursday to help prevent the spread of the coronavirus, according to reps for the event. “Togetherness is a challenge this year, and we have made the difficult decision to cancel this year’s fair,” the Ohio State Fair announced on Twitter. Organizers spent weeks poring through health information to determine whether its worth moving forward with the outdoor celebration at partial capacity in Columbus amid the pandemic, according to WBNS-TV. But the Ohio Expositions Commission ultimately determined Thursday morning that allowing visitors to flock to the fair creates too much of a public health risk, and voted unanimously to cancel it. “We will move ahead be better and have a 2021 Fair,” Ohio Expo Center and State Fair General Manager Virgil Stickler said, according to the local news site Dayton 24/7 Now. The event, which last year drew nearly 1 million people, was scheduled to begin July 29 and run through August 9.  Instead of coming together in person, “we’ll celebrate agriculture and our great state at a distance,” the fair said in a statement.

BOGOTA – It is not a bird, a plane or Superman: the aircraft humming in the skies above Colombia’s capital Bogota are instead police drones that are meant to detect people with high temperatures or those violating the country’s coronavirus quarantine. If a drone detects someone with a potential fever it sends the location to a medical team that seeks out the person to determine if they have coronavirus symptoms, officials said on Wednesday. “It facilitates the location of groups of people day or night,” said Captain Jorge Humberto Caceres, head of the police drone unit, as he monitored an area of northern Bogota with a thermal camera-equipped drone. “It gives us an approximate body temperature and directs the case to a national system so it can be attended to.” The drones only detect temperatures or groupings of people who are out on the street, the police said, and do not penetrate into houses or apartments. The country has been in a coronavirus lockdown for nearly two months. Each drone can fly for up to 30 minutes at a height of 500 meters (1,640 feet) and can get as far as 5 kilometers (3 miles) from the vehicle that serves as its control center. Bogota – home to some 8 million people – has more than a third of Colombia’s nearly 17,000 coronavirus cases. Bogota’s mayor, Claudia Lopez, has placed a dozen areas with high infection rates under special restrictions, tightening rules for outings even as other parts of the country have begun re-opening. The Mazuren neighborhood in the Suba district, where the drone was flying on Wednesday, is one such zone. “Without a doubt the use of these technologies from the national police has been very useful in these orange alerts areas,” Julian Moreno, the district mayor for the Suba district, told Reuters. Suba is the city’s most populous district, with 1.4 million residents and has its second-highest infection rate.

Principal Justine Lucas happens to oversee one of the Big Apple’s largest public schools but PS143Q is also at the epicenter of New York’s coronavirus outbreak in Corona, Queens — making an already tough job that much more challenging. “A lot of our students have very, very sick families and some of our students’ families have passed away and so we’re trying to wrap around everybody with as much support as we can,” Lucas, 36, told The Post. “It was the scariest experience because every single day I was getting, you know, messages from staff that they were not feeling well, they have fevers and so we were really nervous.” Lucas immediately got to work to make sure her staff, and her students, felt like they could lean on her during this time. Every Friday, she hosts a virtual mental health check in with her teachers and regularly hosts meditations and Yoga sessions with her staff, parents and students. She also does “coffee with the principal” every Tuesday so parents can ask questions and have an opportunity to communicate with her. “The biggest thing that we try to do is distract and keep saturating our community with positivity and having those virtual connections,” Lucas said. She encourages her students to record themselves saying affirmations like “I am safe, I am loved, I am going to be okay.” “What we’re trying to do is rehabilitate their spirit,” Lucas, who lives in Freeport, Long Island, explained. “This devastation has really taken the wind out of our sails and my whole guiding sentiment, whether we’re a traditional school or not, is to have a healthy, empowering environment for my teachers, you know, and to ignite their passion and care for them above all,” Lucas went on. “That’s how I believe we are best for our children because doing that in turn motivates us all to go the extra mile for our students and families and they know that I’ll do anything for them.” The second week into remote learning, Lucas set up a weeklong, virtual pep rally to keep the positivity flowing, despite the destruction happening outside of everyone’s windows. “Everyday was a theme. Monday was love, Tuesday was gratitude, Wednesday was aspire, Thursday was pride and Friday was hope,” Lucas said. “We just flooded our entire community with messages of love and tried to kind of be each other’s biggest fans… a lot of the parents had said that because of those engaging activities, they were able to then concentrate on the rigor of you know, Google Classroom, so it kind of made them feel confident.” Lucas said she might be “sad behind the scenes” but she strives to be the “calm amidst a lot of chaos” so the entire school community can feel at ease and focus on learning. “If you want to have a good school, you have to be a good principal. If you want to have a good classroom, you have to be a good teacher,” Lucas said. “People always laugh like ‘oh you, you tell your staff you love them’ and, like, I do love them. When I say I love them, I mean it. I love them and I can’t do any of this without them.” Do you have a nominee for The Post’s Hero of the Day? Email heroes@nypost.com.

During Wednesday’s film and television industry Zoom roundtable with Governor Gavin Newsom, “This Is Us” actor Jon Huertas said that after talking to show creator Dan Fogelman, the NBC drama may not return to production until January 2021 in case of a second wave of COVID-19. People ran with this return date which made Huertas jump on social media to clarify his comments. He wrote on Instagram: “#dontbelievethehype @nbcthisisus is prepping to begin shooting this fall! Our writers are already working and the only reason we’d delay until January is if a bad 2nd wave of #covid19 were to hit hard … safety of our cast & crew is very important to us. Don’t worry, #thisisus is raring to go!” During the aforementioned roundtable, Huertas said: “Emotionally, of course, we all want to get back to work…but also, the actor is going to be the least protected person on set. We can’t film with PPE on.” Huertas said he had spoken to SAG-AFTRA and it is working on guidelines for how to return safely. Huertas was upped to a series regular in Season 2 of “This Is Us,” which is now entering its fifth season.     Hey peeps!  #dontbelievethehype @nbcthisisus is prepping to begin shooting this fall!  Our writers are already working and the only reason we’d delay until January is if a bad 2nd wave of #covid19 were to hit hard…safety of our cast & crew is very important to us. Don’t worry, #thisisus is raring to go! A post shared by  Jon Huertas  🇺🇸🇵🇷 (@jonhuertas) on May 21, 2020 at 9:01am PDT

About a dozen Michigan barbers and hair stylists turned the state Capitol lawn into their personal salon Wednesday morning — as they offered free haircuts in defiance of the state’s stay-at-home orders during the coronavirus pandemic. The demonstration, dubbed “Operation Haircut” and organized by the Michigan Conservative Coalition to oppose the lockdown measures imposed by Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, drew about 300 people, according to The Detroit Free Press. While many were there for the free cuts, others came simply to protest Whitmer’s orders, which closed barbershops, salons and other businesses. Seven barbers or hairdressers were cited for disorderly conduct — engaging in an illegal occupation or business — after receiving warnings from state police, according to the Free Press. The cases were referred to the state attorney general, and they could each face up to 90 days in jail, a $500 fine or both. Angela Rigas, of Caledonia in western Michigan, told the outlet she was ticketed after refusing to stop cutting hair three times. “We’re all here for the same reason today — to show the governor that our rights do not come from her and that we need to open Michigan,” Rigas told the paper. “People need to get back to work.” Karl Manke, the Owosso barber who inspired the “Operation Haircut” movement when he refused to close up shop even though the state suspended his license, told MLive.com that Whitmer’s extension of her executive orders have “brought him to his knees,” financially. Getty Images AFP via Getty Images AP View Slideshow He even drew a comparison to Jews in Nazi Germany being “placed into cattle cars.” “These older people in Germany were told in reels and movies and types of propaganda coming out at the time, that they could get into these cattle cars, and would be taken to these new homes,” Manke said. “They willingly got into those cattle cars. I will not be placed into a cattle car.” Whitmer said Tuesday it’s “unlikely” barbers, salons and personal care services will be able to open their doors when the stay-at-home order expires May 28, according to MLive. “It hurts me to say it because I would love to go to get my hair done, too,” the governor said. “But the fact of the matter is, the nature of that personal service is such that it is intimate, it is close, you can’t social distance and get your hair cut.” “That’s why it is important that we have all the protocols in place. My hope is that we get into phase four and then phase five and we are able to do those things. But at this juncture, it’s too early to say precisely when we will get there. We’re going to get there.”

Julia Roberts and other A-listers, including Hugh Jackman and Millie Bobby Brown, have teamed up with Dr. Anthony Fauci for a campaign aimed at spreading accurate coronavirus information. Celebs participating in the #PassTheMic campaign will hand their social media accounts over to a COVID-19 expert for the day to spread awareness about how people can help end the pandemic and to hear from those who, according to the promotional video, “actually know what they’re talking about.” “It’s my honor and complete joy to #PassTheMic to Dr. Anthony Fauci, the director of the @NIAID at @NIHgov. He’s probably one of the most important people in the world right now,” Roberts wrote on Instagram on Thursday. “If you don’t know him, he’s the man making sure we get the most accurate, critical information about #COVID19. Things like how we can keep ourselves and our communities safe. Today he’s taking over my account to shed light on the importance of a global response to this pandemic, the latest treatment research and the power of staying cautiously optimistic.” The director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases then shared several informative posts to the “Pretty Woman” actress’ feed, sharing his tips, facts, and research on the virus. Roberts also interviewed Fauci in her Instagram Story. Other celebs surrendering their Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram accounts to healthcare professionals and experts for a day include Sarah Jessica Parker, Rainn Wilson, Penélope Cruz, Busy Philipps, Robin Wright and Shailene Woodley. The initiative launched Thursday and will continue for three weeks as part of the One World Campaign.

Top congressional Democrats have written to President Trump asking him to order that flags be lowered to half-staff on all public buildings to honor Americans who died during the coronavirus pandemic once the death toll hits 100,000. In the letter, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer note that during the upcoming Memorial Day weekend, the US comes together to honor service members  killed in battle, and that it would be appropriate to also honor those felled by the coronavirus. “As we pay our respects to them, sadly, our country mourns the deaths of nearly 100,000 Americans from COVID-19. Our hearts are broken by this great loss and our prayers are with their families,” they said. “We are writing to request that you order that flags be flown at half-staff on all public buildings on the sad day of reckoning when we reach 100,000 deaths. It would serve as a national expression of grief so needed by everyone in our country,” they continued. More than 93,000 people have died from coronavirus in the US, according to Johns Hopkins University. The plea by Pelosi and Schumer comes weeks after former Vice President Joe Biden made the same suggestion. A number of governors, including New York’s Andrew Cuomo, Connecticut’s Ned Lamont and New Jersey’s Phil Murphy, have all ordered flags lowered to honor coronavirus deaths. White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The president has the right to order that flags be flown at half-staff for tragedies such as mass shootings and the deaths of notable officials or others. Flags are normally lowered to half-staff on Memorial Day.

At least seven states may have botched their coronavirus testing tallies — potentially providing a distorted picture of how COVID-19 has spread, according to new reports. Virginia, Texas, Georgia and Vermont have been combining the results of two types of COVID-19 tests — swabs for the disease itself and antibody blood tests — in their total tallies, a serious concern as the nation begins to reopen, CNN reported Thursday. In a separate report this week, The Atlantic reported that Florida, Maine and Pennsylvania had also been conflating the two because of testing guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Nose swab or saliva samples help determine if a patient currently has coronavirus, while antibody blood tests look for biological signals that a person has been exposed to the bug in the past. Combining the two could paint an inaccurate picture of where and when the virus has spread in each state — and overstate the extent of their testing, experts said. “You only know how many cases you have if you do a lot of testing,” CNN senior medical correspondent Elizabeth Cohen said. “If you put the two tests together, you fool yourself into thinking you’ve done more testing than you have.” Antibody tests are generally used on the broader population, rather than just those displaying symptoms, so they typically have a lower positive rate than nasal swabs — meaning a mix of the two “will drive down your positive rate in a very dramatic way,” Ashish Jha, a professor of global health at Harvard and director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, told The Atlantic. Health officials in Texas, Virginia and Vermont said in recent days that they clued into the problem and are working to fix it. Florida hopes to separate the two tests in the next few weeks, according to The Atlantic. Georgia officials said its combined test numbers are in keeping with the CDC testing guidelines. A new University of Minnesota report found that coronavirus testing nationwide was generally disorganized and not well coordinated among the states, CNN said in another report. “It’s a mess out there,” Mike Osterholm, head of the school’s Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy, told the outlet. “Testing is very, very important, but we’re not doing the right testing.” “The data is really kind of screwed up,” he added. “It’s because the public health system is overwhelmed.” As of Thursday, there have been more than 1.5 million COVID-19 cases in the US, with 93,000 people killed by the virus, according to Johns Hopkins University.

Over 150 possible cases of the Kawasaki disease-like ailment affecting kids exposed to coronavirus are now being probed in New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Thursday, a growing concern as the state mulls the fate of schools for the fall semester. “It’s something we’re very concerned about,” Cuomo told reporters in his Midtown Manhattan office of the now 157 suspected cases being probed by the state Department of Health. “The more they look, I believe, the more they will find.” At least 145 cases have been documented among young people in the five boroughs, with a sizable number of those affected also testing positive for the coronavirus or antibodies to it, officials have said. Symptoms of the affliction — alternately referred to as pediatric multi-system inflammatory syndrome (PMIS) or multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) — include: persistent fever, irritability or sluggishness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or vomiting, rash, red or pink eyes, enlarged lymph node gland on one side of the neck, red cracked lips or red tongue, and swollen hands and feet. The latest coronavirus-linked curveball presents a new hurdle as officials weigh when and how to reopen schools. “When you’re talking about schools, you’re talking about children and you’re talking about density,” said Cuomo. The governor announced Thursday that, at the least, all summer school statewide will be conducted through distance learning, echoing a city move announced earlier in the week by Mayor Bill de Blasio. Meal programs and childcare services offered through schools, however, will still be available. “In terms of opening up school for the fall, it’s still too early to make that determination,” said Cuomo. “We want to get more information on this inflammatory syndrome. We also want to see how the development for a treatment, a vaccine proceeds.” The state will issue guidelines to schools in early June on crafting possible reopening plans, with the schools providing their proposals to the state in July for a potential reopening in September. “Again, we don’t want to make that decision until we have more facts,” said Cuomo. “As the facts keep changing, prudence dictates that you don’t make a decision until it’s timely so you have the most recent facts.” Cuomo sketched the rough timeline for schools as the state’s death toll crossed 23,000. Another 105 New Yorkers succumbed to the bug in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Thursday, raising the overall number of confirmed deaths to at least 23,081. “Relatively, it’s better than it has been,” said Cuomo. “Still, [it’s] 105 families who are grieving today.” Meanwhile the city’s Dept. of Health revised the number of MIS-C cases in the five boroughs downward from 158 to 89 following a new definition of the disease by the federal Centers for Disease Control. City health officials are still investigating another potential 43 cases.

Among the World Health Organization’s “Goodwill Ambassadors” are Chinese President Xi Jinping’s wife and a reporter with ties to Chinese state-run media outlets, according to a report. Peng Liyuan, known as the “First Lady of China,” has been a Goodwill Ambassador for tuberculosis and AIDS since 2011, American Military News reported Wednesday. James Chau, a London-born, Beijing-based broadcaster, has been serving as a “Goodwill Ambassador” for Sustainable Development Goals and Health since 2016. The biography lists him as a “Guest Presenter on BBC World News” and a “Special Contributor to CCTV where he interviews global leaders and reports breaking news to 85 million viewers.” China Central Television is China’s state media outlet. President Trump has been highly critical of China’s response to the coronavirus pandemic and its relationship with the WHO. The president last month accused the United Nations agency of being a “pipe organ” for China. “They must have known more than they knew,” he told reporters in the Oval Office. “We knew things that they didn’t know, and either they didn’t know they didn’t tell us … right now, they’re literally a pipe organ for China, that’s the way I view it.” Earlier this week, Trump sent a scathing letter to the WHO threatening to permanently halt US funding unless it commits to “substantive improvements” in the next 30 days. In Peng’s biography on the WHO’s website, she is described as a “famous Chinese soprano and actress,” a health activist and the “head of the Chinese Song and Dance Ensemble in the General Political Department of the People’s Liberation Army.” It does not mention that she is married to Xi, the chairman of the Chinese Communist Party. She has been an ambassador since June 2011, and was appointed by former WHO Director-General Dr. Margaret Chan. Current WHO Director-General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus renewed her two-year term in 2019. Chau also anchored the confession of Peter Humphrey, a British man who was imprisoned in China in 2013 on claims he illegally obtained and sold Chinese citizens’ information, on CGTN, The New York Times reported in February 2019. China Global Television Network is an English-language media outlet owned by CCTV. Humphrey has since been released.

LONDON — The decision by Oxfam International to close operations in 18 countries in response to the devastating financial impact of the coronavirus pandemic was met with shock and sadness Thursday across developing countries where the aid organization has often been helping the needy for decades. Oxfam, which currently operates in 66 countries and whose global work is coordinated via 20 affiliate offices around the world, said in a statement late Wednesday that it has had to accelerate and deepen changes that it was mulling as a result of the pandemic. “We’ve been planning this for some time but we are now accelerating key decisions in light of the effects of the global pandemic,” said Oxfam International’s interim executive director Chema Vera. The most notable changes involve its exit from countries around the world. Among those it is planning to leave are Afghanistan, Cuba, Egypt, Rwanda and Sri Lanka. It said 1,450 out of nearly 5,000 program staff could lose their jobs and that there will be an impact on 700 out of its nearly 1,900 partner organizations. In Liberia, in West Africa, for example, Oxfam has been present since 1995 and has been helping local partners to increase access to essential services like safe drinking water and sanitation facilities. Bobby Whitfield, Chairman and CEO of Liberia’s National Water Sanitation and Hygiene Commission, said in a statement, that Oxfam’s decision to leave the country must have been “tough” but that it had come as a “shock.” “Water, sanitation and hygiene are at the heart of this fight against COVID-19,” he said. “So it must be at the center of our response. To see one of our partners closing down their operations when we need them most is truly devastating.” And in nearby, Sierra Leone, the country’s minister of development and economic planning, Dr. Francis Kaikai, said it was “unfortunate” that Oxfam, which has been working in the country since 1998, has had to leave though he had yet to receive formal notification. “We will feel it because they had their own niche in our development efforts,” he said. “Any partner we lose which is involved in our development plans, especially in the current global pandemic is something of significance to the government.” Oxfam insisted that the changes will be phased and that its departure does not necessarily mean the end of its involvement in those countries. It said it will continue to advise local aid agencies and could launch fund-raising events where and when needed. The organization had started a 10-year strategic review in late 2018, which coincided with the fallout of a sex-abuse scandal in Haiti in the wake of the earthquake in 2010 that had devastated the country. The scandal caused a global outcry and prompted many donors to withdraw their support, particularly in the UK, where Oxfam started operations back in 1942. Haiti, where its brand has been seriously diminished, is another one of the countries that Oxfam is leaving. Oxfam had steadied the ship after the fallout of the Haiti revelations and its revenues in 2018-19 held steady at around 1 billion euros ($1.1 billion). However, the pandemic has caused much of Oxfam’s income stream to dry up and the worry must be that other aid organizations are seeing similarly acute pressures on their finances. Many of Oxfam’s charity shops have been shuttered during the lockdown restrictions imposed around the world and its key fundraising events, such as the Glastonbury Festival in southwest England in June, have been canceled. However, institutional fundraising from the likes of national governments and international organizations such as the European Union has held steady. “The tough decisions we announce today will allow us to continue making a positive impact on the lives of people living in poverty in ways we believe will be even more relevant and focused than before,” Oxfam’s Vera said. Vera said the changes, combined with further “phases of transformation in the months ahead,” will lay “the foundation for our future over the coming decade as the longer-term effects of this devastating pandemic become clearer.”

Big tech companies such as Facebook and Google have touted their efforts to help small businesses struggling during the coronavirus pandemic — but those efforts may eventually take customers away from the small businesses they were supposed to help, according to a new report. Facebook and Instagram shops were announced this week to help shuttered or wounded small businesses create an e-commerce platform on the two popular sites, Axios reported. The feature lets people shop on stores’ Facebook and Instagram pages, and marks the company’s largest move yet into e-commerce, Markets Insider reported. Many such efforts to bring business onto big tech companies’ platforms start out free or inexpensive, but costs often rise as the businesses become dependent on the platforms, according to Axios, which can cut into their profits or even sink their operations. Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg told “CBS Evening News” that the company was only trying to help. “What we are seeing are a lot of small businesses are moving more of their business online, and we want to make it easier for them to do that, too,” he said. “Facebook Shops allows a small business to easily set up a shop inside our apps. And it will be a very fast experience for people to discover their products and be able to buy things directly.” Amazon as well had already taken large shares of small businesses in the past decade as more people shop online. And Colorado Republican Rep. Ken Buck, who sits on the House Judiciary antitrust subcommittee, said this week he’s concerned about large tech companies like Amazon crushing small businesses, the website reported. Buck signed a bipartisan letter from the committee demanding that Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos testify after the Wall Street Journal reported last month that the company used third-party sellers’ data to develop its own products. “I feel very strongly that we need to make sure that we are looking at antitrust laws as a tool to increase prosperity across the marketplace to incentivize small businesses, and to make sure that the large businesses don’t use their platforms and their position to disincentivize the kind of innovation that comes from small businesses,” Buck told the Internet Accountability Project, which has pushed for antitrust action against big tech companies. Google and Yelp have also offered small business aid, but mainly in the form of ad credits. Facebook has distributed ad credits as well, and also made $100 million in cash available to 30,000 small businesses, according to Axios. Lauren Lang, a volunteer organizer with Help Main Street, which allows users to support local businesses by ordering online, buying gift cards or donating cash, said not all tech companies hurt small businesses. “While third-party delivery companies are definitely predatory, there are some other corporations like Instacart that are actually helping to provide supplementary income for restaurant workers that have been laid off,” Lang told Axios. “It’s not full-time work and it’s not solving the unemployment crisis by any means, but it’s additive, flexible income that can be a bridge in the interim.” Meanwhile, shares of Facebook and Amazon hit all-time highs in intraday trading Wednesday, Markets Insider reported. Facebook surged more than 6 percent to a record high of about $230 per share. The company announced a day earlier that it would roll out Facebook and Instagram shops this week. Amazon shares also hit a record high, surging as much as 1.5 percent to nearly $2,490 per share.

Eight in 10 Americans are reevaluating their health priorities due to the COVID-19 pandemic, according to new research. The study asked 2,000 Americans about their health and how the novel coronavirus has affected their health plans. Sixty-two percent of those surveyed admitted they didn’t take their health seriously enough before the COVID-19 pandemic. Seven in 10 are even using self-isolation as an opportunity to hit the reset button and improve their health. Conducted by OnePoll on behalf of cellular health product Tru Niagen, the survey found 59 percent of respondents said the top thing they’re focused on improving during self-isolation is eating healthier. Over half of the respondents shared their biggest health improvement success was simply eating more fruits and vegetables while they’ve been in self-isolation. Seven in 10 respondents also said they’ve struggled to stay positive and motivated while they’re stuck indoors – so it’s no surprise that 41 percent are using this time to focus on improving their mental health. So what are people doing to keep themselves busy? Forty-six percent of those surveyed said they’ve been turning to the kitchen to boost their moods and stay busy. And this is paying off, as 59 percent of respondents said they’re cooking more than ever during this period of self-isolation. Other ways respondents are staying busy include watching TV, redecorating their homes and even taking time to meditate. Three in 10 respondents are also taking this time to learn a new skill and 29 percent are curling up with a good book. And despite being stuck inside, 67 percent of those surveyed said they feel they’ve actually been more physically active in self-isolation. Respondents shared they’ve been able to squeeze in an extra three and a half hours of exercise each week and have been taking at least two walks a day to stay active. Nearly half of the respondents said they’ve made daily walks a family activity as well. “Now more than ever we are conscious of our health,” said Rob Fried, CEO of ChromaDex, the makers of Tru Niagen and global leader in NAD+ science. “When choosing health-related products, please choose trusted brands with proven safe, clinically verified products.” Another way respondents are staying busy is by researching how they can improve their immune health, so it’s no surprise 77 percent of those surveyed said they’re focusing on how to improve their immune system more than ever before. A quarter of respondents are even using this time to completely revamp their health regimens and 42 percent are turning to DIYs to give their immune systems a boost. “While many Americans have experienced disruptions to their fitness routines, it’s important to stay active for your physical and mental well-being,” said Dr. Andrew Shao, ChromaDex SVP of Global Regulatory & Scientific Affairs. “Keep the family healthy together by exploring virtual fitness classes and activities you can do safely outdoors while maintaining recommended physical distancing guidelines.” Top 15 ways to stay busy in self-isolation Top things Americans are focusing on during self-isolation

Now his political career may be dead! The mayor of a town in Peru posed as a dead coronavirus victim — by lying in a coffin while wearing a face mask — to avoid being arrested for violating lockdown rules that he should have been helping enforce, according to reports Thursday. Jaime Rolando Urbina Torres was out drinking with friends in Tantará on Monday night when he allegedly played dead to throw off cops who arrived to bust them for defying public health orders amid the pandemic, according to the UK’s Evening Standard. The mayor — who has already faced criticism for being absent for much of the time during the outbreak — is shown in a photo released by local police lying in a coffin with his eyes closed. Torres was detained for violating curfew and social distancing laws, the paper reports. Police claim the mayor staged the macabre scene to appear as if he was a victim of COVID-19, according to The Times. It wasn’t immediately clear where he and his pals were drinking or why open caskets were nearby. Torres has also come under fire by officials in recent weeks for failing to open emergency quarantine shelters and failing to implement safety checks, according to local media. Like the rest of Peru, the town of Tantará was placed on lockdown on March 16. Peru has seen at least 104,000 confirmed coronavirus cases and 3,024 deaths linked to the virus as of Thursday morning, according to Johns Hopkins University data.

The New Jersey gym that’s waged war with Gov. Phil Murphy over his lockdown order plans to reopen again Friday — after getting shut down by the state health department. “We’re planning a big reopening again tomorrow,” said Jim Mermigis, the lawyer representing Atilis Gym, which was shuttered by the state Thursday morning. The owners of the Bellmawr gym, Ian Smith and Frank Trumbetti, have been locked in a nasty back-and-forth with Murphy, who’s ordered all non-essential businesses closed as the state battles the coronavirus. “The health department is used for public safety,” Smith told The Post outside the gym. “It is sad to see it weaponized against small business owners to enforce the will of the governor because these organizations are meant to protect people against credible threats.” The gym initially opened its doors on Monday and again Tuesday and Wednesday — despite Smith and Trumbetti being slapped with summonses for violating Murphy’s executive order. On Thursday, a notice from the state Department of Health was plastered on the gym’s door ordering it shut. “Atilis Gym has continued to operate in non-compliance with Executive Order No. 107, thus posing a threat to the public health by failing to adhere to the measures taken to mitigate the spread of COVID-19,” the order reads in part. Smith said every time they open, they are given a summons with penalties of up to $1,000 in fines and six months in jail. “That doesn’t stop us,” he said. “We keep staying open.” Mermigis said the health department’s order was largely symbolic. “They haven’t padlocked the doors,” he said. “Technically what happened today is just an extension of the executive order.” The gym didn’t reopen Thursday because of sewage issues, the owners said. Mermigis is planning to file an injunction seeking to have Murphy’s order declared unconstitutional. He promised “civil rights lawsuits will also follow.” The owners said patrons will be scanned with a biometric thermal scanner Friday when the gym reopens at 20 percent capacity. The gym is also cleaning the air with a disinfecting UV light and is requiring patrons to wear masks at all times, except while doing cardio workouts. “We took our gym and made it compliant with social distancing with sanitary and disinfecting measures,” said Trumbetti. “We’ve taken precautions. There isn’t a single big-box store that actually has a secure facility that does what we do right now to prevent the spread of the virus.”

A City Councilman from Brooklyn is calling on Mayor Bill de Blasio to allow mom-and-pop shops that haven’t received government loans during the pandemic to reopen so they don’t have to close forever. “Small businesses are suffering tremendously during the shutdown — forced to shutter for months and unable to pay rent and meet their basic needs,” Councilman Chaim Deutsch told The Post. “These business owners initially took on these losses knowing that they needed to make sacrifices in order to keep others safe. Now with the curve flattened and data trending positively, these small business owners are still being told that they still cannot reopen, even with careful safety precautions,” the south Brooklyn Democrat said. The storefronts are also not part of an eventual phase one reopening that de Blasio announced Thursday could start by June 15. The first businesses to return online next month would be in the construction, manufacturing and wholesale industries as well as some retail locations with curbside pickup. Ernest and Marie Louinis, who own a second-hand furniture store in Flatbush, told The Post they back Deutsch’s plan. The couple closed their store, The Thrift Shop on Nostrand Avenue, in early March and laid off two employees. “I’m paying rent and I don’t have a business,” Marie Louinis said. “We are working on getting a loan but nothing yet.” The mother of four said if she could reopen she would space customers six feet apart and limit entry to three people at a time. “I could get it clean and open in two days,” she said, adding that she’d regularly blitz her store with Lysol and Clorox to keep it sanitary. Deutsch said many immigrant entrepreneurs like the Louinis family who are from Haiti have had trouble navigating bureaucratic red tape to secure aid. “Over 50 percent of small businesses in New York City are immigrant, women, minority and veteran-owned. These are the communities that will be hardest hit by an economic downturn,” Deutsch said. “It is critical that they be allowed to reopen safely. If not, many will shut their doors permanently.” At a hearing Wednesday council members demanded more support for small businesses, but de Blasio administration officials said its $59 million grants and loans program had run dry. “That’s equivalent to about $12,000 plus-or-minus, per business,” said Mark Gjonaj (D-The Bronx). “It’s not nearly enough,” he said of the city’s aid package. De Blasio’s Small Business Services Commissioner Jonnel Doris acknowledged the shortage. “We know it’s not enough. These programs were meant to be a stop-gap until additional aid had come,” he said. “The federal government is the only one who can actually support us at this time,” Doris said. De Blasio’s press secretary Freddi Goldstein said, “We will explore every possibility to help New Yorkers, but we can’t reopen prematurely and risk people’s health and safety. When and how we reopen will be led by guidance from health professionals.”

Mayor Bill de Blasio on Thursday urged Big Apple residents to “keep it local” and not venture out to Long Island beaches for the upcoming Memorial Day weekend as city beaches remain closed. “My advice to people is keep it simple. Keep it local. Less is more,” de Blasio said during his daily coronavirus press briefing when asked about city residents who may want to travel to Long Island this weekend for some fun in the sun. De Blasio, who has repeatedly traveled 11 miles from Manhattan to Brooklyn’s Prospect Park for a stroll with first lady Chirlane McCray amid the coronavirus pandemic, added, “I’m not encouraging people to do a lot of traveling.” “The beaches all over the region are going to come with lots of restrictions,” he said. Hizzoner’s comments come after he said that New York City residents should be allowed on Long Island beaches following remarks by Nassau County Executive Laura Curran, who blasted as “irresponsible” the mayor’s decision to keep city beaches closed for the holiday weekend and at least until mid-June. On Wednesday, de Blasio said he understands why Curran has to put her constituents first during the coronavirus crisis. The mayor on Thursday expressed more of his concerns about city-goers heading to closed Big Apple beaches this weekend. “We don’t want people gathering on the beaches,” Hizzoner said, acknowledging that “Memorial Day weekend itself will pose a particular challenge.” There will be “plenty” of NYPD and Parks Department personnel out enforcing social distancing rules and to make sure folks are not going swimming, de Blasio said. “We will keep both spreading people out, but if we have to send people off the beach, off the boardwalk if we have to reduce the number of people, we’ll do that,” said de Blasio. City beaches will be closed for swimming until further notice, but walking, running and exercising on the sand and boardwalks are still permitted. “I think it’s very important that we go slowly and carefully with the beaches,” de Blasio said. “I think we’re in the right place to say there won’t be swimming.” State-run New York beaches will be open starting tomorrow for the Memorial Day weekend, but they will be at only 50 percent maximum capacity. “Those beaches may reach capacity at 10, 11 o’clock in the morning, so that’s something to take into consideration,” Gov. Andrew Cuomo said during his own press briefing Thursday. “You don’t want to take that ride and find out the beaches are already closed,” Cuomo said. Additional reporting by Bernadette Hogan

Apparel chain Gap is speeding up its rollout of warehouse robots for assembling online orders so it can limit human contact during the coronavirus pandemic, the company told Reuters. Gap reached a deal early this year to more than triple the number of item-picking robots it uses to 106 by the fall. Then the pandemic struck North America, forcing the company to close all its stores in the region, including those of Banana Republic, Old Navy and other brands. Meanwhile, its warehouses faced more Web orders and fewer staff to fulfill them because of social distancing rules Gap had put in place. “We could not get as many people in our distribution centers safely,” said Kevin Kuntz, Gap’s senior vice president of global logistics fulfillment. So he called up Kindred AI, the vendor that sells the machines, to ask: “Can you get them here earlier?” Sourcing parts in time for the eight-foot-tall robotic stations was not simple or cheap, said Kindred’s Chief Operating Officer Marin Tchakarov. But the venture-backed startup was able to deploy 10 of them to Gap’s warehouse near Nashville, Tenn., and 20 near Columbus, Ohio, with plans to finish the rollout to four of Gap’s five US facilities by July, months ahead of schedule, he said. Each machine handles work typically performed by four people, Kuntz said. Neither the deal to triple the number of robots, nor the expedited installations, have been previously reported. The news illustrates how the pandemic may speed up automation in the retail industry. Companies including Gap and Amazon have long used such systems for a range of tasks, like moving items across warehouse floors. Various new technologies are capable of supplanting some cashier, box packing and item picking roles that employ millions of US workers, and the pandemic is giving vendors a chance to make their case. The firm RightHand Robotics, for instance, has helped its customer Walmart manage more online orders through greater use of its picking machines that had been deployed at several of the chain’s facilities, a person familiar with the matter said. Walmart did not answer requests for comment. Vince Martinelli, RightHand’s head of product and marketing, declined to comment on the deployment but said as a general matter, “If you’re going to have limited people in the building, the last thing you want them to do is a simple task that can be automated.” Amazon is also relying more on automation for sorting items that warehouse workers have unpacked, sparing staff from having to walk by each other frequently as the more manual process once required, the company said. It is looking to roll out the technology more widely in its buildings. Kindred, RightHand and robotics firm Berkshire Grey told Reuters they are seeing a rise in inquiries from prospective retail clients, though travel restrictions and the need to limit human contact make new installations a challenge. The interest is no surprise: Researchers from the Brookings Institution have said spurts of automation often follow economic shocks, a phenomenon they said could be replayed as retailers’ sales plunge. “At these moments, employers shed less-skilled workers and replace them with technology and higher-skilled workers, which increases labor productivity as a recession tapers off,” the think tank’s March report said. Pressure to make distribution networks more efficient is likely to increase for retailers because of their financial woes during the pandemic. Gap last month said it faced a cash shortage, prompting it to borrow $2.25 billion. Three-quarters of its revenue its last fiscal year came from over 3,300 physical stores, most of which it has closed for weeks. While Gap has kept shops in China in business and has started the reopening of 800 others this month, its e-commerce operation has been a lifeline for sales. Gap, based in San Francisco, did not disclose the financial terms of its deal with Kindred, or its base pay for staff. The company said it has around 6,500 warehouse employees, who are receiving higher wages because of the health crisis. It is limiting numbers in facilities because of US health guidance.

A Wisconsin woman has taken the unproven coronavirus drug hydroxychloroquine for nearly two decades for another health condition — and says she was still infected by the virus, according to a report. The woman, who asked to only be referred to as Kim, said she had felt safer knowing that the anti-malaria drug, which she has taken for 19 years to help with her lupus, was gaining international attention as a possible treatment for warding off COVID-19, news station WISH reported. But she came down with symptoms of the virus in mid-April, despite also taking precautions during her trips to the grocery store. “Weak all over. Coughing, fever. The fever was very high,” Kim said. “It just went downhill from there. I couldn’t breathe no more.” She ended up in the emergency room at Aurora Medical Center in Summit, where she tested positive for the virus, the outlet reported. “I’m like, ‘How can I be sick? How? I’m on the hydroxychloroquine,'” she said. “They were like, ‘Well, nobody ever said that was the cure or that was going to keep you safe’ and it definitely did not.” Kim said she’s on the mend now from her battle against the bug — but warns others the drug alone won’t protect them from the virus. “You’re not safe taking that medication at all. [Hydroxychloroquine] is not going to prevent anything. You can still get coronavirus,” Kim told the outlet. President Trump announced earlier this week that he began taking the anti-malarial drug after he “heard a lot of good stories” about what it could promise against the virus. “You’d be surprised at how many people are taking it, especially the front-line workers before you catch it,” Trump said. “The front-line workers — many, many are taking it. I happen to be taking it. I happen to be taking it — hydroxychloroquine.”

This father definitely knows best. Rob Kenney, a father of two adult children, has become a heartwarming YouTube sensation by cobbling together a dozen videos that have a touching purpose: As someone whose father walked out on his family when Kenney was a kid, he wants to use his channel — aptly titled “Dad, How Do I?” — to teach young people how to deal with basic household tasks that he had to learn on his own. His simple tutorials, released on Thursdays, have garnered more than 2.1 million views and his channel has topped 1.3 million subscribers since it went live early last month. The homespun handyman — whose Instagram bio says he offers “Practical Dadvice for Everyday Tasks” — covers chores such as fixing sink clogs and “most running toilets,” checking a car’s oil and changing a tire, ironing a dress shirt and shaving. His first video — “How to tie a tie” — dropped on April 2 and has been viewed more than 240,000 times. Kenney’s drive to pay it forward comes from a dark period in his upbringing. One of eight children, he says he grew up in Bellevue, Washington, in a home rattled by “dysfunction” and fractured by an acrimonious divorce when he was a teen, according to an interview with Shattered magazine last month. “He got custody of us, but he didn’t really want us. I think he was kind of done by that time,” Kenney says of his father. Now he’s putting his acquired knowledge out into the world in hopes of making it a better place — or at least easier to navigate. “The pain is pretty real in our world, and hopefully, this’ll help alleviate some of it,” says Kenney, whose videos could come in handy for many holed-up people surviving on their own during the coronavirus lockdown. “It’s more than just how to fix things; it’s how to manage your life and ‘adulting’ questions,” he continues in the video. “We thought maybe it’d be beneficial to a few people, and I thought if I could help a few, then I’d be happy.” It seems to be working. Hundreds of comments grace his posts from fans who find his know-how useful. “I’m watching this cuz’ I’m 24 and my dad promised to hang a shelf in my bedroom,” says one commenter on a video about doing just that. “It has been 12 years now.” “My father passed away when I was about 7, and literally never got to teach me any of this,” says another on Kenney’s tie-tying tutorial. “Funny to say that after all theses [sic] years, but anyway I busted [sic] wanted to give you a BIG THANKS for making videos like this for people like me.” Kenney also made a “heartfelt” appreciation video to supporters, which he posted May 19 and titled “THANK YOU!” “You guys are amazing,” says Kenney, who adds that he just wants to “empower” viewers. “Please know I don’t think I’ve cornered the market on how to fix things. You know, just being a dad and … stuff comes up and I’ve just gotta figure out how to do it.”  He says he’s also heard comments about being the “perfect dad,” but he instead says he’s “an internet dad.” “Please understand I didn’t always do everything right with my kids,” he says in a particularly reflective moment. “If I fail, if you’re gonna fail as a dad; it’s part of the human experience. You aren’t gonna always do things right, so I think it’s very important to ask for forgiveness and not pretend that you’ve got it all figured out. ‘Cause your kids are gonna find out sooner or later that you don’t have it figured out when they grow up, right? “They don’t remain little for long; the window that you have them is such a short time,” he says. He even tosses in a cheesy “dad joke” for good measure: “Did you hear the rumor about the butter? Well, I’m not gonna spread it.” Kenney ends his message of thanks on an uplifting note, quoting a lyric by alt-rock group Switchfoot, who ask, “Is this the world you want?” “Well, you’re making it every day you’re alive. And I really take that to heart,” he says. “ ’Cause it is true: if we all each did our own little bit, then the world would be such a better place. I know the internet can be toxic, and it’s sad that it’s that way ’cause it just shouldn’t be that way. “We need to be kind to each other,” he says.

WASHINGTON — New York GOP Rep. Elise Stefanik, one of the lawmakers nominated to the new China Task Force, believes the secretive Communist nation is now among the biggest threats to the US. In an interview with The Post, Stefanik, a rising star who has become a key adviser to President Trump, said the Republican-led task force would not only take China to task over its mishandling of the coronavirus crisis, but seek to curb its growing influence on the world stage. “I believe that the China Task Force is not only about China’s mishandling and propaganda over the course of this pandemic. This is an opportunity to put forth policies to deal with China as a generational issue,” Stefanik (R-Schuylerville) said Wednesday. “I think that China is going to be the key challenge of the 21st century,” the upstate New York congresswoman continued, noting her stint as chair of the Subcommittee on Intelligence and Emerging Threats and Capabilities, where she is now the ranking member. “As we think about emerging threats, China is one of the most significant emerging threats that we face, not only in the United States, but that we face when we’re partnered with our allies,” she said. House Republican Leader Kevin McCarthy earlier this month announced the formation of the task force — originally planned as a bipartisan panel with Democrats before they abandoned the idea, he said. “We will be looking at a broad range of China-related issues, including influence operations targeting the US, the economic threat to our government and allies, efforts to gain the technological advantage, and China’s role in the origin and spread of COVID-19,” McCarthy said. Washington lawmakers on both sides of the aisle have sounded the alarm over China’s attempts to cover up the origins of the virus, which broke out in Wuhan in late 2019, in addition to America’s reliance on the Communist-ruled nation for key goods such as medical supplies. The country’s Communist Party has ramped up propaganda amid the crisis — blaming the outbreak on American soldiers in China and portraying COVID-19 victims as martyrs. Stefanik, 35, said her focus would be returning manufacturing to the US and leapfrogging China’s attempts to become the leader on artificial intelligence. “Manufacturing is a key concern. This crisis has highlighted our overreliance on China when it comes to PPE, ventilators and life-saving pharmaceutical drugs,” she said. “I hear this from my voters much more so than ever before, that there is this overwhelming interest in bringing back our manufacturing capabilities,” she continued. “I think that the China case is going to be more and more important as we get to the election,” she added. Republicans are mounting China as a key election issue — rather than have November be a verdict on Trump’s handling of the pandemic — with former veep Joe Biden consistently ahead in presidential polls. GOP lawmakers have become increasingly bullish on China — with Sen. Josh Hawley of Missouri giving an impassioned speech on the Senate floor Wednesday about how the US would not take “second place to the imperialists in Beijing.” Stefanik, who also sits on the powerful House Intelligence Committee, was critical of its chairman, Rep. Adam Schiff (D-Calif.), who has signaled he wants to conduct an investigation into the president’s coronavirus response, which he claimed had a “profound and disturbing echo” to impeachment proceedings. With her voice carrying increasing gravitas, Stefanik spent the past weekend with Trump at Camp David to advise him on his plan to reopen the cratering US economy. “Republicans on the [Intelligence] committee have been frustrated that there has not been nearly enough focus, or any focus, on this looming threat of China,” she told The Post. “This is what’s so frustrating with Schiff’s obsession on impeachment and they’re continuing to put out information that they want to continue to pursue impeachment. The American people have moved beyond that,” she continued. Stefanik said Congress needed to focus on China’s capabilities and the threats it posed, saying America’s allies in the Pacific — including Australia, which is currently being threatened with trade sanctions for wanting to investigate China — had been raising the alarm for years. “We need to take note and really work with those strong relationships to ensure that we have a strategy, and we have the proper intelligence capabilities, when it comes to understanding what China is doing,” she said.

Uber Technologies on Thursday for the first time detailed how much it has spent to support its ride-hail drivers and food delivery workers during the coronavirus crisis, which has battered the company and forced it to lay off thousands of employees. The company said in a blog post here it had spent $19 million as of mid-May in direct two-week financial assistance to a total of nearly 48,900 drivers worldwide who were infected by the virus or ordered to quarantine. Half of that amount was paid out to 12,350 drivers and delivery workers in the US and Canada, Uber’s largest market and where, it has some 1.3 million drivers. Under the program announced in mid-March, North American drivers received an average of nearly $650, but payout amounts varied widely by location, with Uber limiting the maximum payment per city and calculating support based on prior earnings. Uber did not provide a breakdown of payments in other countries, but a spokesman said financial assistance has been provided in all of the more than 70 countries it operates in. The spokesman said drivers’ demand for support also varied depending on the existing social safety net in individual countries. Ride-hail drivers in online forums have complained about an arduous approval process to receive financial support. In the US, many drivers also struggled to receive unemployment benefits, typically reserved for employees. Uber insists its drivers are independent contractors, but in March it urged the US president to include gig-economy workers in a federal coronavirus relief bill so drivers could receive unemployment benefits. Uber previously said it has allocated $50 million to supply drivers with masks and disinfectants and purchased some 28 million masks. Almost half a million drivers and delivery people have received safety supplies to date, the company said.

SALT LAKE CITY — Health investigator Mackenzie Bray smiles and chuckles as she chats by phone with a retired Utah man who just tested positive for the coronavirus. She’s trying to keep the mood light because she needs to find out where he’s been and who he’s been around for the past seven days. She gently peppers him with questions, including where he and his wife stopped to buy flowers on a visit to a cemetery. She encourages him to go through his bank statement to see if it reminds him of any store visits he made. Midway through the conversation, a possible break: His wife lets slip that they had family over for Mother’s Day, including a grandchild who couldn’t stop slobbering. “Was there like a shared food platter or something like that?” Bray asks. “There was, OK, yep … sharing food or sharing drinks, even just being on the same table, it can spread that way.’” Suddenly, with a shared punch bowl, the web has widened and Bray has dozens more people to track down. She is among an army of health professionals around the world filling one of the most important roles in the effort to guard against a resurgence of the coronavirus. The practice of so-called contact tracing requires a hybrid job of interrogator, therapist and nurse as they try coax nervous people to be honest. The goal: To create a road map of everywhere infected people have been and who they’ve been around. While other countries have devised national approaches, a patchwork of efforts has emerged in the US where states are left to create their own program. Bray normally does this type of work to track contacts for people with sexually transmitted diseases. She is now one of 130 people at the Salt Lake County health department assigned to track coronavirus cases in the Salt Lake City area. The investigators, many of them nurses, each juggle 30 to 40 cases and try to reach everyone the original person was within 6 feet (1.8 meters) of for 10 minutes or more. They stay in touch with some people throughout the 14-day incubation period and calls can take 30 minutes or more as they meticulously go through a list of questions. Some estimate as many as 300,000 contact tracers would be needed in the US to adequately curtail the spread. While some states like Utah have reported having enough contact tracers, others are hundreds or even thousands of people short. The contact tracers often find themselves in a tangled web of half-truths and facts that don’t match up. Language and cultural barriers arise that require interpreters and taxing conversations that leave the investigators wondering if the person understands what they’re trying to do. They land on occasion into complicated family dynamics where people are reluctant to tell the truth. Health investigator Maria DiCaro found out days into a case that a father was sleeping in his car because he and his wife were separating. The man had stopped returning DiCaro’s calls and that key information came from his child. “I get people that lie all time,” DiCaro said. “I try to get as much information from the beginning but it’s just not always the case. And time is one of those things you can’t take back when you are trying to prevent and you know do these contact tracing investigations.” Each call is an exercise in good cop, bad cop. She needs people to cooperate, but no one is legally required to answer the questions. Usually kindness works better than strong words. Some people lie because they’re scared, or they forget an outing. Construction workers, housekeepers and others without paid sick time may gloss over symptoms so they can get back to work. Some immigrants without documentation brush off testing because they fear it could lead to deportation. “People sometimes think contact tracing is black and white but there is a lot of gray that goes into it,” said Bray, who often thinks about her parents and 97-year-old grandmother as she works to help stop the spread of the virus. “Our worst fear is that we push too hard and we lose someone. It’s not just their health on the line, it’s the people around them.” No matter the tension, Bray and DiCaro give frequent reminders of why it all matters: “Thank you for what you’re doing. You’re helping the community,” DiCaro says during one call. She knows that on the other end of the line, the first call from a tracer can be jarring. Sometimes, DiCaro and Bray have to break the news that someone was exposed or tested positive. “It’s normal to talk to like your doctor, but you don’t ever expect the health department to call you and be like, ‘You were exposed to a serious disease,’” said Anissa Archuleta. The 23-year-old got a call from DiCaro after she, her sister and her mother took a rare break from hunkering down to help organize a drive-by birthday party for a young cousin. They dropped off a present, then caved and accepted an impromptu invitation to go inside to grab some food. What they didn’t know: the father of the birthday boy had the coronavirus and unknowingly exposed more than a dozen people at the gathering. After that first call, DiCaro checked in every day for two weeks. The fear slowly faded after their tests came back negative and they began building a rapport with DiCaro. She asked about their symptoms and how they were feeling each day and learned about how Archuleta’s mother lost her voice to fibromyalgia. Archuleta would pass along messages her mother whispered in her ear. And after a while, Archuleta began asking DiCaro about her life and how she was holding up. About a week in to their calls, on the daily check-in, Archuleta thanked DiCaro for caring about them and checking in every day. Tears welled up in DiCaro’s eyes. “Ah thanks,” she said as she grabbed a Kleenex to wipe her eyes. After she hung up, she leaned back in her chair and closed her eyes for a few seconds. “When you do this like 10-12 hours a day … It’s nice to get those positive reactions from people that are very grateful who do see the purpose of what we are doing,” said DiCaro. “It’s nice to be appreciated.”

A new dining bubble that resembles the Cone of Silence from the 1960’s TV series “Get Smart” can serve as a safe haven from the coronavirus when restaurants begin opening up, according to a report. Christophe Gernigon, who invented the see-through contraption called the Plex’Eat, said designs that were already on the market looked like booths in prison visiting rooms. “I wanted to make it more glamorous, more pretty,” he told Reuters about his invention, which will go into production next week. Gernigon said he has already received interest from France, Belgium, Canada, Japan and Argentina. The Plex’Eat, which hangs from a cable on the ceiling, features a scoop cut out of the back that allows a diner to sit and stand up without having to bend over. France is beginning to ease some of the restrictions it imposed to curb the spread of the coronavirus, but the government has not yet given the green light to restaurants and bars to reopen because they pose particular problems for disease control. Customers can’t eat while wearing a face mask, and if tables are removed to ensure diners are a safe distance from each other, many business owners say they would not be able to make enough money to cover their expenses. Mathieu Manzoni, owner of the H.A.N.D restaurant near Paris’ Louvre museum, invited Gernigon this week to hear his pitch about the device. He said he was planning to place an order. “Will people like it? I can’t say but I want to believe that it can add something because I find it fun,” Manzoni said in his eatery, which is only open for takeout orders.

Kuwait’s coronavirus lockdown has created a logistical nightmare for polygamist men — who are facing jail time or steep fines for leaving home to split time with all of their wives, according to a report. Thousands of multi-wived men in the Gulf State have been ordered, along with the rest of the country, to stick to one household under the “total” lockdown until May 30, Agence France-Press reported. “My life has become so complicated,” Abu Othman, who has 10 children between two wives, told the outlet. The 45-year-old said he’s struggling to make sure that neither wife feels neglected during the pandemic. “Sometimes police patrols understand my situation, while at other times I have to apply for permission claiming there is a ‘family emergency,'” he told AFP. Under the lockdown measures, residents are allowed to shop for food only once every six days, after electronically obtaining permission, and then can only go outside for two-hour evening walks, the outlet reported. Those who defy the rules, which also include wearing a face mask outdoors, could be hit with as much as a $1,600 fine or jailed for three months, according to the report. Polygamist men have urged more flexibility to the rules, resulting in new changes issued Sunday that allow for those married to more than one woman to obtain electronic permits for one-hour visits twice a week, according to the report. But for some, one hour is not enough time to make the trip. Abu Abdulaziz said his first wife lives too far from his second for him to be able to see both. “For the first time, I haven’t seen some of my children,” he told the news outlet. His first wife wasn’t thrilled that he was holed up with his second wife and their two children, the AFP reported. “He could have chosen to stay with me,” his first wife, who requested anonymity, told the outlet.

New York City could start reopening from its coronavirus-induced shutdown as early as June 1, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Thursday. “All roads are leading to the first half of June,” de Blasio said during his daily coronavirus press briefing, explaining that the Big Apple is expected to meet its own targets involving hospitalizations, ICU admissions, and the amount of those testing positive for the bug, as well as the state’s seven COVID-related benchmarks by that time. Clarifying the timing of the city’s phased reopening, de Blasio said, “I’m saying first half of June. I’m obviously giving a little bit of range there, but I mean literally the first half of June, so somewhere between June 1 and June 15. “I’m basing that on everything we know today,” de Blasio said, adding, “This disease has thrown us a lot of curveballs so we’re not going to rest on laurels or assume we have a crystal ball.” “We’re basing it on the trend, which has been pretty damn consistent,” the mayor said. The mayor said that when the city enters phase one of reopening, it will be based on state guidelines, “possibly with some modifications for the reality of New York City.” Under phase one of New York’s four-phase coronavirus reopening plan, construction, manufacturing and wholesale supply chains, and retail businesses with curbside pickup can reopen. “We have to talk to the state about particular features of the approach here that we need to implement together,” de Blasio said. “We need to think about the ramifications in terms of people getting around and congregating. There’s things we got to work through that are particularly challenging to the city.” De Blasio touted Big Apple residents for the progress the city has made in its battle against the coronavirus, saying, “Something very good is happening because of your hard work.” However, the mayor said, “We’re talking about small, smart steps,” adding, “It will take a series of steps over time to get back to anything like normal.” Gov. Andrew Cuomo, speaking during his own press briefing later Thursday, said that when it comes to reopening New York City and other regions, “We don’t want financial ruin, but we don’t want death either, so that’s the balance we’re trying to find.” “We don’t want to make a mistake now, and go back to a spike that would be the worst case scenario,” he said. Cuomo’s top aide Melissa DeRosa added that the city, based on the metrics, is on track to reopen in June. “I believe what Mayor de Blasio said is ‘looks like we’re on track for June based on the metrics with a big asterisks for what happens between now and then,’ and again we are on the exact same page as them. Based on the metrics that is what it looks like,” DeRosa said. Cuomo, who said he spoke to de Blasio, continued, “We said we all have the same numbers and the same criteria. The only question is when we hit those numbers and that comes down to what people do.” De Blasio did acknowledge Thursday that more and more New Yorkers are getting out from their coronavirus-induced isolations as he announced that the city is increasing rush-hour service on the Staten Island Ferry starting Thursday afternoon since ridership is up. “We obviously see people out more. We see more traffic. We have to start making adjustments accordingly,” said de Blasio, who noted that ridership is up to 600 passengers daily. “This signals something good is happening,” Hizzoner said, adding, “We need to get ahead of that.” The city will now run Staten Island Ferry service every half-hour between 5 a.m. and 9 a.m. and between 3:30 p.m. and 7 p.m., de Blasio said. “A step forward in terms of increasing service on the Staten Island Ferry and giving people more space as a result,” the mayor said, explaining, “We want to make sure those ferries don’t become crowded.” When asked why he believes there is increased ridership on the Staten Island Ferry, de Blasio said, “I think what’s happening is folks are naturally growing into what is allowed.” “I think you’ve got essential workers … folks who need to get medical care,” said de Blasio, noting, “many things that were allowed folks were not doing out of real concern.” Staten Island Ferry service was previously slashed because of the coronavirus pandemic with boats running every hour as ridership dramatically plunged. Meanwhile, de Blasio called it a “pretty good day” when it comes to the latest statistics for the city’s daily coronavirus indicators. “It’s a pretty good day, I want to get to great days, but it’s a good day,” he said. Patients in intensive care units for suspected COVID-19 across the city’s public hospital system dropped from 483 on Monday to 477 on Tuesday, while the number of people admitted to Big Apple hospitals also declined from 63 on Monday to 60 on Tuesday, according to the data, which has a two-day reporting lag. “For more than a week we have been around or even below the annual average for folks admitted to hospitals for this broad kind of disease,” de Blasio said. “This is very powerful.” The percentage of people tested citywide who are positive for coronavirus, however, ticked up slightly from 8 percent on Monday to 9 percent on Tuesday. De Blasio pointed out that in the last 10 days that measure has been below 15 percent with several days in the single digits. “You see a little fluctuation,” said de Blasio who called the stats “remarkable progress.” Additional reporting by Bernadette Hogan

Amazon is scheduling its annual Prime Day shopping event for September and allowing unlimited shipments of non-essential goods to warehouses, the Wall Street Journal reported on Thursday, citing people familiar with the matter. The latter move will allow the company to lay the groundwork for shipments of a wider variety of products, indicating it is now in a position to process orders more quickly in its warehouses and create room for more inventory, the report said. Amazon declined to comment to a Reuters request for comment on the report. Prime Day, a marketing event Amazon started in 2015 to drum up sales during the summer shopping lull, has previously occurred in July, though the company never publishes the date far in advance. The decision to delay it means Amazon will have about 5 million extra devices it would have expected to sell sooner, items like its suite of voice-controlled Echo speakers that have been popular orders during the event. It also affects third-party merchants who have come to depend on Amazon’s platform for revenue.

Macy’s said on Thursday it could rack up operating losses of up to $1.11 billion in the first quarter, as the department store operator was forced to shut stores due to lockdowns aimed at curbing the spread of the new coronavirus. The health crisis has forced brick-and-mortar retailers to tap credit lines, lay off employees and suspend dividends and buybacks in a bid to stay afloat amid store closures. Just this month, several retailers, including J Crew, JCPenney and luxury store chain Neiman Marcus Group filed for bankruptcy after failing to cope with market uncertainties and mounting debt. Macy’s, which shut all of its 775 stores on March 18 to curb the spread of the coronavirus, hired investment bank Lazard to explore options for bolstering its finances, Reuters reported last month. It started reopening stores on a state-by-state basis on May 4 and, as of this week, approximately 190 Macy’s and Bloomingdale’s stores have reopened fully. The company expects most stores to reopen by late June, including its flagship store in Manhattan. “We expect business to recover gradually,” Macy’s Chief Executive Officer Jeff Gennette said. Despite online sales bringing some respite to retailers, Gennette said it could not offset the losses relating to store closures. Offering services, including curbside pickup where allowed, has helped the retailer boost sales. From suits to dresses, apparel sales across the board have been “soft,” Gennette said on a call with investors. The company said it recorded inventory writedowns of about $300 million at the end of the first quarter. Gennette identified fine jewelry, kids and home as categories that have performed better than others during the pandemic. Moving forward, Macy’s will look to expand its packaged food, home office and cooking and baking offerings, he said. Macy’s, the largest US department store operator by sales, expects to post an operating loss of between $905 million and $1.11 billion. It forecast first-quarter sales in the range of $3 billion to $3.03 billion, down from $5.50 billion a year earlier. The loss excludes potential estimated pretax non-cash goodwill and asset impairment charges for the quarter. Macy’s had earlier this month said it would report its first-quarter earnings on July 1 as significant business disruptions due to the pandemic had led to delays in preparing its financial statement. Shares of the company were up 4.1 percent at $5.30 mid-morning trades.

Millions of Americans are missing payments on credit cards and car loans as the coronavirus pandemic squeezes consumers’ wallets, data shows. Nearly 15 million credit cards, or about 3.2 percent of the nation’s accounts, were in “financial hardship” status in April, according to figures from credit-reporting company TransUnion. That means the accounts were frozen, in forbearance or had a deferred payment, among other factors. The same was true for almost 3 million, or 3.5 percent, of the nation’s auto loans, according to TransUnion. Both rates saw dramatic increases from April of last year, when just 0.03 percent of credit cards and 0.5 percent of auto loans had hardships, the company said. “While these programs are providing consumers with temporary relief, banks and lenders are looking for further regulatory guidance as to what next steps should be taken once stimulus packages dry up,” Matt Komos, TransUnion’s vice president of research and consulting, said in a statement. Moreover, the share of credit card borrowers at least 90 days past due jumped to 1.87 percent last month from 1.78 percent a year earlier, the data show. And 1.3 percent of car loan borrowers were at least 60 days past due, up from 1.1 percent in April 2019. The spikes came as lockdowns aimed at curbing the deadly virus put more than 20 million Americans out of work last month, squeezing many people’s ability to pay bills. The financial stress has also affected mortgage payments, with more than 4 million homeowners now in forbearance plans, according to the Mortgage Bankers Association.

“Total Bellas” fans won’t have to worry about missing their favorite show because of quarantine restrictions. Nikki and Brie Bella revealed that they are currently in production for Season 7 of the E! show, telling Maria Menounos on Wednesday’s episode of “Better Together with Maria Menounos,” that their crew is back in action. “We all quarantined for 14 days,” Brie, 36, said. “Could have no contact with the outside world. It was, such strict rules and regulations, and then once we all did the 14 days quarantine, then we all had to take Coronavirus tests. And then once those tests came in, then, we all are together, but still quarantined, like all isolated.” Brie added, “It’s actually nice because we get to get to talk to other humans … I sometimes feel bad for [the crew] because they have to be in protective gear all day, like masks, gloves, sanitizer. We don’t have to be in masks but we all check our temperatures.” The Bella twins, who are both pregnant, also discussed their new memoir, “Incomparable,” and why they decide to write about Nikki being raped twice in high school. “Even when I was talking to Nikki during the #MeToo movement, I was like, ‘Hashtag it! Tweet it! I’ve got your back. It’s time to tell your story,'” Brie said. “And she still didn’t have enough courage at the time … and it was sad for me to see someone who was innocent still not have the courage to speak about it. And that’s when we knew we had to talk about it in the book.” Nikki explained, “The #MeToo movement is when Bri and I really talked about it again because I put it away for so long. And I remember telling Bri, ‘I’d do anything to have these women be around when it happened to me,’ because I probably would’ve ended up talking about it to my mom, someone. I would’ve gotten help, but instead, we didn’t have that. “After we got this opportunity to write the memoir, it was just like, maybe I need to help be the role model for people, and not be a victim to it. I don’t want any high school girl to waste 20 years of her life holding on to what I held on to. I want her to break free.” Toward the end of the interview, the twins reminisced about their friendship with WWE star Shad Gaspard, whose body was found washed up on Venice Beach earlier on Wednesday. “Oh my gosh. Shad was one of the sweetest human being,” Brie recalled. “You know, at the time that we knew him, we were all on ‘Smackdown’ … Shad was one of those guys who was always so sweet and respectful to women, always made the Divas feel good. He always brought this light into a room.” “You never saw him not smile,” Nikki added. “You never saw him angry. He literally always lit up the room. Shad was just one of those guys, till the very end.”

SINGAPORE – A shopping mall in Singapore is deploying a newly developed smart robot to fight the novel coronavirus, not with chemicals – but with light. While spraying has become the norm in many places around the world, the robot uses ultraviolet lamps to disinfectant not only surfaces but tricky-to-reach crevices and even the air. According to Derrick Yap, whose firm, PBA Group, developed the Sunburst UV Bot, the novel coronavirus pandemic presented an opportunity to test out a robot for a role that was “dangerous, dull and dirty”. “It’s dangerous because UVC shouldn’t be deployed when there’s humans around,” he said, referring to the short-wave germicidal type of ultraviolet radiation. “Dull – because you keep on going to a place and you keep on doing a repeated task and dirty, because of the COVID-19,” he said. UVC can be harmful to the skin and eyes, which is why the robot, which looks like a bunch of fluorescent lights standing up on a moving base, is being tested by Frasers Property Retail after the mall’s closing time. But it is programmed to turn off its UV lights if it detects a human in close proximity. Once its route has been fully mapped, the robot is expected to perform its cleaning cycle autonomously and recharge itself afterward. Yap said he expected the coronavirus outbreak to prompt companies to reassess their labor requirements and use of technology, including robots. “In the future, there will be a lot of use for this,” he said. Just one Sunburst UV Bot has been undergoing test runs, Frasers intends to deploy more elsewhere in Singapore. But they don’t come cheap, each one costing S$70,000 ($49,500). Some are being leased to clients for S$3,000 ($2,121) a month and some will be given to hospitals and isolation centers.

President Trump’s former fixer Michael Cohen was sprung from prison Thursday due to coronavirus concerns, according to reports. The 53-year-old, who was once Trump’s personal attorney, was serving a three-year sentence for his role in paying hush money to porn star Stormy Daniels and Playboy model Karen McDougal, as well as financial crimes and lying to Congress. Both women claimed to have had affairs with Trump. Cohen, who was released from Otisville prison in upstate New York, arrived at his pad at Trump Park Avenue on Thursday morning, climbing out of a gray Mercedes wearing jeans, a baseball cap and a face mask. “I am so glad to be home and back with my family,” he tweeted Thursday. “There is so much I want to say and intend to say. But now is not the right time. Soon. Thank you to all my friends and supporters.” Cohen served a little more than a year behind bars and is expected to serve the remainder of his sentence in home confinement, sources told Reuters. He had been eligible for release from prison in November 2021. Cohen’s bid for compassionate release was shot down by a federal judge in March — but his early release was granted Wednesday by the federal Bureau of Prisons. At the time, his lawyer said BOP was “demonstrably incapable of safeguarding and treating BOP inmates who are obliged to live in close quarters and are at an enhanced risk of catching coronavirus.” Last week, Trump’s former campaign manager Paul Manafort was also sprung early from prison over coronavirus fears.

The northeastern Chinese city of Shulan is now under a Wuhan-like lockdown as it battles its own coronavirus outbreak, according to new reports. All villages and residential compounds in the city of 700,000, located in Jilin province near the Russian border, were closed off Monday afternoon, its coronavirus prevention and control group said in a statement obtained by the South China Morning Post. One person per household is allowed to leave every other day for two hours to buy necessities, according to the statement. No one is permitted to enter or leave villages or compounds with suspected or confirmed coronavirus cases, and local stores are delivering necessary supplies to those residents. The stringent restrictions are similar to the since-lifted regulations in Wuhan, where the coronavirus first emerged last year. Shulan was reclassified as high-risk last week after the city reported a cluster of cases connected to a woman with no known travel history or exposure to the deadly bug, the Guardian reported. In response, authorities ordered that all public places, schools and public transportation be closed temporarily. Those restrictions were increased further Monday as China Daily called the city “the latest pandemic hotspot in the country,” adding that hundreds of people are under medical quarantine and normal life may not resume for weeks. Another nearby city, Jiaohe, introduced protective measures Tuesday due to “severe circumstances” in the areas surrounding it, according to the Guardian. China’s northeast region, which borders Russia and North Korea, is the latest area of concern in the country, as cases appear to have been brought in from elsewhere before spreading locally. The virus is manifesting differently among patients in the northeast, Qiu Haibo, a top critical care doctor, told state television Tuesday, according to Bloomberg. Patients there are showing mostly lung damage, while Wuhan patients experienced multi-organ damage across the heart, kidneys and stomach, he said. Additionally, they take a longer time to develop symptoms upon infection, and appear to carry the virus for a lengthier period before testing negative, according to Haibo.

Take me out to the ballgame — and buy me some peanuts and Cracker Jack from the safety of our car. A growing number of Minor League Baseball organizations across the country are now making their signature concessions available for curbside pickup amid the coronavirus pandemic, offering everything from hot dogs and wings to more quirky, regional favorites such as “trash cans” and loose-meat sandwiches. “In these trying times, such endeavors allow teams to perform a community service, stay in the public eye, establish a revenue stream and unload a surplus of perishable goods,” wrote MiLB.com in a recent roundup of the Minor League ballparks now selling their treats to-go. The idea began gaining traction as early as April, according to MiLB.com, kicking off after the Blue Wahoos of Pensacola, Fla., began offerings its “Legalize Marinara” offerings (meatball subs, spaghetti, polenta) on 4/20. In the following weeks, several other teams began advertising their own signature dishes for curbside pickup, including: the Rochester Redwings of New York, serving their version of a “garbage plate,” among other things; the Omaha Storm Chasers, who threw in mystery merchandise with every order; and the Charleston RiverDogs of South Carolina, which not only offered traditional stadium fare and a brisket ramen bowl but also sold mystery 6-packs of beer for $12.99. 100 RTs and our social team will buy someone a Plate of their choice. pic.twitter.com/fINEsJaCuG — Rochester Red Wings (@RocRedWings) April 30, 2020  Hungry for baseball? ⚾️ Satisfy your appetite with your RiverDogs ballpark favorites from "To-Go from The Joe" with @DoorDash! 🚚: https://t.co/VQROi3UZjM pic.twitter.com/NcdI1SfBOv — Charleston RiverDogs (@ChasRiverDogs) May 19, 2020  Those aren’t nearly the only ballparks to adopt the idea, either. More recently, MiLB confirmed that the Burlington Bees out of Iowa have started offering their stadium snacks, including a loose-meat sandwich. Another Iowa team, the Clinton LumberKings, is also selling its fare, including its signature “Garbage Pail,” which MiLB.com described as an “iconic bouillabaisse of breaded items” containing fries, mini corn dogs, onion rings, chicken strips, fried pickles and several other deep-fried items, all mixed together in one dish. Attention all First Responders:  LumberKings Offer Discount for National EMS Week https://t.co/QO5oEAbFEf via @MiLB — Clinton LumberKings (@LumberKings) May 18, 2020  We’re pretty sure most of these places are also selling hot dogs and peanuts, too, just in case your palate isn’t refined enough for the “garbage” plates described above. More comprehensive lists of the Minor League organizations offering curbside concession carryout is available at MiLB.com.

Talk about meta. “Smash,” the TV series about backstage drama that attracted a rabid but small fanbase when it aired for two seasons on NBC, has inspired an upcoming show that is eyeing a Broadway run. “Smash, A New Musical” is setting its sights on the Great White Way and its mega-watt producing team includes Steven Spielberg, WarnerMedia Entertainment chairman Robert Greenblatt, and “Chicago” producer Neil Meron. The Tony- and Grammy-winning duo of Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman, who penned over two dozen songs for the television show, will provide the score, which will feature many of the songs that popped up on the TV series. Like the series, the stage show will follow the efforts to mount “Bombshell,” the Broadway musical-within-a-musical about the life of Marilyn Monroe. However, its backers said the plot will also deviate from that of the series. Some characters such as writers Julia and Tom (played by Debra Messing and Christian Borle on the small screen), as well as stars Ivy and Karen (portrayed on TV by Megan Hilty and Katharine McPhee), will still be central to the storyline. Other details are being kept under wraps, presumably until opening night. The musical’s book will be co-written by Tony winner Bob Martin (“The Prom”) and Tony-nominated Rick Elice (“Peter and the Starcatcher”). “Smash’s” Emmy-winning choreographer Joshua Bergasse will reprise his role for the stage musical. “I am personally thrilled to be a part of this musical and its road to Broadway,” said Spielberg, whose original idea led to the NBC series. “’Smash’ is near and dear to my heart, and it seems fitting that a new musical inspired by what we did on the show would eventually come to the stage. I’m beyond thrilled to be working with this incredible creative team and my producing partners, who began the ‘Smash’ journey with me over ten years ago.” Among the songs that Shaiman and Wittman wrote for “Smash” that will appear in the show is “Let Me Be Your Star.” “Smash” was well-received by critics when it debuted in 2012, but it was also beset by its own backstage dramas, including clashes between the creative team and the show’s creator Theresa Rebeck that led to her exit. The ratings also declined as the series went on, though that was in part due to a time slot shift between the first and second seasons. The series’ circle of supporters has expanded since it began appearing on streaming platforms, transforming it into a cult favorite. This won’t be the first time “Smash” has been reconfigured for the stage. The cast performed an elaborate benefit concert of the songs from Bombshell at the Minskoff Theatre in June 2015 which sold out in fifteen minutes. It was filmed but never shown until this week, when it was streamed in its entirety on People.com as a coronavirus benefit for The Actors Fund. Of course, several hurdles remain until “Smash” can come full circle. Namely, Broadway remains closed due to the coronavirus and it’s unclear when it will be safe for theaters to reopen.

The defiant New Jersey gym that reopened this week in violation of Gov. Phil Murphy’s lockdown was shuttered Thursday by the state. One of the owners of Atilis Gym in Bellmawr posted about the shutdown on Instagram. “So we arrived at the gym this morning to Governor Murphy’s dirty tricks, playing with his power in the health department,” the owner says in a video. “For right now, the gym will be closed. We have a full cleaning crew inside, once again going above and beyond.” The video shows a bright orange “Notice of Embargo” notice by the Camden County Division of Environmental Health, as well as a four-page notice from the state, taped to the gym’s front door. The video also says the owners plan to file a lawsuit against Murphy “first thing this morning.” On Monday, Atilis Gym opened its doors in defiance of Murphy’s stay-at-home executive order. Cops issued a summons to owners Ian Smith and Frank Trumbetti — and then slapped them with a second summons for reopening the next day. The gym opened for business again on Wednesday.

House Speaker Nancy Pelosi defended two costly provisions included in House Democrats’ recently passed $3 trillion coronavirus relief package, arguing that the $3.6 billion for voting-by-mail and a $25 billion bailout for the Postal Service would provide safety and convenience to Americans. Speaking during a Wednesday evening appearance on MSNBC, Pelosi (D-Calif.) stressed that the House package, which is expected to be killed in the Senate, was aimed at making voting and shopping easier and less risky. “We’re now calling it ‘Voting at Home’ because that’s really what it’s all about — enabling people to vote at home,” the California Democrat told the network. Pelosi said the proposal would allow for the implementation of same-day voter registration and the distribution of absentee ballots for all voters. She added that those with disabilities or health concerns would also benefit from the proposal. Referencing Wisconsin being left unable to postpone its recent primary elections, Pelosi called in-person voting in the era of coronavirus “dangerous.” “Standing in those lines, for that amount of time, going to places that are enclosed, is dangerous to your health,” she said before asserting that voting by mail was “more democratic.” “It gives people more options, it removes obstacles and barriers to voting, which is what we want to do,” she continued. While Democrats have been backing the mail-in-voting push, President Trump and his GOP allies have railed against the practice. “Republicans should fight very hard when it comes to statewide mail-in voting. Democrats are clamoring for it. Tremendous potential for voter fraud, and for whatever reason, doesn’t work out well for Republicans,” the commander-in-chief tweeted in early April. That same week, Trump again slammed the scheme when asked during the White House daily coronavirus briefing about being critical of the process when he personally voted by mail. “Mail-in voting is horrible, it’s corrupt,” he said of submitting ballots by mail. “Because I have to be in the White House, I won’t be able to go to Florida to vote,” but there is a difference between “somebody out of state and does a ballot and everything sealed, certified and everything else.” Trump went on to defend his position further, saying “dumping” existed in mail-in voting. “I think if you vote, you should go, and even the concept of early voting is not the greatest … You look at what they do where they grab thousands of mail-in ballots and they dump it. I’ll tell you what. I don’t have to tell you. You can look at the statistics. There is a lot of dishonesty going on with mail-in voting, mail-in ballots.”

House lawmakers in Illinois voted this week by a wide margin to remove a Republican colleague who flatly refused to wear a face mask during a legislative session. State Rep. Darren Bailey was kicked out of Wednesday’s legislative session after refusing to comply with new rules adopted earlier in the day requiring members, staffers and visitors at the Bank of Springfield Center to wear face coverings if they’re medically able, the Chicago Tribune reports. “I will not,” Bailey, a farmer who represents rural Xenia in southern Illinois, said when asked to comply. That led Democratic Rep. Emanuel “Chris” Welch to make a motion for Bailey’s removal, which passed by an 81-27 margin, the newspaper reports. Bailey, who has sued Democratic Gov. J.B. Pritzker over his stay-at-home order, later defended his actions as taking a stand against big government. “This whole thing that it’s concern for other people?” Bailey told the Washington Post. “I don’t buy that at all.” The new rule is “not about health,” Bailey insisted, but is rather “just another Democrat bullying tactic,” Bailey told the newspaper. Bailey said he would wear a mask if he was worried about his health, but that’s not the case. The GOP lawmaker isn’t sure if he plans to wear a face covering during legislative sessions moving forward, he said. “I don’t know,” Bailey said Wednesday. “That’s something where I’ll have to decide whether I go back tomorrow and wear a mask or not.” Pritzker, meanwhile, did not hold back when asked about Bailey’s removal, accusing him of unnecessarily putting lives at risk, the Tribune reports. “The representative has shown a callous disregard for life, callous disregard for people’s health,” Pritzker said during his daily briefing. “You just [heard] a doctor tell you why people wear masks in the first place. It’s to protect others. So clearly, the representative has no interest in protecting others.” In April, a judge granted Bailey a temporary restraining order that makes him exempt from Pritzker’s stay-at-home order. A hearing in the case is scheduled for Friday, the Washington Post reports.

Another 2.4 million Americans applied for unemployment benefits last week as the number of workers sidelined by the coronavirus crisis topped 38 million, new federal data show. That indicates almost a quarter of the US workforce has tried to join the nation’s unemployment rolls in the past nine weeks as the pandemic kneecapped the global economy. It also means more workers have submitted initial jobless claims in the last nine weeks than in the 18 months of the Great Recession, when about 37 million claims were filed. “The seismic impact should not be dismissed because earlier shock waves were larger,” said Mark Hamrick, senior economic analyst for Bankrate. “Many of these filers seeking unemployment benefits are not solitary in their suffering.” While the US Department of Labor’s seasonally adjusted weekly totals have fallen steadily since late March, they indicate layoffs have continued during the pandemic while states slogged through backlogs of applications. The latest numbers were in line with economists’ expectations for 2.4 million claims. The feds also revised the prior week’s total down to 2.6 million from about 3 million after Connecticut misreported its figures. But the number of continued claims for unemployment benefits surged to more than 25 million in the week ending May 9, the feds said, suggesting many workers have not returned to their jobs since being laid off or furloughed amid lockdowns aimed at curbing the coronavirus. And some 6.1 million people were collecting “Pandemic Unemployment Assistance” for gig workers and others not traditionally eligible for benefits in the week ending May 2, a roughly 80 percent jump from the prior week. The silver lining to those grim numbers is that states appear to be catching up with the flood of claims that roiled some offices in recent weeks, according to unemployment insurance expert Andrew Stettner. “It is good evidence that more people are moving through the process and getting on benefits,” Stettner, a senior fellow at the Century Foundation think tank, told The Post. But, he added, “There’s still a lot of people waiting out there, way too many.” There are thousands of outstanding claims in New York, where initial jobless filings jumped to an unadjusted 226,521 last week from 199,419 the prior week, according to federal data. As of Wednesday, the state’s Department of Labor had yet to process 7,580 claims that were at least four weeks old, according to officials. The agency said it is trying to reach the people who filed those claims, which had missing or incorrect information, were duplicates or had been abandoned. Another 20,801 applications filed before April 22 had been processed but not paid because the workers had not submitted required certifications, officials said. The latest jobless claims were filed in the same week as the feds’ monthly employment survey that will be used to generate the closely watched jobs report for May. April’s survey showed unemployment spiking to a record 14.7 percent as the economy shed more than 20 million jobs, the worst losses since the Great Depression.as the economy shed more than 20 million jobs, the worst losses since the Great Depression. With Post wires

The feds have ordered 300 million doses of a potential coronavirus vaccine from British drugmaker AstraZeneca, officials said Thursday. The company will get up to $1.2 billion from the US Department of Health and Human Services to speed the development and production of the vaccine with the goal of delivering the first doses as early as October, according to officials. The deal between AstraZeneca and HHS’s Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority includes clinical studies that will start this summer with about 30,000 US volunteers, officials said. But AstraZeneca acknowledged that the vaccine may not work as it’s still being studied. The Food and Drug Administration must sign off on it before it’s made available, the feds said. The contract is part of the Trump administration’s “Operation Warp Speed” initiative to make a safe and effective COVID-19 vaccine widely available by January. A vaccine is considered key to ending the coronavirus crisis that has killed more than 90,000 Americans and devastated the US economy. “The Trump administration is making multiple major investments in developing and manufacturing promising vaccines long before they’re approved so that a successful vaccine will reach the American people without a day wasted,” HHS Secretary Alex Azar said in a statement. AstraZeneca is licensing its vaccine candidate known as AZD1222 from the University of Oxford, where it was developed. The company said it will soon have data from a clinical trial involving more than 1,000 healthy volunteers in England, which could lead to late-stage trials if the results are positive. AstraZeneca said it has the capacity to produce 1 billion doses of the vaccine and has already made deals to supply at least 400 million doses. The company said it expects to start supplying the UK in September. “We will do everything in our power to make this vaccine quickly and widely available,” AstraZeneca CEO Pascal Soriot said in a statement. AstraZeneca’s New York-listed shares were up 2.8 percent in premarket trading at $55.35 as of 7:48 a.m. Other companies are also racing to produce a vaccine for the deadly virus. Johnson & Johnson has said it expects to start testing its leading candidate in humans in September, and biotech firm Moderna trumpeted promising results from an early trial this week.

An Indian doctor who spoke out about PPE shortages has been admitted to a mental facility following a caught-on-camera tussle with police. Dr. Sudhakar Rao, an anesthetist at a government hospital, was seen in a wild confrontation with cops on Saturday in Visakhapatnam, resulting in the doc with his hands tied behind his back and being whacked with a baton, BBC News reported. “They snatched my phone and wallet. They hit me,” Rao told a group of journalists at the scene. Video of the altercation went viral on WhatsApp and other social media, the BBC reported. Police said they responded to a drunk, erratic man on the highway, saying Rao tried to remove a road barricade and tossed a liquor bottle into the road. They claimed passersby tied the doctor up before they got there. “He behaved rudely with the police. He snatched the mobile phone from a constable and threw it away,” Visakhapatnam Police Commissioner RK Meena said. “He is apparently suffering from psychological problems.” The doctor was taken to the police station but later underwent a basic examination at the hospital. Doctors there said he should be transferred to a mental institution. Rao was suspended from working last month after blowing the whistle about the lack of protective gowns and masks at his government-run hospital. “We are told to use the same mask for 15 days before asking for a fresh mask,” he said on local TV at the time. “How can we treat patients risking our lives?” The government ordered an inquiry, with officials saying Rao damaged morale among his colleagues by going to the media and not filing a formal complaint. He and his family claimed he was subjected to harassment after going public with his concerns. “He is a reputed doctor,” his mom, Kaveri Rao, told BBC News. “But he has been facing abuse since the day he raised those concerns. I feel bad when people call me and ask about him. He has been very stressed for weeks.” Rao is now accused of obstructing police and causing damage. Dr. Radha Rani, the hospital superintendent where Rao was examined, told BBC that Rao seemed OK but would undergo a two-week observation to “ascertain his condition completely.”

The number of confirmed coronavirus cases around the world reached 5 million Thursday — reaching the grim milestone with the global death toll standing at 328,172, according to data from Johns Hopkins University. Europe has been the hardest hit with 1,954,519 cases and 169,880 deaths, while the US has 1,551,853 cases and 93,439 deaths. The statistics represent only a fraction of the exact total of cases because many countries test only the most serious infections. The latest numbers come as the spread of the deadly illness across the world shows no signs of slowing down. Even as outbreaks in China — where the novel coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan — and other countries appear to have abated, the pandemic has picked up speed across other parts of the world. On Wednesday, the World Health Organization said the number of newly reported cases hit a daily record this week with more than 100,000 new ones over the last 24 hours, according to CNBC. Almost two-thirds of the cases were reported in just four countries, WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said during a news conference in Geneva. “We still have a long way to go in this pandemic,” he said. The majority of new cases are coming from the Americas, followed by Europe, according to the WHO’s daily report. The US reported 45,251 new cases Tuesday, while Russia had the second-most reported cases with 9,263, according to the agency. WHO officials have warned against easing coronavirus restrictions and reopening economies too fast, saying it could lead to a “vicious cycle” of economic and health disasters as cases resurge and strict lockdowns become necessary again. In the US, several states are beginning to reopen businesses even as models suggest it will lead to an increase in the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths. Meanwhile, Latin America has overtaken the US and Europe in the past week to report the largest portion of new daily cases, according to Reuters. Latin America accounted for about a third of the 91,000 cases reported this week, while the US and Europe each accounted for just over 20 percent.

CANBERRA, Australia — A woman has tearfully embraced her dying sister in Australia after weeks of bureaucracy wrangling over pandemic travel restrictions. Australia had rejected Christine Archer’s request for permission to fly from New Zealand four times before her story attracted media attention. Her only sister Gail Baker was diagnosed with incurable ovarian cancer in late March after both countries stopped international travel. Baker has perhaps weeks to live. Archer was eventually allowed to fly to Sydney and spent only a week in hotel quarantine before testing negative for the coronavirus. International travelers are usually quarantined for two weeks. Family friends drove the retired nurse 490 kilometers (300 miles) from Sydney to the New South Wales state coastal town of Bowraville. Archer finally hugged her younger sibling in the front yard of Baker’s home on Wednesday. It was their first reunion in six years. “Words can’t explain how I feel, to be honest.” Archer told Australian Broadcasting Corp. in an interview aired on Thursday. “I’m just so happy that I finally got to be here and be with her. The last two weeks have been the hardest or the longest two weeks of my life,” Archer said. Archer was surprised that her persistence paid off. But she is adamant that Australia made the right decision in allowing her to remain with her sister in her final days. “I wondered whether the Australian government had any compassion at all with their rejections,” Archer said. “I honestly don’t know what they were thinking. I know it’s an awful time at the moment with the virus … but, I mean, there are some things you’ve got to be a bit lenient on and I felt this was one of them,” she said. “I didn’t think I was ever going to see Gail again. That would’ve been the worst thing in the world if that had happened,” she added. Australia’s Department of Home Affairs relented on Archer’s travel application after it allowed the New Zealand Warriors rugby league team to relocate from Auckland in preparation for the Australian football competition restarting next week. The department did not immediately respond on Thursday to a request for an explanation for the change of heart on the sisters’ reunion. New Zealand has largely succeeded in its goal of eliminating the virus. It has reported no new infections over the past four days and most of the people who contracted the virus have recovered. About 1,500 people have been reported as having the virus including 21 who died. Australia has had similar success in slowing the virus spread although New South Wales remains the worst-affected state. Australia expects New Zealand will become the first international destination with which regular passenger travel will resume because of the low risk of infection. Australia has recorded 7,079 virus cases and 100 deaths. Australia’s population is five times larger than New Zealand’s.

Zoë Kravitz, who plays the Catwoman in the upcoming “Batman” movie, is concerned about what will happen once filming is allowed to resume after the coronavirus pandemic, a report said. “I was probably touched more than any job [on The Batman], just because of the clothes and the combat and all of that,” says Kravitz, 31, told People.com. “You have people just touching your face, touching your body all day long,” she continues. “I need help getting into the catsuit. I can’t do it on my own.” Although concerned for her safety and health, as well as the rest of the cast and crew, she anxiously awaits the day that the film is allowed to go back into production. In a recent interview with Variety, she said that she’s “hoping to wake up every day to an email or a phone call saying, ‘We’re ready to go.'” The project, which started filming in January, was put on hold in March when the coronavirus pandemic hit the United States. Originally slated for a summer release of July 25, 2021, the film, which stars Robert Pattinson as the titular character, as well as Andy Serkis, Colin Ferrall and Peters Sarsgaard, has been pushed back to October.

The National Safety Council has studied driving data since the novel coronavirus outbreak hit the U.S. in March and found that the streets have become deadlier, despite a decrease in the number of drivers out on the road. The data showed that in March, when Americans began to drive less due to the spread of the pandemic and subsequent stay-at-home orders, the fatality rate per mile rose by 14 percent compared to the year before, The Washington Post reported. The overall death count did decrease by 8 percent, according to the report from the council. It credited the decline to the shelter-in-place orders issued by state governors. However, data that was reportedly taken from all 50 states and the District of Columbia showed a spike in speeding and dangerous driving. “The risk on our roads has actually increased,” the council’s manager of statistics Ken Kolosh said. He told The Washington Post: “Although an 8 percent decrease in deaths from one March to the next March is great news, that decrease should have been even greater if the risk on our roads had stayed the same. We should have seen closer to an 18 percent decrease in deaths.” The death rate per 100 million vehicle miles driven also went up to 1.22 in March, up from 1.07 in March 2019, according to the report. “We really have to keep a very close eye on the trends going forward,” Kolosh added. “Unfortunately, with the anecdotal reports of risky driving, we fear that the fatality rate per hundred million miles traveled is going to continue to be elevated.” As of Wednesday evening, there were more than 1.5 million confirmed cases of COVID-19 in the U.S. and over 93,000 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University.

Believe it! Music icon Cher turned 74 Wednesday, and was surprised by family and friends with an appropriately spaced outdoor “social distancing” party. The group, which consisted of just 10 people, who all wore masks and gloves and stood outside, surprised the Grammy Award-winner with a cake. Cher wrote, “Hope we did it right. It’s not easy, a million things you’re used to doing that you can’t do.” Cher took to Twitter to express her thanks to her crew in an emoji-ladden tweet. HAD GREAT SURPRISE🎉🎁🎈🎂PARTY‼️WE WERE OUTSIDE,MASKS GLOVES,& SOCIAL DISTANCING.Hardest Part,Social Distancing,NOT EASY‼️BEING OUTSIDE HELPED.10 PPL.THERE WAS CAKE👻🎂🥰👻. HOPE WE DID IT RIGHT🤞🏻.ITS NOT EASY🙄.A MILLION THINGS YOU’RE USED TO DOING THAT YOU CANT DO😣 — Cher (@cher) May 21, 2020  Fans went crazy offering her their well-wishes. “I hope you had a beautiful day w your friends! we had cupcakes in my house to celebrate you!” wrote one user. “I hope you all had fun!! i celebrated your birthday at home. I don’t know how to bake so I just bought chocolate cake” wrote another. Cher wrote earlier thanking fans for their continued love.  “I can’t believe I’m ‘so’ old and ‘still crazy after all these years.'” “I can’t find words to thank you for all you’ve [done] for me.”

A top U.S. scientist said on Wednesday that governments should not count on a successful vaccine against COVID-19 being developed anytime soon when deciding whether to ease restrictions imposed to curb the pandemic. William Haseltine, a groundbreaking researcher of cancer, HIV/AIDS and human genome projects, said the better approach now is to manage the disease through careful tracing of infections and strict isolation measures whenever it starts spreading. While a COVID-19 vaccine could be developed, he said, “I wouldn’t count on it.” Vaccines developed previously for other types of coronavirus had failed to protect mucous membranes in the nose where the virus typically enters the body, he said. Even without an effective treatment or vaccine, the virus can be controlled by identifying infections, finding people who have been exposed and isolating them, he said. He urged people to wear masks, wash hands, clean surfaces and keep a distance. He said China and some other Asian countries used that strategy successfully, while the United States and other countries did not do enough to “forcibly isolate” all who were exposed to the virus. China, South Korea and Taiwan have done the best at curbing infections, he said, while the United States, Russia and Brazil have done the worst. Tests on animals of experimental COVID-19 vaccines had been able to reduce the viral load in organs like lungs although the infections remained, he said. For treatment, patients have been getting antibody-rich plasma donated by people who recovered from COVID-19, and drugmakers are at work producing refined and concentrated versions of that serum. Known as hyperimmune globulin, those products are “where the first real treatments are going to be,” he said, predicting success also with research into monoclonal antibodies that home in on and neutralize the ability of the virus to enter human cells.

A North Carolina nurse said she’s treating patients who have attended “coronavirus parties” in an attempt to catch the deadly bug and hopefully develop immunity. “Over the last few days, we have heard from a lot of patients and the community that they’re unafraid of getting the virus,” Yolanda Enrich, a nurse practitioner at Novant Health Forsyth Medical Center, told an NBC affiliate. “People are actually out and about trying to get the virus, so attending gatherings, parties trying to maximize their chances of exposure.” Ernich said younger patients have told health care workers they’re hoping to develop antibodies so they no longer have to take precautions while they’re out in public. But health experts have not yet determined whether coronavirus antibodies actually deliver immunity. “We’re really concerned about this trend,” Enrich said. “They can spread the virus around the community and hurt our vulnerable populations that will have serious health implications.” Gov. Roy Cooper and state health officials are sounding the alarm on the idiotic concept. “You can easily kill someone you love,” Cooper said at a news conference this week, adding that the sickening soirees are “completely irresponsible and absolutely unacceptable.” Dr. Mandy Cohen, secretary of North Carolina’s Department of Health and Human Services, said more cases translate to more risk for vulnerable residents. “There is no circumstance under which we want people to actively pursue getting COVID-19,” Cohen said. “The reason we’re working so hard collectively to keep virus spread low is the fact that when there is more virus in our community, it not only impacts those who have it, but particularly those who are at high risk of getting severe reactions to disease.” Soumya Swaminathan, the Wold Health Organization’s top scientist, earlier this month threw cold water on the idea of developing herd immunity against the virus. Around the world, studies have shown rates of natural immunity between 10 and 15 percent — far from the 90 to 95 percent of the population that would need to become immune to achieve herd immunity, Swaminathan said. Embracing a herd immunity approach would mean accepting a “high rate of death,” she said.

In his daily coronavirus briefing on Wednesday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo was as haughty and boastful as ever. The difference this time was that the Albany press pack didn’t give him a free pass. It’s incredible how highly he rates himself when he has presided over the most COVID deaths of any state in the nation by far — 22,976 as of Wednesday, some seven times more than California, 11 times more than Florida. New York still hasn’t come to grips with why that is. The disparity is not a random act of God, as the governor would have us believe. He bears at least some culpability. He was slower to respond to the threat of the virus. And then he compounded that error with the unforgivably callous act of forcing nursing homes to admit COVID-positive patients — a death sentence for other residents as the infection spread like wildfire. And yet, not a trace of worry do we see on Cuomo’s tanned face. There is no remorse, just buck-passing. Wednesday, for instance, he blamed President Trump for the nursing-home deaths. The chutzpah is astonishing. But at least he faced tough questions about a potential federal probe into his March 25 directive to nursing homes. “I have refrained from politics,” he said, laughably. “But anyone who wants to ask ‘why did the state do that with COVID patients and nursing homes,’ it’s because the state followed President Trump’s CDC guidance. “So they should ask President Trump.” Cuomo even tried to claim that the more-than-5,500 deaths connected to nursing homes in New York was a better toll, per capita, than most other states. But the state Department of Health seems to have fudged the death toll, admitting it does not count nursing-home residents who ended up dying in hospital of the coronavirus, so the real numbers are much higher. Asked about this convenient accounting, Cuomo returned to Trump: “The state followed President Trump’s CDC guidance . . . No numbers were changed.” A reporter pointed out that Cuomo has shown a “willingness to thwart President Trump at other times.” Why not on his March 25 nursing-home directive? Good question, which ­Cuomo couldn’t answer. Instead, he switched to blaming the nursing homes. “In retrospect, do you think that was a bad decision? Do you think it contributed to the death toll?” “No,” said Cuomo. “Because you have to be saying the nursing homes were wrong in accepting COVID-positive patients.” It is Kafkaesque. First, he orders nursing homes to obey a directive with his name emblazoned at the top of the page: “All NHs must comply with the expedited receipt of residents returning from hospitals . . . No resident shall be denied readmis­sion or admission to the NH solely on a confirmed or suspected diagnosis of COVID-19.” The nursing homes were “prohibited” in that March 25 directive even from COVID-testing discharged patients. But now that the policy has blown up in his face, he blames those same nursing homes for doing what he ordered them to do. “We always had alternative beds . . . Any nursing home could just say, ‘I can’t handle a COVID person.’ ” Yet in April he told a reporter at a press conference that the nursing homes “don’t have the right to object.” His reversal of the directive on Mother’s Day was a tacit acknowledgement of wrong­doing, as was the legal indemnity for nursing homes that he reportedly slipped into the state budget in late March. The terrible thing about ­Cuomo is that he has the appearance of being everything he’s not. He is a facsimile of a take-charge alpha male who stands up and takes responsibility. In reality, he behaves like a dithering, vain, deceitful bully. He appears to be a moral Catholic family man who talks about his days as an altar boy and expresses concern for the sanctity of life. “To me, I say the cost of a human life, a human life is priceless. Period,” he philosophized one day while trying to justify his decision to keep everyone in lockdown. But it’s not true. He doesn’t think every human life is precious at all. Last year he pushed for ­euthanasia legislation and gloated about signing into law the state’s late-term abortion laws. He even had One World Trade Center lit in hot pink in an obscene celebration of death. And didn’t he just tell us breezily last week, as the heat from his nursing-home fiasco dialed up: “Older people, vulnerable people are going to die from this virus. That is going to happen despite whatever you do.” He made sure of it. We knew from the start of the pandemic that the frail elderly were most at risk. Florida, with its big retired population, moved early to protect nursing homes. A mistake is one thing, but Cuomo’s lack of remorse or self-doubt is chilling. “I feel very good about how exhaustive I have been in communicating,” he boasted on Wednesday. It is true he has been communicating “exhaustively.” His “love gov” routine — joking around with his brother on CNN and strutting his stuff as New York’s most eligible bachelor — has done wonders for his approval ratings. But it doesn’t save the people who died distressing deaths, unnecessarily and alone, in nursing homes that he knew could barely cope at the best of times. No matter how sick you are of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, it’s hard to imagine that a Republican could dislodge her from her deep blue stronghold in The Bronx and Queens. But if anyone can do it, it’s John Cummings. Born and bred in the Bronx, he’s an-ex cop injured in the line of duty who retired to become a civics teacher at his old Catholic school, Saint Raymond in The Bronx. Judging by the hefty $2 million he has already raised and the enthusiastic reaction from district residents, it’s not as much of a long shot as you’d think. “AOC is a far left socialist, and a lot of the people that live in that district are working people, homeowners, union people, people who work in the service industry, in health and hospitals, in construction, firefighters, police . . . They’re not looking for high taxes. They’re not looking for socialized medicine. They like their health insurance.” AOC won the seat from incumbent Democrat Joe Crowley in a primary upset in 2018. Crowley was a “moderate, a Reagan Democrat,” who had the seat for more than two decades, but ended up taking it for granted, says Cummings, 59, whose ideology is closer to Crowley’s than is AOC’s. “She has done a great job of creating a national persona. But when it comes to the district, she doesn’t even have her own office in the Bronx.” With any luck, the 14th Congressional District has a bad case of buyer’s remorse. You could tell Nancy Pelosi thought she was clever when she delivered her “morbidly obese” insult against the president. She couldn’t keep the Queen Bee smirk off her face. Buoyed by the adulation of Trump haters, she followed up Wednesday, comparing him to a child with “doggy doo on his shoes.” It’s pathetic. But it also is a political “own goal,” in a way a geriatric Mean Girl can’t fathom. Trump couldn’t care less, and the insults only confirm the elitism and snobbery that lurk beneath the surface of the Democratic Party. The party views half of America as fat, deplorable, smelly Walmart people. It’s no way to win an election.

A woman was injured by a bison at Yellowstone on Wednesday — just two days after the national park reopened to tourists amid the coronavirus pandemic. The bison knocked the visitor to the ground in the Upper Geyser Basin near Old Faithful, after she approached the large mammal too closely, park officials said in a statement. She was checked out by first responders at the scene and refused transport to a medical facility. The incident is under investigation. It was the first bison attack at the park this year. The nearly 3,500-square-mile wilderness recreation area reopened the east and south entrances on Monday, after being closed for seven weeks because of the outbreak. Visitors are required to stay 25 yards away from bison and other large animals, including elk, deer and coyotes, and at least 100 yards away from bears and wolves.

Is your coronavirus quarantine driving you kooky? Try sheltering in place “At Home With Amy Sedaris.” The wild satire of a homemaking show — starring comedian and consummate crafter Amy Sedaris as a deluded domestic diva with a dark side — kicks off its third season at 10 p.m. Wednesday on TruTV. And Sedaris, 59, says shooting the show on a faux home set last year actually felt like it was shot on lockdown. “Our show already feels like it’s in quarantine because we never leave the freakin’ set,” she tells The Post. “We shot it inside of an ‘I Dream of Jeannie’ bottle and now we’re all living inside of an ‘I Dream of Jeannie’ bottle. I just hope people don’t get that claustrophobic feeling, if they’re stuck at home, watching other people stuck on a set.” But viewers will have plenty of daffy distractions, at least. The former “Strangers With Candy” star and her cast of characters — including sturdy, bouffant-rocking socialite Patty Hogg, played by Sedaris, and self-involved neighbor Chassie Tucker (series regular Cole Escola) — will stay occupied by turning her craft room into a nursery (rusty-nail crib mobile, anyone?), giving a whirl to summer outdoor entertaining (well, perhaps after lockdown) and more. Guest stars this season will include Laura Benanti, Michael Cera, Ann Dowd, Rachel Dratch, Bridget Everett, Ana Gasteyer, David Alan Grier, Jackie Hoffman, Jane Krakowski, Debi Mazar, Michael McKean, Paul Rudd, Michael Shannon, Jason Sudeikis, Justin Theroux and more. Longtime Greenwich Village resident Sedaris and her Cobble Hill sidekick Escola, 33, recently spoke with The Post about living in quarantine, the problem with taking baths and their cooking tips. Sedaris: My attention span is shorter. I have less patience. I don’t really have what it takes to watch a movie and I don’t really want to listen to music; I don’t really know what I want, you know? You’re not as busy running around, going in and out, but I have been able to read books, which has been nice. I miss not seeing my godkids and I like hanging out with friends, so I miss that. Escola: The thing I’ve been doing more is shopping online because I just love looking forward to the mail and a package coming and not remembering what I ordered. Sedaris: Now you’re gonna start getting some s–t in the mail from me. Sedaris: I kind of have that feeling now no matter what. I like being at home. I enjoy it; I’m a home person. But I’m getting a little antsy; I’m over it. Escola: Yeah, I’m getting stir-crazy and I’m looking at hotels and stuff, pretending to plan a trip. Sedaris: Do you take baths, Cole? Escola: No, I get in a bath and am like, ‘Well, I’m here.’ I sort of feel the same way about baths as I do the ocean. But when I go to the beach, I’m like, ‘Oh, pretty. Now what?’ I don’t really wanna stay. I get in a bath and I’m like, ‘OK, well, I’m done.’ Sedaris: I’m with him. I love the idea of a bath over a shower, but I’m not in there long. I’m in and out — it’s a very big waste of water. Sedaris: I do, yes. I’m taking more time cutting and dicing. I’m doing things slower in the kitchen. Like, really romanticizing the cooking element instead of, like, throwing it in one pot, like an alcoholic would, and walk away for an hour. I’m taking more time with things. But I have one new recipe; that’s it. I usually just go to my stand-bys. Escola: Not really. My boyfriend will come over sometimes and he likes to cook, so he does that and then I’ll just eat the leftovers. It’s like an all-day activity when I try to make something because I don’t really know how to do it. I have to read the recipe, like, three times and pre-measure everything. Sedaris: Just save that bacon fat for everything! Sedaris: Well, if you’re tanning and have a fire escape, you can stick your legs out and put bacon fat on ’em. But be careful of horseflies. Escola: Date someone.

More than 600 doctors signed onto a letter sent to President Trump Tuesday pushing him to end the “national shutdown” aimed at slowing the spread of the coronavirus, calling the widespread state orders keeping businesses closed and kids home from school a “mass casualty incident” with “exponentially growing health consequences.” The letter outlines a variety of consequences that the doctors have observed resulting from the coronavirus shutdowns, including patients missing routine checkups that could detect things like heart problems or cancer, increases in substance and alcohol abuse, and increases in financial instability that could lead to “[p]overty and financial uncertainty,” which “is closely linked to poor health.” “We are alarmed at what appears to be the lack of consideration for the future health of our patients,” the doctors say in their letter. “The downstream health effects … are being massively under-estimated and under-reported. This is an order of magnitude error.” The letter continues: “The millions of casualties of a continued shutdown will be hiding in plain sight, but they will be called alcoholism, homelessness, suicide, heart attack, stroke, or kidney failure. In youths it will be called financial instability, unemployment, despair, drug addiction, unplanned pregnancies, poverty, and abuse. “Because the harm is diffuse, there are those who hold that it does not exist. We, the undersigned, know otherwise.” The letter comes as the battle over when and how to lift coronavirus restrictions continues to rage on cable television, in the courts, in protests and among government officials. Those for lifting the restrictions have warned about the economic consequences of keeping the shutdowns in effect. Those advocating a more cautious approach say that having more people out and about will necessarily end with more people becoming infected, causing what National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Director Dr. Anthony Fauci warned in a Senate hearing last week would be preventable “suffering and death.” But these doctors point to others that are suffering, not from the economy or the virus, but simply from not being able to leave home. The doctors’ letter lists a handful of patients by their initials and details their experiences.  “Patient E.S. is a mother with two children whose office job was reduced to part-time and whose husband was furloughed,” the letter reads. “The father is drinking more, the mother is depressed and not managing her diabetes well, and the children are barely doing any schoolwork.” “Patient A.F. has chronic but previously stable health conditions,” it continues. “Her elective hip replacement was delayed, which caused her to become nearly sedentary, resulting in a pulmonary embolism in April.” Dr. Mark McDonald, a psychiatrist, noted in a conversation with Fox News that a 31-year-old patient of his with a history of depression who was attending school to get a master’s degree in psychology died about two weeks ago of a fentanyl overdose. He blames the government-imposed shutdown. “There are thousands of us out there that don’t agree with the perspective of Dr. Fauci.” “She had to stay in her apartment, essentially in house arrest as most people here in [Los Angeles] were for weeks and weeks, she could not see her therapist — she could speak to the therapist over the phone but she couldn’t see her in person. She could not attend any of her group meetings, which were helping to maintain her abstinence from opiates … and she relapsed into depression. “She was just too withdrawn to ask for help,” McDonald continued before noting that due to regulations only six people could be at her funeral. “She was simply trying to escape from her pain… I do blame these actions by the government for her death.” Fox News asked McDonald, as well as three other doctors who were involved with the letter, if they thought the indirect effects of the shutdowns outweighed the likely direct consequences of lifting them — the preventable “suffering and death” Fauci referred to in last week’s Senate hearing. All four said that they believe they do. “The very initial argument … which sounded reasonable three months ago, is that in order to limit the overwhelmed patient flux into hospitals that would prevent adequate care, we needed to spread out the infections and thus the deaths in specific locales that could become hotspots, particularly New York City… It was a valid argument at the beginning based on the models that were given,” McDonald said. “What we’ve seen now over the last three months is that no city — none, zero — outside of New York has even been significantly stressed.” McDonald is referring to the misconception that business closures and stay-at-home orders aimed at “flattening the curve” are meant to reduce the total number of people who will fall ill because of the coronavirus. Rather, these curve-flattening measures are meant largely to reduce the number of people who are sick at any given time, thus avoiding a surge in cases that overwhelms the health care system and causes otherwise preventable deaths because not all patients are able to access lifesaving critical care. McDonald said that “hospitals are not only not overwhelmed, they’re actually being shut down.” He noted that at one hospital in the Los Angeles area where Dr. Simone Gold, the head organizer of the letter, works “the technicians in the ER have been cut by 50 percent.” Gold also said the effects of the shutdown are more serious for the vast majority of people than the potential virus spread if it is quickly lifted. “When you look at the data of the deaths and the critically ill, they are patients who were very sick to begin with,” she said, “There’s always exceptions. … But when you look at the pure numbers, it’s overwhelmingly patients who are in nursing homes and patients with serious underlying conditions. Meaning, that that’s where our resources should be spent. I think it’s terribly unethical… part of the reason why we let [the virus] fly through the nursing homes is because we’re diverting resources across society at large. We have limited resources we should put them where it’s killed people.” People of all ages, of course, have been shown to be able to catch the coronavirus. And there have been reported health complications in children that could potentially be linked to the disease. Fauci also warned about assuming that children are largely protected from the effects of the virus. “We don’t know everything about this virus … especially when it comes to children,” Fauci said in a Senate hearing last week. “We ought to be careful and not cavalier.” Newport Beach, Calif., concierge doctor Dr. Jeffrey Barke, who led the letter effort with Gold, also put an emphasis on the disparity in who the virus effects. “There are thousands of us out there that don’t agree with the perspective of Dr. Fauci and [White House coronavirus response coordinator] Dr. [Deborah] Birx that believe, yes, this virus is deadly, it’s dangerous, and it’s contagious, but only to a select group of Americans,” he said. “The path forward is to allow the young and healthy, the so-called herd, to be exposed and to develop a degree of antibodies that both now is protective to them and also prevents the virus from spreading to the most vulnerable.” Dr. Scott Barbour, an orthopedic surgeon in Atlanta, reflected the comments the other doctors made about how the medical system has been able to handle the coronavirus without being overwhelmed, but also noted that the reported mortality rates from the coronavirus might be off. “The vast majority of the people that contract this disease are asymptomatic or so minimally symptomatic that they’re not even aware that they’re sick. And so the denominator in our calculation of mortality rate is far greater than we think,” he said. “The risk of dying from COVID is relatively small when we consider these facts.” Gold, an emergency medicine specialist based in Los Angeles, led the letter on behalf of a new organization called A Doctor a Day. A Doctor a Day has not yet formally launched but sent the letter, with hundreds of signatures from physicians nationwide, to the White House on Tuesday. Gold and the group’s co-founder, Barke, said they began the organization to advocate for patients against the government-imposed coronavirus shutdowns by elevating the voices of doctors who felt that the negative externalities of the shutdowns outweigh the potential downside of letting people resume their normal business. To gather signatures for the letter, Gold and Barke partnered with the Association of American Physicians and Surgeons (AAPS), a doctors’ group that advocates for less government interference in the relationship between doctors and patients, and notably has taken part in legal challenges against the Affordable Care Act and advocated to allow doctors to use hydroxychloroquine on themselves and their patients. Gold, in a conversation with Fox News, lamented that the debate around hydroxychloroquine has become politicized, noting that it is taken as a preventative measure for other diseases and that the potentially harmful effects of the drug mainly affect people with heart issues. The drug is approved to treat malaria, lupus and rheumatoid arthritis, but the Food and Drug Administration has said that “[h]ydroxychloroquine and chloroquine have not been shown to be safe and effective for treating or preventing COVID-19.” The FDA has also warned health professionals that the drug should not be used to treat COVID-19 outside of hospital or research settings. Gold said she has direct knowledge of physicians who are taking hydroxychloroquine and said that although “we will see” about its efficacy as it is studied more, there have been some indicators that it could be effective at preventing or mitigating COVID-19 and she could therefore understand why doctors might take the drug themselves or prescribe it to their patients. There is also other research that appears to indicate hydroxychloroquine is not an effective treatment for the coronavirus, which has largely informed the consensus that the risks of the drug outweigh the potential benefits. Gold, who is a member of the national leadership council for the Save Our Country Coalition — an assortment of conservative groups that aim “to bring about a quick, safe and responsible reopening of US society” — also said she was concerned that her message about the harms of shutdowns is becoming politicized. She said that she agreed with the general principles of the coalition and decided to sign on when asked, but hasn’t done much work with it and is considering asking to have her name removed because people are largely associating her message on reopening the country with a conservative political point of view. “I haven’t done anything other than that,” she said. “It’s causing a big misunderstanding about what I’m doing so I actually think I’m just going to take my name off because it’s not really supposed to be political.” Gold also said she is not associated with the Trump reelection campaign in any way, referring to her inclusion in an Associated Press story about the Trump campaign’s efforts to recruit doctors to support the president’s message on lifting coronavirus restrictions. The AP story details a call organized CNP Action, also part of the Save Our Country Coalition, which involved a senior Trump campaign staffer and was aimed at recruiting “extremely pro-Trump” doctors to make television appearances calling for the reopening of the economy as quickly as possible. Fox News’ Andrew O’Reilly and the Associated Press contributed to this report. 

Kendall Jenner has settled a lawsuit concerning her involvement with the disastrous 2017 Fyre Festival. The supermodel has agreed to pay $90,000, for promoting the fiasco music festival in a since-deleted Instagram post, according to court documents filed on Wednesday. Jenner, 24, was sued in August 2019 in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in New York by Gregory Messer, who is recovering funds for creditors that lost money investing in the festival. Messer claimed Jenner was allegedly paid $275,000 to post about the event on Instagram, making her millions of followers believe it “would be filled with famous models on an exotic private island with ‘first-class culinary experiences and a luxury atmosphere.'” Although, the lawsuit states Jenner “did not indicate to the public that she was paid to promote the Festival.” The court documents claimed Jenner suggested in the post’s caption that her brother-in-law, Kanye West , would be performing at the festival. “Further, Jenner’s reference to her ‘G.O.O.D. Music Family’ as ‘headliners’ at the Festival, intentionally led certain members of the public and ticket purchasers to believe that Jenner’s brother in law, famous musician and GOOD Music record label founder Kanye West, may be or would be performing at the Festival,” the lawsuit stated. “In fact, Mr. West was never going to perform at the Festival. This conduct demonstrates a clear lack of good faith on Jenner’s part.” Infamous Fyre Festival promoter Billy McFarland, was sentenced to six years in the slammer for the botched event in the Bahamas. He recently requested an early release from prison , citing fears of the  COVID-19.

The World Health Organization reported 106,000 new coronavirus cases over the course of Tuesday — the most global cases to be reported in a single day. The grim tally is a reminder that as wealthy nations begin to climb out of their outbreaks, the pandemic continues to rage in poorer countries — an especially concerning progression to world health leaders. “We still have a long way to go in this pandemic,” WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus said at a news conference Wednesday. “We are very concerned about rising cases in low- and middle-income countries.” The massive daily spike comes as the number of worldwide coronavirus cases approaches 5 million and as the WHO continues to face mounting criticism from the Trump administration over its handling of the pandemic. President Trump penned a letter to the WHO this week threatening to withdraw from the organization and permanently withhold funding if it doesn’t commit to reforms in the next 30 days. Trump has claimed the WHO mishandled the virus because it has been beholden to China, where the outbreak began. Tedros acknowledged he received the letter and was “looking into it,” declining to elaborate further. He said the WHO has long been seeking new funding sources but that it pledges to conduct a review of its response to the pandemic. He did not say when that review would begin. “I said it time and time again that WHO calls for accountability more than anyone. It has to be done and when it’s done, it has to be a comprehensive one,” Tedros said of the review. But Tedros went on to defend the WHO’s operations, calling its $2.3 billion budget “very, very small” for a global organization and about the same as a medium-size hospital in a developed country. Dr. Mike Ryan, the WHO’s chief of emergencies, said he preferred to wait to reflect when the pandemic subsided. “I for one would prefer, right now, to get on with doing the job of an emergency response, of epidemic control, of developing and distributing vaccines, of improving our surveillance, of saving lives and distributing essential PPE to workers and finding medical oxygen for people in fragile settings, reducing the impact of this disease on refugees and migrants,” he said. Ryan indirectly took a jab at Trump during the news conference when he advised that, outside of clinical trials, people should refrain from taking the anti-malarial drug hydroxychloroquine. The president revealed earlier this week that he had been taking the drug for weeks to prevent coronavirus infection even as health experts questioned its efficacy. “At this stage, [neither] hydroxychloroquine nor chloroquine have been as yet found to be effective in the treatment of COVID-19 nor in the prophylaxis against coming down with the disease,” Ryan said. “In fact, the opposite, in that warnings have been issued by many authorities regarding the potential side effects of the drug.” With Post wires

More than half of Americans don’t feel safe getting around in anything other than their own vehicle during the coronavirus pandemic, according to a new poll. The national Harris Poll conducted over the weekend found 79 percent don’t consider subway safe,  73 percent are averse to planes, 70 percent think taxis are unsafe, and 65 percent were irked by Ubers. By comparison, 91 percent felt it was safe or somewhat safe to take a car. “Its fear of the unknown,” said Harris Poll CEO John Gerzema. The poll found 58 percent of respondents don’t feel safe using a bike share like Citi Bike — and Gerzema said the relatively low number could be a sign that more two-wheelers will be hitting the streets. “Look for the explosion of bikes,” he said. “We’re going to have to think about more bike lanes [and] potentially shutting down more streets to allow for people to feel safe.” Gerzema added that “most New Yorkers don’t have access to [cars], nor can afford ride sharing,” leaving them feeling uneasy about getting around. And about 80 percent of those surveyed said they fear leaving their homes entirely — even for essential errands like going to the pharmacy or grocery store. This comes as several states have begun to reopen, and even parts of the hard-hit Empire State are loosening restrictions. But while 43 percent said they would go back to work within 30 days, only 20 percent said they would take public transportation. Of those surveyed, lower-income Gen-Xers were the most likely to say they would get back on mass transit. “While everyone wants the economy to reopen and people to get back to work, we have a large gap between what most Americans believe is safe and what they can afford,” Gerzema said. About 52 percent of respondents said they feared losing their jobs — and 49 percent said they feared dying. “This puts people in the position of choosing their health or their livelihood –– an unfair choice, one not even comprehensible two months ago,” Gerzema said. Officials will have to make sure people not only feel comfortable going back to work, but also getting there, he noted. The results “suggest there’s a lot more work that needs to be done than just cleaning the subways at night,” he added. The survey was conducted online within the U.S. from May 15-17 among a nationally representative sample of 1,961 U.S. adults.

Citing the Bill of Rights and the “ideals of civil disobedience,” the owner of Atilis Gym in Bellmawr, NJ, defied Gov. Phil Murphy’s orders by reopening on Monday. Cops “formally” notified the gym owner he was in violation of the shutdown order and then wished him “a good day.” The crowd cheered. Two days later, Atilis is still open. Civil disobedience is alive and well, even in this pandemic. Last week, a Texas judge told salon owner Shelley Luther that if she disagreed with lockdown rules in Dallas, she should “hire a lawyer” and sue. Sorry, but most working people can’t afford that. They protest instead. And disobey when laws become oppressive. Lawyering has a place, though. In many states, business groups, churches and state representatives are suing to overturn what they claim are freedom-stifling rules imposed by autocratic governors. On Monday, an Oregon county judge struck down Gov. Kate Brown’s coronavirus restrictions, ruling that her emergency powers should last only a month; after that, she needs legislative approval. Brown is appealing. Last week, a Wisconsin court struck down Gov. Tony Evers’ “safer at home” regimen, when Evers tried to extend it until the end of May. The court said 28 days of emergency powers is enough. Expect a similar outcome in Michigan, where the Legislature is suing Gov. Gretchen Whitmer. The governor, according to a Detroit News editorial, has “declared herself the sole and absolute power in Michigan.” Although Whitmer is a Democrat, and the legislature mostly Republican, this isn’t mere partisan wrangling. Lawmakers offered to compromise on lockdown rules, and she refused. At stake is “whether Michigan remains a representative democracy even in times of crisis,” the Detroit News editors warn. Also at stake is the right to earn a living. Karl Manke, a barber who reopened his shop in Owosso, Mich., two weeks ago, has been wearing a mask, washing his hands between customers and sanitizing his tools with UV light. He’s taking safety seriously. Yet the authorities have slammed him with criminal misdemeanor charges. (The same, by the way, with the owner of Atilis gym in Jersey.) Both these business owners raise the some question: Why is it safe to walk down the aisles in Walmart but not in a smaller business? What makes big-box stores more “essential” than mom-and-pop shops? The longer lockdowns drag on, the dumber rules get. Mayor Bill de Blasio announced Monday that beaches will be closed and anyone who dares swim will “be taken right out of the water.” Huh? Scientific evidence shows that being outside is extremely low risk, almost no risk, and swimming is undoubtedly the lowest. Don’t count on the NYPD to drag out swimmers. Across the nation, cops have displayed common sense and sympathy for their neighbors. Four sheriffs’ departments in Michigan have announced they are refusing to enforce Whitmer’s orders. “With limited resources,” said the Shiawassee Co. sheriff, “our priority focus will be on enforcing duly passed laws.” Those are beautiful words, especially coming from law enforcement. Even in this health crisis, when safety is paramount, Americans are standing up for the principles of self-government and personal liberty. They know that freedoms are rarely lost in easy times. They’re snatched away usually under the guise of an emergency. Scientific evidence shows how arbitrary some lockdown rules are, especially ones targeting the young and healthy. A minuscule 1.8 percent of coronavirus deaths in New York City are otherwise healthy people under age 65. Governors and mayors in New York and across the country have been calling the shots. Why should we have confidence in them? Truth is, most of them failed miserably to protect the vulnerable. A staggering 51 percent of coronavirus deaths across the nation are nursing-home residents. Ordering people to shut their businesses and stay home didn’t save these victims. They were already stay-ins. More proof the shutdowns need to end: Georgia opened 24 days ago. COVID-19 hospitalizations are down a whopping 34 percent since then, while freedom and economic activity are up. Betsy McCaughey is a former lieutenant governor of New York, chairwoman of the Committee to Reduce Infection Deaths and author of the forthcoming book “The Next Pandemic.” 

CHICAGO – Two studies in monkeys published on Wednesday offer some of the first scientific evidence that surviving COVID-19 may result in immunity from reinfection, a positive sign that vaccines under development may succeed, US researchers said on Wednesday. Although scientists have assumed that antibodies produced in response to the new coronavirus virus are protective, there has been scant scientifically rigorous evidence to back that up. In one of the new studies, researchers infected nine monkeys with COVID-19, the illness caused by the novel coronavirus. After they recovered, the team exposed them to the virus again and the animals did not get sick. The findings suggest that they “do develop natural immunity that protects against re-exposure,” said Dr. Dan Barouch, a researcher at the Center for Virology and Vaccine Research at Harvard’s Beth Israel Deaconness Medical Center in Boston, whose studies were published in the journal Science. “It’s very good news,” Barouch said. Several research teams have released papers – many of them not reviewed by other scientists – suggesting that a vaccine against the virus would be effective in animals. In the second study, Barouch and colleagues tested 25 monkeys with six prototype vaccines to see if antibodies produced in response were protective. They then exposed these monkeys and 10 control animals to SARS-CoV-2, the official name of the novel coronavirus. All of the control animals showed high degrees of virus in their noses and lungs, but in the vaccinated animals, “we saw a substantial degree of protection,” Barouch said. Eight of the vaccinated animals were completely protected. These studies, which have been peer reviewed, do not prove that humans develop immunity or how long it might last, but they are reassuring. “These data will be seen as a welcome scientific advance,” Barouch said.

President Trump says he’s unlikely to make good on a threat to withdraw funds from states including Michigan over their promotion of mail-in voting during the coronavirus pandemic. “They’ll be finding out very soon if it’s necessary. I don’t think it’s going to be necessary,” Trump told reporters at the White House Wednesday afternoon. Trump said he “just spoke with” Michigan Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat, about flooding in the state, but not specifically about his threat. Trump is scheduled to visit Michigan on Thursday, but is not slated to meet Whitmer, whose name has been floated as a potential vice president pick for presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden. On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted that he could “hold up” funds to Michigan, which sent 7.7 million absentee ballot request forms to residents, and to Nevada for promoting mail-in voting, which he said could result in fraud. In his afternoon remarks, Trump said he remains concerned about fraud and encouraged people to vote in person despite COVID-19. He said it was reasonable for some people to vote by mail — such as himself, as he is registered in Florida and cannot readily be there to vote — but that mass mail-in balloting could create problems. “I’m at the White House. And I have to send a ballot to Florida, that makes sense. So if you needed for some reason, or if somebody’s not well, that’s one thing,” Trump said. “But when you send out 7.7 million mail-in ballots there’s forgeries, there’s frankly duplication where they print ballots on the same kind of paper with the same kind of machinery and you can’t tell the difference.” Trump said it would alarming for ballots to be widely distributed, though side-stepped a reporter’s question about several Republican-led states also encouraging remote voting. “They pick the ballot — they take them out of mailboxes. They go around and accumulate them. They harvest them. I guess the word is ‘harvest’ them. And it was especially prevalent in California, and it’s just not a fair situation,” Trump said. Trump alleged “a lot of people in certain districts don’t ever get their ballot.” He added: “Maybe the same person signs them with different writing, different pens — I don’t know.  A lot of things can happen. No, if you can, you should go and vote. Voting is an honor, it shouldn’t be something where they send you a pile of stuff and you send it back.”

Sometimes, a good rant is all a writer can offer. Bear with me. Last Friday morning, some 3,500 New Yorkers lined up at a Catholic church in Queens to receive free food hours before it even opened, ­according to the New York Police Department. Catholic Charities has reported a 200 percent increase in demand over the past month and a half. By prolonging the coronavirus shutdown long after its core mission was accomplished, Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio have plunged tens of thousands of New Yorkers into poverty. It needs to end. Now. In mid-March, we were told we have to endure a lockdown to ensure that hospitals didn’t get overrun. We did. The hospitals were not overwhelmed. We turned the Javits Center into a hospital. We didn’t need it. We brought in a giant Navy ship to treat New Yorkers. We didn’t need it. We were told we were moments away from running out of ventilators. We weren’t, and now the United States has built so many, we are giving them away to other countries. Meanwhile, the Big Apple is ­dying. Its streets are empty. The bars and jazz clubs, restaurants and coffeehouses sit barren. Beloved haunts, storied rooms, perfect-slice joints are shuttered, many for good. The sweat equity of countless small-business owners is evaporating. ­Instead of getting people back to work providing for their families, our mayor talks about a fantasyland New Deal for the post-coronavirus era. Open the city. All of it. Right now. Broadway shows, beaches, Yankees games, the schools, the top of the freakin’ Empire State building. Everything. New Yorkers have already learned to socially distance. Businesses can adjust. The elderly and infirm can continue to be isolated. For two months, we have waited for Cuomo and de Blasio to tell us how this ends. Where is ex-Mayor Michael Bloomberg with his alleged army of tracers that the governor told us was the key to reopening? And why did he hand that responsibility over to Bloomberg, whom ­nobody elected anyway? What the hell is going on? Is anybody in charge of this situation? Or are we just left with the governor and his talking-head brother ­arguing on CNN about which of the two Ma loves best? (Who cares?) In late April, Georgia Gov. Brian Kemp defied experts by opening his state. The Atlantic magazine, once a serious publication that should now come with a stick of stale bubblegum, accused him of engaging in “human sacrifice.” You want to guess what happened? Guess, come on, take a guess. Instead of the predicted spike in deaths, the number of cases of coronavirus and associated deaths declined. We should always consider that we are led by idiots, as one of my friends likes to remind me. Cuomo and de Blasio have no plan. There is not a single question about when New York can get back to normal to which they have a straight ­answer. Not one. They cash their taxpayer paychecks while immiserating the rest of us. If our elected leaders won’t save the world’s greatest city from a slow death by economic strangulation, then the people of New York must do it themselves. Barbers, tailors, nail ­salons, sporting goods stores, movie theaters and others should open their doors — while maintaining social distancing, of course — and dare the state to shut them down. Our politicians serve by our consent; we don’t run our businesses or live our lives by their consent. The suggestion to the contrary is an ­affront to Americanism. It has been a long time since this country, let alone this city, really had to deal with the prospect of mass starvation. This isn’t about the stock market — it’s about parents putting their kids to bed hungry and hoping tomorrow there will be something for them to eat if they get up at 4:30 a.m. and get in line at the food bank. We did what we were asked. We flattened the freakin’ curve. There is no longer any reasonable justification for the government to deprive us of our livelihoods. And our rights aren’t the government’s to grant or take away. They belong to us — the free grant of nature and the God of nature. We’re Americans. More than that: New Yorkers, goddammit. David Marcus is The Federalist’s New York correspondent. Twitter: @BlueBoxDave 

It took only two days for a reopened Ford assembly plant to grind to a halt over the coronavirus. Thousands of workers at Ford’s facility in Chicago were forced to leave the site Tuesday on just the second day of operations after two workers tested positive for COVID-19 — and a second company factory in Michigan had to close for the same reason on Wednesday, CNN reported. The departures came after the American automaker began bringing back 12,000 North American workers the day before. Ford promised a slew of safety-related changes included social-distancing reminders, reconfigured workspaces and temperature checks. Some employees told the local CBS affiliate they were grateful to be able to work and earn a living, though others still feared for their safety. “I’m worried right now,” said employee Timothy Shy. “This is the second day, and we are already hearing about this.” Another employee, Billy Cowart, added “social distancing doesn’t really work.” The Chicago plant builds the Ford Explorer, the Lincoln Aviator and the Ford Interceptor police car. Workers there returned to work for the second time on Wednesday morning, CNN reported. But by that time, a second Ford facility in Dearborn, Michigan, where the F-150 pickup is produced, also shut down after a worker there tested positive, according to the outlet. The brief closures demonstrate the difficulties facing major American manufacturers looking to ramp up operations as states begin to reopen. Ford’s factories had been shut down for two months during the pandemic. Getty Images Getty Images View Slideshow “There are three things that have to all come together. You have to have a healthy work force, a healthy supply chain and healthy demand,” Kristin Dziczek, vice president of industry, labor & economics at the Center for Automotive Research, told CNN. “It’s not just flip a switch and everything is as it was. It’s very complicated.” Ford did not immediately respond to a request for comment, though a spokesperson told CNN the company believed the workers contracted the virus before returning to the factories. “When two employees who returned to work this week tested positive for COVID-19, we immediately notified people known to have been in close contact with the infected individuals and asked them to self-quarantine for 14 days,” said Ford’s spokesperson, Kelli Felker. “We also deep cleaned and disinfected the work area, equipment, team area and the path that the team member took.”

Broadway star Nick Cordero has suffered a major setback in his recovery after a months-long battle with the coronavirus. Cordero’s wife, fellow stage actor Amanda Kloots, updated fans Wednesday via Instagram, holding back tears as she revealed that, after waking up from a medically induced coma, the 41-year-old thespian’s health had taken a turn for the worse. “Okay guys, so here in the car to blast that song because I just needed some stereo sound strength. Nick has had a bad morning,” Kloots, 38, began. “Unfortunately, things are going a little downhill at the moment, so I am asking again for all the prayers, and mega prayers right now. “Please cheer and please pray for Nick today, and I know that this virus is not going to get him down,” she said, weeping. “That’s not how his story ends! So please keep us in your thoughts and prayers today, thank you!” Just hours before, Kloots shared that Cordero’s right lung was improving, though his left was “still causing issues.” Cordero first fell ill in March and was admitted to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles with what he believed was a severe case of pneumonia. After being diagnosed with the coronavirus, he was placed on a ventilator. He has since lost his right leg, suffered two mini-strokes and a septic infection, battled fungus in his lungs, and was given a temporary pacemaker for his heart.

President Trump’s former personal lawyer Michael Cohen will be released from federal prison because of the coronavirus outbreak and will serve the remainder of his time in home confinement, reports said Wednesday. Cohen will be released from Otisville Prison in upstate New York, where he is serving time for lying to Congress and campaign-finance violations, a person familiar with the matter told the Associated Press. Cohen has been in prison since last May and was expected to remain in custody until November 2021. He had appealed to a Manhattan federal court judge for compassionate release in March, but the justice denied him in a scorching order. “That Cohen would seek to single himself out for release to home confinement appears to be just another effort to inject himself into the news cycle,” Judge William Pauley wrote in the order denying his request. His early release Wednesday was granted by the federal Bureau of Prisons, according to the AP. The agency had previously said he and other inmates at Otisville would be released, but then rescinded the decision days later.

ATHENS, Greece — Greece’s long-awaited tourist season will begin on June 15 with the opening of seasonal hotels and the arrival of the first foreign visitors, while international flights will begin heading directly for holiday destinations gradually as of July 1, the government said Wednesday. Speaking in a televised address to the nation, Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis said visitors would be subject to sample coronavirus testing and “our general health protocols will be adhered to, without them, however, overshadowing our bright sun or the natural beauties of Greece.” Tourism Minister Harry Theoharis said a list of countries from which visitors will be able to arrive in Greece will be announced before the end of May. The selection will be based on “epidemiological criteria” as determined by Greece’s committee of experts dealing with the pandemic. Balkan and Baltic countries, Germany and regional countries such as Israel and Cyprus are expected to be in the first wave of those whose citizens will be allowed to enter Greece, he said. Visitors from those countries will be able to fly into Greece initially only through Athens’ international airport as of June 15, Theoharis said. Direct international flights to the rest of the country’s airports will resume July 1. Some countries, however, might be excluded, depending on the situation with their coronavirus outbreaks, the minister said. Those countries would be closely watched, with a view to re-establishing direct flights when the situation allows. Those arriving will not be subject to mandatory quarantine or blanket testing of all arrivals, but Greek authorities will have the right to carry out sample testing, he said. Theoharis outlined an operational plan being set in place to tackle any potential outbreaks at tourist destinations, including a designated doctor for each hotel, special quarantine areas and testing facilities on islands. Mitsotakis noted that Greece has “managed to restrict the spread of the virus. … We made our country an example to follow in the handling of the health crisis.” The government imposed a lockdown very early in Greece’s outbreak, and this has been credited with keeping the number of deaths and critically ill people low. On Wednesday, health authorities announced one new death and 10 new confirmed coronavirus cases, bringing the total number of dead to 166 and the total confirmed cases to 2,850 in the country of nearly 11 million people. But the lockdown has dealt a severe blow to Greece’s economy, which has barely emerged from a brutal decade-long financial crisis that saw a quarter of gross domestic product wiped out. Tourism is a vital part of the economy, contributing around 20% of GDP, and authorities have been anxious to ensure the entire summer season isn’t lost. About 33 million visitors traveled to Greece last year, spending 19 billion euros, according to Theoharis. “Let us face reality with courage: April and May was the nadir of tourism,” Mitsotakis said. “So whatever we achieve this year will be a profit.” Mitsotakis announced a reduction in consumer taxes on transport from 24% to 13% for five months, which will lead to cheaper boat, plane and bus tickets during the tourist season, as well as a cut on tax on coffee, soft drinks and open-air movie theater tickets. The government’s priority, he stressed, was on maintaining jobs “and helping the sector’s professionals prepare for their big comeback in 2021.”

The owner of a New Jersey gym that continues to defy the state’s coronavirus lockdown order came clean Wednesday about a fatal drunk driving crash he pleaded guilty to 13 years ago. Ian Smith, co-owner of Atilis Gym in Bellmawr, said in an Instagram mea culpa that “there is justifiably a great deal of hatred ” toward him for a 2007 crash that killed 19-year-old Kevin Ade — which has been gaining new attention online since news of Smith’s gym’s anti-lockdown stance started spreading. “Over the past few days there has been a lot of posting about a tragedy that I was the cause of,” Smith said. “And there is justifiably a great deal of hatred and resentment towards me. This is something I’ve been public about my whole life.” “I never run from it nor would I ever,” he said. “It’s something that I fully accept responsibility for, and for anybody out there who hates me, I think you are completely justified in doing so.” Smith, a student at Stockton University at the time, said he awoke from a night of heavy drinking and got behind the wheel without realizing there was still alcohol in his system.     Please listen. What we stand for is far bigger than me. I understand people’s resentment and hatred towards me. All I ask is you listen to the details and make your decision based off of that. Regardless, what stand for as a community at @atilisgymbellmawr remains unchanged. Day 3 here we come. A post shared by  Ian Smith (@iansmithfitness) on May 20, 2020 at 5:25am PDT “Being a 20-year-old kid nobody, nobody ever explained those dangers,” he said. “It was always, ‘don’t drink and drive,’ and we didn’t drink and drive. I made it a point not to. And it doesn’t matter, because the end result was the same.” Smith raced through a stop sign in Galloway Township and hit a car Ade was driving, killing the teenager, according to nj.com. He pleaded guilty to vehicular manslaughter and was sentenced to five and a half years in prison, the outlet reported. “That being said, what we started here in Atilis and what we stand for has very little to do with me as an individual,” he added. Ade’s family, some of whom hoped Smith would turn his life around, took offense at his open defiance of the state lockdown law. “It shows he has no regard for the law,” Robert Henchy, the teen’s uncle, told nj.com. “He drove drunk, killed somebody, gets probably one of the lightest sentences I’ve ever seen. And now, 13 years later, you’re out defying the law again. I just don’t get it.” Smith and his partner, Frank Trumbetti, opened their gym for business for the third straight day Wednesday despite a shutdown order from Gov. Phil Murphy. The two contend they’re taking a stand for small businesses who are being crippled by the continued lockdown. “I mean, Gov. Murphy said the other day that he’s not comfortable opening up the state of New Jersey until there’s a vaccine,” their lawyer, James Mermigis, told The Post Wednesday. “That could be months. That could be next spring. He’s taking a stand in what he believes in, and I commend him.” The gym owners were cited for violating the order on Monday and Tuesday, and the police even handcuffed a customer. Mermigis said Atilis opened for business again on Wednesday, and this time were allowed to remain open — although prosecutors told Mermigis that the summonses would be sent by mail. He said the fines can be up to $2,000 for each infraction. Mermigis would not comment on Smith’s past drunk driving case because he said he was not involved in that case.

Media watch: The COVID Spike That Wasn’t CNN reported that “Texas is seeing the highest number of new coronavirus cases and deaths just two weeks after it officially reopened,” implying that reopening led to a resurgence — which, groans RealClearPolitics’ Sean Trende, is “simply wrong.” In fact, the “rate of increase has ­remained virtually unchanged since early May” in the state’s large metro areas. Since “COVID-19 does not kill quickly,” the latest Texas deaths were “mostly seeded before the reopening,” and the data suggest the rising ­infection numbers result from increased testing, not an uptick in cases. Notably, “the percentage of tests being returned positive is at a two-month low.” CNN’s “misfeasance or malfeasance” — a “major media company spreading what is dangerously close to disinformation” — erodes “overall public confidence in an important institution for democracy.” Libertarian: #MeToo’s Memory-Holing After Tara Reade alleged that Joe Biden had assaulted her, many #MeToo leaders said they’d “never claimed that all women should be believed,” notes Reason’s Robby Soave — in “a transparent attempt to rewrite history.” As Soave notes, Hillary Clinton captured the “movement’s central tenet” when she said “every survivor of sexual assault” has “the right to be believed.” Simply put, “#MeToo advocates demanded a presumption of belief for every individual who claims to be a sexual-misconduct victim.” To say anything else “is, to use a term beloved by victims’-rights advocates, gaslighting.” Foreign desk: Uniting Against China “Far from correcting course” after covering up the coronavirus crisis, “the Chinese Communist Party is doubling down in its attempts to squash any criticism,” sighs Michael Auslin at The Hill. Yet “all the threats and insults” against countries and organizations that dare question the origins of the pandemic, “redolent of the worst Soviet diatribes during the Cold War,” might actually weaken Beijing’s standing — especially if democracies “work ­together, presenting a united front in the face of Chinese intimidation tactics.” Since “democracies still have enormous power, wealth and appeal,” they could work to prevent Beijing from “picking off the needier nations with aid or intimidation tactics.” A united China playbook would be the first step toward “transparency and equality” in the West’s relationship with China. Pandemic journal: How Florida Got It Right The coronavirus response in Florida, where “the disaster so widely predicted hasn’t materialized,” is “the opposite of the media narrative of a Trump-friendly governor disregarding the facts to pursue a reckless agenda,” observes National Review’s Rich Lowry. Gov. Ron DeSantis & Co. “followed the science closely from the beginning, which is why they forged a nuanced approach.” Sunshine State officials ignored the models that quickly proved wrong, instead examining the evidence from abroad, which showed the elderly were most at risk. So “Florida went out of its way to get COVID-19-positive people out of nursing homes, while New York went out of its way to get them in, a policy now widely acknowledged to have been a debacle.” As DeSantis told Lowry, “if I can send PPE to the nursing homes, and they can prevent an outbreak there, that’s going to do more to lower the burden on hospitals than me just sending” gear to hospitals. Iconoclast: Our Predictable Crises Central Michigan faces “a serious ecological crisis” as “flooding has led to the failure of multiple dams along the Tittabawassee River” — and it “was predicted years ago,” laments The Week’s Matthew Walther. But it’s the sort of problem “no one wants to address until it’s too late, not just in Michigan but across the United States, where the phrase ‘crumbling ­infrastructure’ has been with us so long that it too is probably on the verge of collapse.” We’re “incapable of meaningful action until we find ourselves in the middle of a totally predictable crisis.” Indeed, many problems cited during the coronavirus pandemic — “the dangers of nursing homes, racial inequality, social atomization” — should have been “dealt with long before we found ourselves faced with a novel virus. ­Instead, we waited as we always do until the dams burst, metaphorically and otherwise.” — Compiled by Karl Salzmann & Kelly Jane Torrance 

The city checked over 150 homeless men into an upscale Brooklyn hotel and apartment tower to ride out the coronavirus potentially delivering the pandemic to the doorstep of the building’s residential units, fearful tenants told The Post. “There were people lined up outside the hotel and they weren’t wearing masks and gloves. They weren’t social-distancing at all,” said one resident, describing the scene when approximately 160 homeless were dropped off at the Tillary Hotel in Downtown Brooklyn on May 15, with no warning to tenants. “They were also chilling out in the lobby, talking, sitting beside each other on the couch,” continued the tenant, who asked not to be identified by name. “A couple of them had masks on, but most did not.” As part of a City Hall push to get the homeless off the street and out of cramped congregate shelters with the pandemic raging, the crush of newcomers were ushered into most of the building’s 174 hotel rooms on its six lowest floors, which once hosted Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman’s wife during his federal trial. But above the hotel sit five floors of apartments with an average monthly rent of $3,342, according to StreetEasy.com — full of tenants who say that the move undermines their own painstaking efforts to avoid the plague. “I don’t want to even go out there for fresh air, because I don’t want to come into contact with these people that aren’t social distancing, aren’t wearing masks, aren’t wearing gloves, and just touching everything,” said the first resident. “I feel like I’ve done my part at social distancing, but then the city moves these people in who aren’t practicing this at all.” A second tenant, paying $3,200 in monthly rent in the building at Flatbush Avenue Extension and Tillary Street, voiced similar concerns. “You see them walking around everywhere without masks,” said the resident, who also asked not to be identified by name. “They’re using our same stairs, elevators, lobby, without masks.” Both tenants also noted that the homeless hotel residents are free to come and go from the hours of 9 a.m. and 6 p.m., leading them to question whether it defeated the point of them being off the streets. “The whole purpose of the city offering shelters to the homeless is so that they can quarantine, not so they can walk around as they please from nine to six,” said the second tenant. The residents also cited general security concerns, saying that some of their new neighbors openly use drugs and that the city saw fit to install a metal detector in the hotel lobby when they moved in. “If the city doesn’t think these people are safe if they’re having, on the hotel side, a metal detector, then I have to assume the same,” said the second tenant. Added the first, who pays about $3,300 in monthly rent, “I just don’t feel like I should be paying this amount of money to live in a homeless shelter.” Their biggest fear, however, is that the move will introduce the contagion into the building. A spokesman for the city’s Department of Homeless Services insisted that the location is not being used to house positive or symptomatic homeless. But two men both of whom were openly smoking pot outside the hotel, and neither of whom was wearing a mask — told The Post that they were never tested for the bug. “They didn’t test us for s–t,” said one of the homeless men. Tenants said that they’d called on both building management and the city to at least make the homeless guests follow commonsense preventative measures. Leo Rubin, one of the building’s landlords, told The Post that he had no idea what he was signed up for when he agreed to take in homeless New Yorkers at a rate of $100 per room per day. “I don’t have to tell you what the hotel has been going through for the past three months. So you go over it and you decide you’re closed anyway, why not take in the homeless?” said Rubin. “I thought it was maybe veterans, older, calmer people. “I had no idea what I was getting myself into,” he said. Isaac McGinn, a DHS spokesman, said that the homeless were no more bound to abide by coronavirus precautions than the average city resident. “Just like all other New Yorkers, our clients are free to take a walk, get fresh air, or exercise. Just like all other New Yorkers, we are not monitoring with tracking devices how and where they may spend their time,” said McGinn. “And just like all New Yorkers, we encourage our clients to stay inside as much as possible, or wear a mask or face covering if you will be unable to social distance –– and we provide PPE masks/face-coverings to staff and clients alike, including and especially for anyone who doesn’t have one.”

Perhaps everyone deserves a second chance? After taking heat for purportedly failing to foresee the coronavirus pandemic, popular astrologer Susan Miller says the stars point to a resurgence of the virus in the fall. The Astrology Zone founder dropped the bombshell in an interview with The Post. “We are getting another wave,” says Miller, who created a free astrology app that provides “short daily horoscopes for all 12 signs a day,” per the site. Her rationale? Pluto and Jupiter will be getting together on Nov. 12 to plan COVID-19’s comeback tour. “Right now, Jupiter thinks that’s a good idea to help Pluto expand the virus,” says Miller, adding that interplanetary collaborators will “come back in a vengeance” and that “we have to be ready.” But that’s not the only reason to fear, according to the horoscope hawker. “We’re having an eclipse on the Fourth of July,” says Miller. “And when you have any eclipse on your birthday, whether your country or person, that means big changes are coming. “So whatever we’re going through, we’re not done yet.” Despite the ominous omens, Miller tells The Post she forecasts a “going down on this horrible death and destruction that we’re feeling” by winter. Not only that, but they might even come out with a vaccine, per her predictions. Miller’s dire divinations mark a 180-degree turn from the start of the year, when she claimed that 2020 would be a “prosperous year” on CBS New York, much to the ire of the online masses. “Susan, you’re a very good writer but you forgot about the [coronavirus] and the loss of jobs,” fumed one YouTube commenter on another interview, referring to the pandemic and subsequent unemployment surge. The New York Times even ran an article earlier this month accusing her and others of selling celestial snake oil. However, Miller insists she’s not seeing stars. “Astrology is not fortunetelling,” claims the revered astrologist, who boasts throngs of stargazing groupies who apparently can’t cope without her. Miller adds that she “did not see the pandemic coming” because she “didn’t think it was possible. “When you learn astrology, you have to stay within realistic terms.” Nonetheless, the prediction peddler says she foresaw “a third of our population losing their jobs” but kept quiet for fear of stoking unnecessary anxiety or being labeled a crackpot. And Miller maintains that “astrology is so good for problem-solving and because of its rich structure, you can ask questions and get a variety of answers.”

The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention now says the coronavirus “does not spread easily” through touching surfaces or objects. In early March, the federal health agency was warning that it “may be possible” to pass on the virus from contaminated surfaces, according to Fox News. Its guidelines now include a section on ways the virus doesn’t easily spread — including from touching surfaces or objects. “It may be possible that a person can get COVID-19 by touching a surface or object that has the virus on it and then touching their own mouth, nose, or possibly their eyes,” the CDC webpage states. “This is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, but we are still learning more about this virus.” Other ways the virus doesn’t easily spread are from animals to people or people to animals, the CDC’s updated webpage states. It’s unclear when the CDC updated its guidance. The agency didn’t immediately respond to The Post’s request for comment. The agency continues to note that the virus is thought to mainly spread from person to person — even from those not showing symptoms. Specifically, it mainly spreads between people who are in close contact, within 6 feet of each other, when someone with the infection coughs, sneezes or talks, causing droplets to land in another person’s mouth or nose. The Food and Drug Administration said last month there was no evidence to suggest the virus can spread through food or what it’s wrapped in, and that there was no need to wipe down groceries. “The biggest issue is that people are picking up COVID-19 from other people,” Marilyn Roberts, a microbiologist and professor at the University of Washington, previously told The Post. “They’re not picking it up from surfaces.”

China has been placing massive orders of protective personal equipment — sparking fears that the country is preparing for a second wave of the coronavirus, American traders in China told The Post. President Trump on Wednesday blamed China’s “incompetence” for allowing the virus to spread around the world and kill more than 320,000 people. Meanwhile, Wuhan — the Chinese city where the pandemic began — has banned the consumption of wild animals. The virus is believed to have emerged from a wet market in the city, jumping from an animal to a human. Get the latest developments on the coronavirus straight to your inbox by signing up for our special edition newsletter. Here’s what else we learned today: 

A recently reopened Texas church has closed its doors again after five leaders tested positive for coronavirus — days after the death of a priest who returned there despite showing symptoms, officials said. Father Donnell Kirchner, 79, died early last Wednesday from coronavirus-like symptoms that earlier saw him seeking help at both an urgent care and a local hospital in Houston, the Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston said. He was diagnosed with pneumonia, a common complication with similar symptoms to the contagion — but was sent home with medication to the Holy Ghost parish in Bellaire, where he shared a residence with seven other members of the order. It was not clear if he was ever tested, and the “specific cause of death is unknown,” the archdiocese stressed. However, five of the seven he lived with later tested positive for COVID-19, the archdiocese confirmed — including two who were active in helping at recent masses. The church immediately closed its doors again — despite having only reopened at the beginning of the month, as part of Gov. Greg Abbott’s plan to end the state lockdown in phases. “If you have attended Masses in person at Holy Ghost Church since the reopening on May 2nd, you are strongly encouraged to monitor your health for any symptoms and be tested for COVID-19, as a precautionary measure,” the Archdiocese said.

White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany took on Chris Cuomo on Wednesday, saying that while he “mocked” President Trump for taking hydroxychloroquine, the CNN anchor took a less safe version of the drug himself. “You had Chris Cuomo saying the president knows that hydroxychloroquine is not supported by science, he knows it has been flagged by his own people and he’s using it,” McEnany said at a White House press briefing. “Cuomo mocked the president for this” but “it turns out that Chris Cuomo took a less safe version of it called quinine, which the FDA removed from the market in 2006 because it had serious side effects, including death. So really interesting to have that criticism of the president.” The CNN host’s wife, Cristina Cuomo, who also came down with coronavirus, detailed his daily health regimen to treat COVID-19 in an article for her wellness publication Purist. She wrote that his daily intake included “Potentized quinine (OXO); it’s derived from the nontoxic bark of Peruvian-grown quinine plants. It is a natural antibiotic (it’s being used in India with very good results). This is not on the market here; Dr. Lancaster has made this in her lab for 40 years, and I took this for my Lyme. (The medicine Plaquinol, which many doctors are using for COVID-19 is similar to quinine, but it has negative side effects.)” By contrast, McEnany said, hydroxychloroquine is “a drug that has been in use for 65 years for lupus, arthritis and malaria. It has a very good safety profile.” Trump disclosed Monday that he’s taking the drug to protect against contracting COVID-19. He previously touted anecdotal evidence of its effectiveness. A medication guide posted on the FDA’s website says the drug quinine sulfate “may cause problems with your heart rhythm that can lead to death” and “may cause your blood cell (platelet) count to drop causing serious bleeding problems. In some people, serious kidney problems can happen.” In 2006, the FDA warned against off-label use of the drug to treat leg cramps, writing, “Fatalities and renal insufficiency requiring hemodialysis have been reported.” McEnany defended Trump’s use of the fellow anti-malaria drug. “No one should be taking this without a prescription from their doctor, but that being said, I’ve seen a lot of apoplectic coverage of hydroxychloroquine. You had Jimmy Kimmel saying the president’s ‘trying to kill himself’ by taking it, you had Joe Scarborough saying, ‘This will kill you.’ Neil Cavuto saying, ‘What have you got to lose? One thing you have to lose are lives,’ ” she said. A Brazilian study of the effectiveness of a related drug, chloroquine, ended early in April after determining that high doses of the drug caused heart problems. On Monday night, Chris Cuomo questioned whether Trump truly was taking hydroxychloroquine, saying he believed it was “a beautiful distraction” that “speaks to optimism” about reopening the country. But McEnany countered that Chris Cuomo’s brother, Democratic New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo, “has several on-the-record statements about hydroxychloroquine,” including that “I’m an optimist, I’m hopeful about the drug and that’s why we’ll try it here in New York.”

New lawsuits and divorces can be filed electronically in New York City, Long Island, Westchester County and other county Supreme courts beginning on Monday — after weeks of pause for coronavirus closures, officials announced. Chief Administrative Judge Lawrence Marks said beginning on Memorial Day, “e-filing through the [New York State Courts Electronic Filing] system — including the filing of new non-essential matters — will be restored in those counties of the state that have not yet met the benchmarks required to participate in the Governor’s regional reopening plan.” Marks said these include the five counties comprising New York City, as well as Nassau, Suffolk,  Dutchess, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Sullivan, Ulster and Westchester counties. “This expanded use of NYSCEF will permit a significant broadening of civil litigation in a manner that continues to ensure the highest measure of health and safety to judges, court personnel and the public,” Marks said Wednesday in a letter to state judges. While the Supreme courts will be opening up to electronic filings in new cases, housing courts, lower civil courts, and criminal courts in these counties are not yet accepting new non-essential cases, according to state courts spokesman Lucian Chalfen. The moratorium on new cases began in late March amid the COVID-19 pandemic, with courts closing to all but emergency and essential matters. Last Monday, upstate counties that have met the Governor’s safety benchmarks reopened for judges and court staff to return to work and court cases to resume, albeit with new coronavirus measures in place.

A group of indigenous healers in a Brazilian rainforest state are fighting the coronavirus pandemic with medicinal plants — as the country battles the third-largest outbreak in the world. Five men from the Satere Mawe tribe, traveling in a small motorboat, are trying to help others survive without relying on the saturated health system in Amazonas, a massive northwestern state covered almost entirely by the Amazon rainforest. “We’ve been treating our symptoms with our own traditional remedies, the way our ancestors taught us,” Andre Satere Mawe, a tribal leader from a small village on the far outskirts of the state capital, Manaus, told Agence France-Presse. “We’ve each used the knowledge handed down to us to gather treatments and test them, using each one against a different symptom of the disease.” Remedies created by the tribe include teas made from the bark of the carapanauba tree, which has anti-inflammatory properties, and from the saracuramira tree, which has anti-malarial properties — as well as mango peel, mint and honey. Villagers who suspect they had the coronavirus said the natural remedies have helped. “I was feeling weak, it felt like I had something in my lungs, I couldn’t breathe,” Valda Ferreira de Souza, a 35-year-old artisan, told AFP. “I took a home-made syrup, which made me feel a lot better.” Despite Amazonas’ remoteness, it has been heavily hit by the contagion, with 22,132 confirmed cases and nearly 1,500 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University data. The rapid spread has raised concern for the region’s indigenous people, who have been heavily impacted by diseases brought in by outsiders in the past. The virus has so far reached 40 indigenous groups in the state, with 537 positive cases and 102 deaths, according to the Brazilian Indigenous Peoples’ Association. In Brazil overall, 271,628 cases and nearly 18,000 deaths have been reported. Meanwhile, President Jair Bolsonaro — who opposes coronavirus lockdown measures meant to keep populations apart — has promoted the use of the anti-malarial drug chloroquine to treat the coronavirus. In São Paulo, Brazil’s largest city, workers are digging mass graves to keep up with the overwhelming number of deaths. With Post wires

The NYPD broke up a gathering of about 100 people at a Brooklyn synagogue Wednesday morning while responding to a 311 complaint, police and the mayor’s office said. The officers responded to a call shortly before 8 a.m. at the Congregation Yetev Lev Satmar Ohel Feiga on South 8th Street near Bedford Avenue and found the gathering, according to cops. They told the group to disperse, and they peacefully followed orders, authorities said. No arrests were made and no summonses were issued. A City Hall spokesperson said the city is already taking action to prevent a similar gathering at the synagogue. “This behavior is unacceptable and we are issuing a cease and desist to this synagogue today,” the spokesperson said in a statement. Police have been called to disperse a number of Orthodox Jewish gatherings since social-distancing guidelines were put in place amid the coronavirus outbreak in the city. Last week, hundreds of Orthodox Jews flouted social-distancing guidelines and held a block party in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn. Dozens of members of the community danced hand-in-hand to blaring music, while others gathered in the street and around a bonfire near Myrtle Avenue and Skillman Street to celebrate the Lag B’Omer holiday, according to witnesses and videos. In late April, hundreds of members of the Orthodox community gathered in the streets of Williamsburg to witness the funeral of Rabbi Chaim Mertz.

The race to find a cure for the novel coronavirus is on, and there are three separate efforts being pursued. The simplest one is to use common drugs to treat symptoms and prevent complications. Such drugs include remdesivir, which was proven to reduce the COVID-19 recovery time, and blood thinners, which can prevent clotting-related complications, including strokes, heart attacks, and death. One other course of treatment concerns vaccines, which could be ready as early as September, to prevent the infection, though vaccines might not work, and there’s no guarantee they will actually roll out earlier than next year. The third option consists of brand new drugs that are being developed to stop the virus from replicating inside the body and improve the patient’s condition. These are antibody drugs that would work just like a plasma transfusion from a patient who survived COVID-19. They could also provide limited immunity, some researchers believe. We’ve seen an increasing number of reports detailing the various monoclonal antibody drugs, with several such drugs already in development in China, Korea, and the US. The latest study details an unusual but exciting discovery: An antibody from a patient who survived SARS 17 years ago works against SARS-CoV-2. SARS is another coronavirus, and it caused the 2003 outbreak that took the lives of 774 people of a total of 8,098 cases around the world. The novel coronavirus is its successor, which explains the name chosen for the virus that causes COVID-19. A person who survived SARS developed an antibody that researchers call S309 in a new study published in Nature magazine (via LiveScience). The study was conducted by doctors from the University of Washington, Pasteur Institute in France, Università della Svizzera Italiana, Switzerland, and Vir Biotechnology. If Vir sounds familiar, that’s because it’s one of the US companies that’s currently looking to develop monoclonal antibodies for COVID-19. The S309 antibody, found in the blood of that person, showed a strong ability to bind to the novel coronavirus’s spike protein, which is the key virus component of both SARS and SARS-CoV-2 that allows these two viruses to attach themselves to cells and invade them. Without this process, the virus can’t enter the cell to replicate itself, and a patient wouldn’t get COVID-19 even after contracting the virus. Lab experiments show that S309 can bind itself to the spike protein, but testing on humans will be required to see whether the antibody is effective and safe. S309 is just one of the 25 SARS monoclonal antibodies found in blood from the patient, including samples taken in 2004 and 2013. The researchers identify S309 as the most potent SARS neutralizing antibody that can block the novel coronavirus, but say it may be combined with additional SARS antibodies that had a weaker activity against SARS-CoV-2 to form a cocktail that could provide added protection. Vir said in a separate announcement that two drugs featuring genetically engineered versions of the S309 antibody will be used in clinical tests in partnership with GlaxoSmithKline. These are known as VIR-7831 and VIR-7832. The first is supposed to have an extended half-life, while the second has an extended half-life and is supposed to function as a T cell vaccine, according to the company. “Remarkably, we believe S309 likely covers the entire family of related coronaviruses, which suggests that, even as SARS-CoV-2 continues to evolve, it may be quite challenging for it to become resistant to the neutralizing activity of S309,” Vir Chief Scientific Officer Herbert Virgin said in a statement. “In addition, S309 exhibits potent effector function in vitro, potentially allowing the antibody to engage and recruit the rest of the immune system to kill off already infected cells. We have seen in animal models of other respiratory infections, such as influenza, that effector function significantly enhances the activity of antibodies that are already potently neutralizing.”

New Zealand’s Prime Minister has suggested that a four-day workweek could help revitalize the country’s economy in the wake of the coronavirus crisis. Speaking Monday from the city of Rotura, Jacinda Ardern supported the idea of a shorter working week as a way to encourage domestic tourism while the nation’s borders remain closed to foreign visitors. “The question for me is, how do we encourage Kiwis to … get out and about, and visit some of the amazing places and tourism offerings that we have,” she asked on Facebook Live. “I hear lots of people suggesting we should have a four-day workweek. Ultimately that really sits between employers and employees. But as I’ve said there’s just so much we’ve learnt about COVID and that flexibility of people working from home, the productivity that can be driven out of that,” Ardern went on. She then encouraged employers to consider the option, “because it certainly would help tourism all around the country.” Ardern said domestic tourism makes up about 60 percent of the industry, but New Zealanders spend about $9 billion (NZD) on tourism internationally. “Think about exploring your backyard,” she said. Ardern’s government quickly put in place some of the strictest restrictions in the world to stop the spread of the virus — and has been lauded for the swift response. Last week, the South Pacific nation was able to relax many social distancing rules — reopening cafes, cinemas and malls that had been closed for at least two months. There were 1,503 confirmed COVID-19 cases in the country as of Wednesday and 21 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University.

Jeffree Star is no stranger to controversy. And the YouTuber, 34, recently angered fans with the release of his death-themed “Cremated Collection” makeup palette, which many felt was insensitive to launch during the coronavirus pandemic. “It takes months and months and months, sometimes a year plus, to actually make a product,” Star said, addressing the backlash in a new YouTube video on Wednesday. “There was something saying ‘Jeffree, it’s a little weird timing, there’s a lot going on in the world.’ This is art and I never come from a negative place.” He continued, “I created this to make people smile, I created a brand for all the weirdos and people that really didn’t feel like they fit in. In no way was this created to be offensive, ever.” The palette features 24 shades of grayscale colors with names like “Grave Digger,” “The Morgue,” “Eulogy,” “Casket Ready” and more. “We’re in a pandemic. People have died and families haven’t even been able to see those loved ones because of COVID-19,” one person tweeted. “This is distasteful and I’m appalled that some people aren’t even seeing it. I was for Jeffree Star before this because I thought he changed.” “You couldn’t have thought of ANY other names? I can give you ten right now for a Smokey pallet,” another commented on Star’s Instagram. A third said, “You must be very disconnected from the world. Do you have any friends/loved ones that work in a hospital or nursing home? They go home broken-hearted from all the deaths they are witnessing. Why would you release this now??” so ur gonna tell me Jeffree star is releasing a palette called ‘cremated’ during a global pandemic where thousands are dying💀 pls who are his PR team ALSO these shades are so nasty…tell me they aren’t all dupes of themselves…. pic.twitter.com/Rx8f7qTh6c — chloe (@ffschIoe) May 16, 2020  Star said his own father, as well as his two Pomeranian dogs who both died in the past year, were all cremated, adding that it’s a “tradition in my family.” He also explained that he already delayed the release of the palette, which was supposed to launch in April, but was unable to push the date back further due to his upcoming releases and for fear of the product expiring. “I’m never discrediting anyone’s feelings,” Star said. “Everyone is allowed to feel how they want and interpret things how they do. Just know that I only come from a good place.”  Besides taking issue with the marketing of the palette, other makeup obsessives complained that the neutral colors are too similar to each other, reminiscent of Urban Decay’s Naked 3 palette and will not be pigmented enough on darker skin tones. Still, fans are eager to get their hands on the latest release from Jeffree Star Cosmetics; many joked that they hope more people boycott the “Cremated Collection” so they can actually snag it before it sells out. The palette will retail for $58. It launches on jeffreestarcosmetics.com on Friday, May 22, at 1 p.m. EST.

Illegal immigrants living in California can begin applying for financial assistance as part of a statewide relief effort to help those without legal status access disaster relief amid the coronavirus pandemic. The $75 million landmark relief program is the first of its kind, offering payments of $500 per person and up to $1,000 per household. Launched by Gov. Gavin Newsom last month, the initiative will work with 12 nonprofit organizations to disburse the aid to individuals who were otherwise excluded from federal relief programs or unemployment assistance. In order to qualify, applicants will be required to show that they are ineligible for federal assistance programs related to the coronavirus pandemic, including the CARES Act passed by Congress. Individuals must also be 18 years or older to be considered. The nonprofits will help applicants determine if they qualify for the state relief, apply for it and deliver the one-time payment cards to those who are approved. The state hopes to help a projected 150,000 immigrants without legal status through the effort. The funds will be available on a first-come, first-served basis until they are depleted, or until June 30 at the latest. “Every Californian, including our undocumented neighbors and friends, should know that California is here to support them during this crisis,” Newsom said when unveiling the effort last month. The governor added that about 10 percent of the state’s workforce is undocumented, saying that while they paid over $2.5 billion in local and state taxes in 2019, they were left unable to benefit from the federal government’s relief funds. Nearly a quarter of the United States’ population of illegal immigrants lives in California, where they make up more than 6 percent of the state’s population, according to the Public Policy Institute of California. On Monday, undocumented individuals flooded the state’s disaster relief website on its first day of launch, which caused the site to crash for several hours, the Fresno Bee reports, citing state officials. The paper also reported that hotlines for the nonprofits distributing the funds were “jammed,” with many unable to get through. All 12 of the nonprofits reported extremely high call volumes to the New York Times, with some saying they were overwhelmed by the thousands of calls they were receiving. The Times reports that in the first 90 minutes after the program’s launch, just one of the organizations received 630,000 calls, thus jamming the phone line. “The website is currently up and running, and we are continuing to increase its capacity. We understand that the demand is high for the Disaster Relief Assistance for Immigrants program,” a spokesman for the state Social Services Department told the Bee at the time.

Rep. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez got into a heated virtual debate with her chief Democratic primary opponent, Michelle Caruso-Cabrera, this week — and the exchanges got very personal. Caruso-Cabrera accused AOC of staying in her “luxury” DC apartment complex with a “Whole Foods in the lobby” during the peak of the coronavirus pandemic that ravaged constituents in her Bronx-Queens district while Congress was out of session. The congresswoman hit back that Caruso-Cabrera, a former CNBC anchor, previously resided in a pricey apartment in a Trump building and that AOC is active in the district and her family has roots there. “This is where my uncle is. There is where my brother is. This is where my family is,” AOC said after mentioning that she intervened in a dispute with Immigration & Customs Enforcement agents on behalf of immigrant kids at LaGuardia Airport in Queens. But Caruso-Cabrera responded, “AOC says her family lives here. Her mother moved to Florida because the taxes are too high.” That set off Ocasio-Cortez, who told Caruso-Cabrera it was a cheap shot to bring up her mother. “You can come after me all you want. Leave my mom out of it. My mom is a widow,” AOC said. “My mother is a school secretary who makes an hourly wage that’s laid off. You don’t know her. You don’t know what she’s been through. Leave my mom out of it. It’s really wrong.” The 14th Congressional District virtual debate Monday night, sponsored by BronxNet and hosted by Gary Axelbank, is being replayed on its YouTube channel. Caruso-Cabrera went on to blast the first-term Democratic socialist for voting against a House bill last year to repeal a portion of President Trump’s tax reform bill that limited state and local tax deductions that largely benefit higher-income New Yorkers. The bill was not taken up in the GOP-run Senate. “AOC voted to raise taxes on New Yorkers,” Caruso-Cabrera charged. During much of the debate, Caruso-Cabrera was on the attack — repeatedly charging that “AOC is MIA” while criticizing her opposition to Amazon locating a headquarters in the Big Apple and her congressional voting record. She also called the far-left incumbent a divisive figure in the Democratic Party. “We have to have an attitudinal shift toward jobs. We can’t tell job creators, ‘Go away, we don’t want your 25,000 jobs [referring to the aborted Amazon project].’ I’m never going to do that,” Caruso-Cabrera said. She pointed out that AOC was the only Democrat in the House to vote against the COVID recovery legislation last month — the Payroll Protection Plan — that included money for small businesses, health care and testing. AOC defended her vote, saying the bill was skewed toward Wall Street and the rich and “not structured in a way” to help small businesses, and excluded immigrants. She said constituents who called her office were overwhelmingly opposed to it. She said she was willing to stand alone when necessary. Caruso-Cabrera scoffed at the explanation, accusing AOC of being the lone dissenter “to get her name in a headline.” “It’s what you always do. You’re always working on your celebrity status. No bill is ever perfect. But we have to start somewhere and we had to work quickly,” she said. After Caruso-Cabrera slammed the congresswoman for staying in her DC abode, Ocasio-Cortez claimed she “wasn’t feeling well” and “wanted to take a few days off.” She insisted she has a strong presence in the district and raised nearly $500,000 for local food pantries and helped delivered food to constituents. AOC also fired back at Caruso-Cabrera’s bona fides. “It’s quite funny. She lived in a $15,000-a-month Trump tower apartment until six months ago [the Trump International Hotel and Tower in Columbus Circle]. This woman probably couldn’t locate Sunnyside on a map until she decided to challenge me for the sake of challenging me. She doesn’t care about the Bronx. She doesn’t care about Queens,” the congresswoman said. She also said Caruso-Cabrera’s campaign was bankrolled by “multimillionaires” and real estate developers and bankers. On other issues, Ocasio-Cortez plugged a government-run Medicare for All to improve medical coverage for more Americans. Caruso-Cabrera dismissed the plan as taking away popular insurance programs for union workers. AOC promoted her Green New Deal plan to combat climate change and said “the door is open” to embracing nuclear energy as well as solar and wind power. Caruso-Cabrera called the Green deal “ineffectual” because the program ignores China and India, two of the world’s biggest polluters. Two other candidates who participated in the debate were Badrun Khan, president of the Jalalabad Association, and chess player Sam Sloan, a perennial candidate.

Delta Air Lines is making moves to ensure that planes don’t get too crowded. The company recently announced that it would be adding more flights so that it can continue to keep planes at about 60 percent capacity. The move is reportedly part of Delta’s plan to maintain social distancing amid the coronavirus outbreak and help customers feel safe while they fly. Delta will continue to keep planes at no more than 60 percent full through July, Reuters reported. In order to achieve this, the airline will add more flights to its routes than the current demand would normally justify. Delta had previously announced that it would be limiting the capacity on its flights in order to promote social distancing. The company has said that it is limiting first-class seating to 50 percent, while the main cabin will be capped at 60 percent. In a statement obtained by Reuters, a spokesperson for Delta said: “We announced a policy on seating capacity through June 30. Nothing has been decided beyond that but we are continuing to monitor the situation and make adjustments as necessary.” This isn’t the only change that the airline is making to help ease customers back into flying after the pandemic passes. Delta, along with American Airlines and United Airlines, will be providing passengers with face masks if they do not have their own. While the airline will encourage passengers to wear face masks during the flight, reports suggest that crew members will not enforce the policy or force passengers to wear masks if they chose not to. Fox News’ Janine Puhak contributed to this report.

Religious gatherings of up to 10 people can resume across New York State starting Thursday, Gov. Andrew Cuomo has announced — though participants must maintain social-distancing and wear masks to ward off the coronavirus. “When people are so anxious and so confused, I think those religious ceremonies can be very comforting,” particularly during the time of the pandemic, Cuomo told reporters during an Albany press briefing on Wednesday. “But we need to find out how to do it and do it safely and do it smartly.” The allowance is similar to one Cuomo previously announced for Memorial Day observances, and comes days after the governor teased a relaxation of restrictions for the upcoming Jewish holiday of Shavuot. Asked whether he would consider bumping up the number to 14 to afford more wiggle-room to Jewish congregations — which require 10 people alone for a “minyan” to officially mark services — Cuomo didn’t rule it out, but voiced reservations. “It’s complicated to set one number for one religion, another number for [another faith],” said Cuomo. “Then I’ll have the Roman Catholics say, ‘How come they get 14? I don’t get 14.'” The state’s Interfaith Advisory Council will help guide the policy going forward, to ensure it doesn’t do more harm than good, Cuomo said. “The last thing we want to do is have a religious ceremony that winds up having more people infected,” he said. “We know from New Rochelle, Westchester, the first hot spot, that religious ceremonies can be very dangerous.” Cuomo asked houses of worship to consider drive-in and parking lot services where possible. Some churches have already played a role in the pandemic, serving as testing sites in low-income communities across the Big Apple in the latest round of antibody screening, detailed Wednesday by Cuomo. The approximately 8,000 tests conducted showed that a disproportionately high 27 percent tested positive for antibodies, which indicate that someone was at some point infected with the coronavirus. By comparison, 19.9 percent of New York City’s general population has tested positive across various rounds of state screening. Those screened at churches in The Bronx returned the highest positive rate, at a whopping 34 percent. Brooklyn came in second (29 percent), followed by Queens (25 percent), Manhattan (20 percent) and Staten Island (19 percent). Broken down by ZIP code, 10456 in The Bronx’s Morrisania was hardest-hit with a city-high 43-percent positive rate. The 11212 in Brownsville, Brooklyn wasn’t far behind with 41 percent, and a pair of Bronx areas — 10469 in Pelham Gardens and 10472 in Soundview — each showed 38 percent. RICHARD HARBUS RICHARD HARBUS REUTERS RICHARD HARBUS View Slideshow “It’s all across the city, [but] … higher in communities of color and lower-income communities,” said Cuomo of the data, which echoes another ZIP code-based city review of death rates and diagnostic testing results. Antibody testing will ramp up in such city communities to a total of 72 houses of worship, Cuomo said, adding that screening will also expand to include 40 NYCHA public-housing developments. The state will also step up efforts to distribute PPE and hand sanitizer to affected communities, as well as outreach efforts explaining the importance of social-distancing. Statewide, another 112 fatalities were logged in the 24-hour period ending at midnight Tuesday, raising the overall number of confirmed deaths to at least 22,976. “The overall direction is right, but this is a painful, painful, tragic number of lives lost,” said Cuomo.

Apple and Google on Wednesday released long-awaited smartphone technology to automatically notify people if they might have been exposed to the coronavirus. The companies said 22 countries and several US states are already planning to build voluntary phone apps using their software. It relies on Bluetooth wireless technology to detect when someone who downloaded the app has spent time near another app user who later tests positive for the virus. Many governments have already tried, mostly unsuccessfully, to roll out their own phone apps to fight the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic. Many of those apps have encountered technical problems on Apple and Android phones and haven’t been widely adopted. They often use GPS to track people’s location, which Apple and Google are banning from their new tool because of privacy and accuracy concerns. Public health agencies from Germany to the states of Alabama and South Carolina have been waiting to use the Apple-Google model, while other governments have said the tech giants’ privacy restrictions will be a hindrance because public health workers will have no access to the data. The companies said they’re not trying to replace contact tracing, a pillar of infection control that involves trained public health workers reaching out to people who may have been exposed to an infected person. But they said their automatic “exposure notification” system can augment that process and slow the spread of COVID-19 by virus carriers who are interacting with strangers and aren’t yet showing symptoms. The identity of app users will be protected by encryption and anonymous identifier beacons that change frequently. “User adoption is key to success and we believe that these strong privacy protections are also the best way to encourage use of these apps,” the companies said in a joint statement Wednesday. The companies said the new technology — the product of a rare partnership between the rival tech giants — solves some of the main technical challenges that governments have had in building Bluetooth-based apps. It will make it easier for iPhones and Android phones to detect each other, work across national and regional borders and fix some of the problems that led previous apps to quickly drain a phone’s battery. The statement Wednesday also included remarks from state officials in North Dakota, Alabama and South Carolina signaling that they plan to use it. “We invite other states to join us in leveraging smartphone technologies to strengthen existing contact tracing efforts, which are critical to getting communities and economies back up and running,” said North Dakota Gov. Doug Burgum. North Dakota had already launched a location-tracking app that about 4 percent of state residents are using, higher than other US states with similar apps but falling far short of the participation rate that experts say is needed to make such technology useful. Tim Brookins, the CEO of ProudCrowd, a startup that developed North Dakota’s app, said Wednesday that North Dakotans will now be asked to download two complementary apps — his model, to help public health workers track where COVID-19 patients have been, and the Apple-Google model, to privately notify people who might have been exposed to the virus.

Workers in Brazil’s largest city are digging mass graves as the country battles its coronavirus outbreak, grim video shows. Footage shows back-to-back burial plots dug in a São Paulo cemetery, the same day the country tallied its highest daily jump in coronavirus deaths at 1,179. It is now the third-hardest-hit country in the world. “We’re losing the battle against the virus, that’s the reality,” Dimas Covas, director of the city’s COVID-19 emergency center, told Reuters. “The virus at this moment is winning the war. These days coming up, the holidays, I don’t see them as holidays, but I see them as battle days. The most important days in the fight against the virus.” A total of 65,995 coronavirus cases and 5,147 deaths have been reported in São Paulo alone, according to Johns Hopkins University statistics. In Brazil overall, 271,628 cases have been reported — making it third worst behind the US and Russia. Nearly 18,000 deaths have been reported in Brazil. Meanwhile, President Jair Bolsonaro, who opposes coronavirus lockdown measures meant to keep populations apart, has promoted the use of the anti-malarial drug chloroquine to treat the coronavirus. “The government is not exercising the role of a political leader that unites Brazil in this fight,” said Brazilian Sen. Humberto Costa, who served as health minister during Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s presidency. “The ministry of health is neither articulating nor coordinating its work with states and municipalities. The government is sabotaging the social distancing policy and is even selling the idea of a miracle drug to solve this problem, which doesn’t match the reality.”

With Post wires

The pub in Tokyo’s normally bustling Shinjuku district has installed a machine that sprays customers with hypochlorous acid water as they enter. Customers are first greeted by a hostess on a monitor, of course, who instructs them to disinfect their hands and check their temperature with a thermometer provided. They then step into a machine that looks like an airport security scanner, or a car-wash for humans, to get sprayed with a fine mist of the chlorine-based disinfectant for 30 seconds. Customers then pick up a map that guides them to their seat where they order with smartphones. Throughout the process they have not come into contact with a single person. “We wanted to develop a system that is in accordance with the new lifestyle and something that is a high model that could prevent infection,” said the president of the Kichiri&Co group that owns the pub. “It’s still an experiment, but once we develop the system, we want to share the know-how at each of our restaurants.” A clear acrylic screen is set up between each diner to further minimize the risk of infection and it seems to work. “I feel safe,” said one woman customer who didn’t want to be identified. “But being in there for 30 seconds was a bit long. I was like, when will this be over.” Kichiri has also installed a spraying booth, which cost more than $6,493, at a pub in Osaka city, where the government is expected to lift a coronavirus emergency on Thursday. It remains in place in Tokyo.

JOHANNESBURG – South Africa has marshaled huge resources towards preventing its poor from starving because of COVID-19, but undocumented citizens and stranded migrants face hunger as they slip through the net, aid workers say. Some 11,000 families waited for charity food parcels on Wednesday in a queue stretching for several kilometers (about 4 miles) outside South Africa’s capital Pretoria, with some lining up from 4 am. Aid workers estimated more than half of those waiting for the third distribution this month were migrants. President Cyril Ramaphosa has been praised for trying to mitigate the impact of the two-month-old coronavirus shutdown on the country’s most vulnerable, setting aside 50 billion rand ($2.78 billion) for social grants for the poor, who on one measure make up half of Africa’s most industrialized country. But to claim a grant or food parcel, you need a national ID card — which migrants aren’t entitled to and many South Africans from poor areas have failed to obtain. “We saw about the money that they are going to send to the South Africans, but as foreign nationals who is going to provide for us?” said Peter Ndhlovu, an out-of-work Zimbabwean migrant casual laborer, as he queued. “These people are hungry,” said Yusuf Abramjee, one of the coordinators of the charity handout program, gesturing to a queue stretching several kilometers. “Some of them are South African, a large chunk of them are foreign nationals.”

The coronavirus death rate likely extends beyond those directly killed by the lethal virus, a new study reports. Cancer surgeries and treatments delayed or rescheduled due to COVID-19 could be killing thousands, according to a report published Tuesday in the journal Annals of Oncology. Scientists at London’s Institute of Cancer Research found that the disruption to health care caused by the global pandemic could cause the death of individuals who do not contract the coronavirus but who are forced to wait for operations including tumor removals, allowing cancer that could’ve been cured to progress. Researchers analyzed pre-pandemic public health data on the five-year survival rates of cancer patients to estimate the impact current three- to six-month delays are having on those forced to wait for surgeries due to the overloaded health system. If surgery had been delayed for three months in all of the almost 95,000 patient cases they analyzed, they calculated that 4,755 additional deaths would’ve occurred. “Our study shows the impact that delay to cancer treatment will have on patients, with England, and the UK more widely, potentially set for many thousands of attributable cancer deaths as a result of the pandemic,” says study leader and cancer genomics professor Clare Turnbull in a press release. “The COVID-19 crisis has put enormous pressure on the [UK’s National Health Service] at every stage of the cancer pathway, from diagnosis right across to surgery and other forms of treatment.” Cancer patients are over twice as likely to die from the coronavirus, moving many to avoid the hospital, preferring to delay treatment than risk contracting the virus. In NYC, over 1,000 cancer surgeries have been delayed as a result of the pandemic and many are postponing routine medical tests that can catch the disease before it has progressed. While fighting the coronavirus should naturally remain a priority, researchers conclude it should not come at the cost of regular treatment for cancer patients. “The COVID-19 pandemic has already devastated the lives of many people directly,” says professor Paul Workman, chief executive of the Institute of Cancer Research. “Now, these new findings show the potential for the pandemic to also have a terrible indirect impact on the lives of cancer patients.”

Too soon … ? First photos are circulating of CBS All Access’ nine-part adaptation of Stephen King’s “The Stand,” which presents an apocalyptic vision of a world decimated by plague and embroiled in an elemental struggle between good and evil. Though production fell four days short due to the real-world pandemic, and a precise release date has not been set, King himself penned the final installment — which will include a new coda that didn’t exist in his original best-selling novel. Courtesy of Vanity Fair (see read full story here), the photos include “True Blood” alum Alexander Skarsgård as Randall Flagg, a demonic figure who appears in plague survivors’ dreams, Whoopi Goldberg as Mother Abagail, a prophet who receives visions from God and guides survivors of the superflu, and Odessa Young (“High Life”) as expectant mother Frannie Goldsmith. The limited series’ cast also includes James Marsden (“Westworld”) as Stu Redman, Amber Heard (“Aquaman”) as Nadine Cross, Daniel Sunjata (“Rescue Me”) as Cobb, Jovan Adepo (“The Leftovers”) as Larry Underwood, Owen Teague (“Bloodline”) as Harold Lauder, Brad William Henke (“OITNB”) as Tom Cullen, and Henry Zaga (“Looking for Alaska”) as Nick Andros. Additionally, Heather Graham (“Emily’s Reasons Why Not”) plays Rita Blakemoor, a wealthy woman who attempts to escape superflu-infested New York; Greg Kinnear (“House of Cards”) is Glen Bateman, a widowed professor; Nat Wolff (“Paper Towns”) plays Lloyd Henreid, a petty criminal who becomes fiercely loyal to Randall Flagg; Katherine McNamara (Arrow) is Julie Lawry, a small-town girl with a wild side; Eion Bailey (“Once Upon a Time”) is Teddy Weizak, a superflu survivor; and Hamish Linklater (“Legion”) will play Dr. Ellis, a military colonel and infectious disease specialist.

Two in three Americans said they flat-out don’t remember the last time they wore real pants, according to new research. In a survey of 2,000 American respondents who currently work from home, four in five said they spend the nine-to-five wearing PJs or comfy clothes. It’s no surprise then that seven in 10 of those polled said they much prefer working from home than heading into the office every day. The survey from Mattress Firm, conducted by OnePoll, found that even though the respondents live where they work, 44 percent said they’ve still been “late” to clock in and six in 10 said they have taken a nap during the day. But is the flexibility that working from home offers employees bad for productivity, considering all the distractions? Based on the survey results, no. In fact, the opposite is true. Nearly three-quarters of the respondents (70 percent) said they’ve been more productive working from home than they were in the office. Maybe naps are helping to boost productivity. According to Dr. Sujay Kansagra, sleep health consultant for Mattress Firm, “Napping may help improve mental agility, memory and alertness. A nap as short as 20 minutes can help rejuvenate you for the rest of the day and give you the boost you need to perform your best.” And working from home offers all sorts of places to call your workstation — including your bed. More than half of those surveyed said they’ve napped on the clock (59 percent) or “worked from bed” (57 percent) and that it made them realize they need a new bed (52 percent). And of those who have swapped their desk for their bed, respondents said close to four hours of their workday was spent there — that’s nearly half the workweek. “Our bed tends to be a place of comfort and familiarity, especially during times of uncertainty or anxiety, so it’s completely understandable to want to work from bed,” said Kansagra. “But it’s important to remember your bedroom should be your sleep sanctuary and should be kept separate from your workspace.” The COVID-19 pandemic has many of us working remotely, but it’s also changed our lives in other ways, most notably coping with feelings of stress, isolation and anxiety. The survey results show Americans are still trying to adjust and deal with these emotions. “If you find yourself thinking excessively about the pandemic, it’s important to find time and space to decompress. Restful sleep allows our brains and bodies to relax after a tough day and having a comfortable mattress and sleeping environment is a vital part of sleep hygiene,” said Dr. Kansagra. “This is even more important during times of stress, as stress can take both a mental and physical toll. Also, try your best to maintain a similar schedule each day and try to keep the day as normal as possible despite all the changes.” Social distancing during the pandemic may have limited face to face interactions but creating a sense of normalcy for some seems to include taking the time for self-care or virtually interacting with family and friends. Which is why, according to the poll, one in three Americans surveyed have taken it upon themselves to cut their own hair or give themselves a manicure. And 63 percent of respondents said they’ve socialized via a video application, with 23 percent saying they do so five times per week. The top ways to deal with anxious feelings were found to be exercising (55 percent), watching TV and movies (51 percent), meditating (42 percent) and sleeping more (39 percent). Top 10 ways to deal with anxious feelings during the quarantine

Secretary of State Mike Pompeo has praised Taiwan’s response to the coronavirus pandemic and called the country a reliable partner in a statement that sharply contrasted with recent US criticism of China, which denies Taiwan’s sovereignty and claims it as a province. “We have a shared vision for the region — one that includes rule of law, transparency, prosperity, and security for all,” Pompeo said in a statement released Tuesday. “The recent Covid-19 pandemic provided an opportunity for the international community to see why Taiwan’s pandemic-response model is worthy of emulation.” Pompeo a day earlier had condemned the exclusion of Taiwan from the World Health Organization’s annual meeting, saying it proved US charges that the UN body was under the Chinese Communist Party’s thumb. The WHO member states at the annual meeting delayed discussion on whether to grant observer status to Taiwan, which Beijing considers a province awaiting reunification and seeks to exclude from all international organizations. Pompeo said WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who has been harshly criticized by President Trump, “had every legal power and precedent” to include Taiwan in the meeting. “Yet he instead chose not to invite Taiwan under pressure from the People’s Republic of China,” Pompeo said in a statement. “The Director-General’s lack of independence deprives the Assembly of Taiwan’s renowned scientific expertise on pandemic disease, and further damages the WHO’s credibility and effectiveness at a time when the world needs it the most.” Taiwan has enjoyed remarkable success in combating the pandemic, with only seven deaths and some 400 infections despite its proximity and close commercial links with mainland China, where the disease originated. “The PRC’s spiteful action to silence Taiwan exposes the emptiness of its claims to want transparency and international cooperation to fight the pandemic, and makes the difference between China and Taiwan ever more stark,” Pompeo said. “No one disputes that Taiwan has mounted one of the world’s most successful efforts to contain the pandemic to date, despite its close proximity to the original outbreak in Wuhan, China,” Pompeo continued. “Taiwan is a model world citizen, while the PRC continues to withhold vital information about the virus and its origins, deny access to their scientists and relevant facilities, censor discussion of the pandemic within China and on Chinese social media properties, and casts blame widely and recklessly,” he said. Taiwan also criticized the WHO for not extending an invitation to join this year’s assembly. “We feel disappointed and angry about WHO’s decision of not inviting Taiwan to join this year’s WHA. We feel we have so much to share about our successful experiences in this Covid-19 outbreak response,” said Yi-Chun Lo, deputy director general at the Taiwan Centers for Disease Control, CNBC reported. “Our major concern is because Taiwan is not included in WHO’s network, there might not be fair opportunity for Taiwan to get a share [from] the global vaccination program,” said Lo. “So we have to have our own manufacturers [work] very hard on producing vaccine for our domestic purpose,” he said, adding that Taiwan would share any successful vaccine with the global community. With Post wires

The NFL is projected to lose 38 percent of its total revenue if the 2020 season is held without spectators in its stadiums, according to Forbes. Based on figures from the 2018 season, the league is expected to lose $5.5 billion of stadium revenue – which is made up of ticket sales, concessions, sponsors, parking and team stores — should the global coronavirus pandemic force the NFL to have fan-less games. To put it in perspective, per Forbes, the Cowboys and Patriots would lose over half their total revenue while teams like the Bills, Titans and Bengals would lose less than one-third of their usual profits. The NFL and NFLPA agreed to a new collective bargaining agreement in March, which allocated 47 percent of football-related income to the players in 2020 and 48 percent in 2021. A significant loss in total revenue would ultimately hurt the players as well. With the Raiders, Rams and Chargers all scheduled to move into new stadiums for the 2020 season, those organizations would usually see a surge in stadium revenue but will not get those benefits if there are no fans. That’s the same situation with the Buccaneers and their new headlining quarterback Tom Brady, whose signing had already prompted a ticket sale spike in Tampa Bay. The Jets round out the top 5 NFL teams with $218 million in team stadium revenue and $475 million in total revenue. The Giants have the third-highest revenue stream with $262 million in team stadium revenue and $519 million in total revenue.

A social distancing gadget that beeps whenever you’re not keeping six feet from someone could help people return to work. The beeper has been invented by Pathfindr and aims to helps companies keep their workers safe. In the UK and the US, two meters (six feet) apart is the recommended distance to stand in order to try and not spread Covid-19. Pathfindr, based in Norfolk in the UK, usually provides internet-based technical solutions for companies. However, since the coronavirus pandemic broke out the company has received thousands of concerns about keeping workers safe in the office. This is why Pathfindr has now entirely switched its production to focus on beepers. The company’s chief technical officer, Ben Sturgess, told Sky News: “It’s very simple to use. You wear it round your neck, on a belt or in your pocket and it pings out a signal constantly at a rate of about two per second. “If there are any other devices nearby, it sends the message back, calculating how far that other person is away and if you’re within two meters it emits an audible beep.” The company tried to harness Bluetooth technology at first but realized this was bouncing off objects and being blocked by people’s bodies. Sturgess added: “We are using technology called ultra-wideband which is a much higher frequency. “The device measures how long a radio wave takes to travel at the speed of light from one device to another and back again.” Pathfindr managed to create a useable device in less than four weeks. Hundreds of units per week are already being sold but international demand is surging. The company is expecting many thousands of orders per week by next month.

Here’s one way to effectively isolate during the coronavirus lockdown: Rent out a dungeon. That’s what one homeowner in Pottsville, Pennsylvania, is offering in his Craigslist ad for a “Victorian Dungeon Experience.” Starting at $46 a night, you can immerse yourself in a stone windowless basement nook of a house built in 1881, with just candles and oil lamps for illumination. And if you want to be locked in, with just bread, water and a bell to ring for other concerns, you can do that, too. “Surrounded by stone and cement, you will be transported to another time,” reads the ad. “Period reading materials will be available, and you may be *kept down there* with limited house privileges, upon request. There are no bars [to close the cell] at this time, but that may change, based on interest.” The approximately 33-square-foot, 6-foot-tall space is the property of Mack Salt, a writer and former actor, film director and producer, who has lived in the historical home for six years after acquiring it in a foreclosure. He found the extra “dungeon” nook filled with dirt and decaying shelves while clearing out the basement, and surmised that it was once used to store vegetables. His first thought was to utilize it to store his home-brew beer, but then he began using it as a writing space. Mack Salt Salt Salt Salt Salt View Slideshow He had his Edison lightbulb moment to rent the space after watching the 1994 horror flick “Interview With a Vampire,” starring Brad Pitt, Tom Cruise and Christian Slater. “There’s a part where they go down to this crypt under the theater, and they have the coffins,” Salt tells The Post. “I’m not really into vampires and goth stuff, but I thought, ‘You know what, what if I offered this unique space to someone that’s interested in some aspect of that?’ They could have the coolest bedroom quarters ever.” Rather than just rent the space out as a room to crash in for the night, as he does with other bedrooms in the home, Salt (a nom de plume) is hoping to provide a more immersive experience. “I want it to feel real,” Salt says. “And truly, if I take you down to my basement, leave you with an oil lamp down there, and present the right vibe, I think somebody who has a creative mind and wants to experience something, really would.” Renters would have the option to sleep in a regular bedroom and visit the dungeon as they see fit, or spend the whole night there, with a cot provided upon request. And to make the stay fully experiential, Salt includes in the listing period items that could be used for payment, like soap-making supplies (in addition to beer, Salt also makes his own soap), lamp oil and wicks, vintage paper, solid brass and bronze, and of course gold and silver. And for those with coronavirus concerns, Salt says that he keeps the house chemical-free, but will be spraying surfaces with hydrogen peroxide. So, proceed at your own risk. “It’s stone, plaster and concrete down there, so there’s not much that can be done to clean without harsh chemicals,” he says. Should you be able to escape the basement, the house is in walking distance to the Yuengling brewery, which, at almost 200, is the oldest beer brewery in the US, with original hand-dug fermentation caves that you can tour. But after too many beers, no need to use the dungeon’s outhouse, which doesn’t function anyway. Modern facilities are available inside.

A progressive health care advocacy group used cellphone data to track the movements of demonstrators at lockdown protests in five states, according to a report. The Committee to Protect Medicare collected the anonymized location data from opt-in cellphone apps and data scientists at the firm VoteMap used it to determine the movements of the devices at protests in April and May in Michigan, Wisconsin, Illinois, Colorado and Florida, the Guardian reported Monday. They created visualizations that tracked the movements up to 48 hours after the protests ended, and Jeremy Fair, executive vice president of VoteMap, told the newspaper that many of the cellphones reached the state borders and some even crossed them. Following rallies opposing Gov. Gretchen Whitmer’s lockdown orders in Lansing, Mich., on April 30, the devices fanned out to all parts of the state — from Detroit to towns in the northern part of the state. Some crossed into Indiana. In the 48 hours after protests in Denver, cellphones crossed the borders into neighboring Wyoming, Nebraska, Oklahoma, New Mexico and Utah. The compiled data does not include any information that could identify a person.

A Canadian woman who contracted the coronavirus in March has tested positive for the illness for an eighth time. Tracy Schofield from Cambridge, Ontario, came down with COVID-19 symptoms including fever, chills and shortness of breath March 30 and tested positive for the first time March 31, according to CTV News. Since then, she has taken eight more tests, including one that inexplicably came back negative. She is currently preparing for her 10th test. For two weeks following her first test, Schofield self-quarantined in her room at home where her 17-year-old son also lives. During that period, she claims her fever reached 104.1 degrees Fahrenheit, and she also lost her sense of taste and smell. Now, more than 50 days later, she told CTV she still suffers shortness of breath. “COVID-19 has taken a lot out of me, and it continues every day,” she said. After producing a positive result seven times, her eighth test came back negative. “I cried because I was so happy,” Schofield said. But according to World Health Organization guidelines, a patient must test negative twice consecutively before they can be declared “recovered.” Unfortunately, a ninth test found that the virus was still strong in her system. Health officials have warned that these tests have been known to produce false negatives and positives. Early anecdotal reports suggested that some test kits correctly detected COVID-19 only 70% of the time, meaning about a third of patients would receive a false negative. Bill Miller, an Ohio State University physician and epidemiologist who has not treated Schofield, told the Wall Street Journal in April that “the whole testing field is in flux” and “going through a really rapid validation process.” For that reason, “we can’t be completely confident in how they will perform,” he said. Earlier reports have shown that a COVID-19 patient can shed the virus for nearly two months after onset of symptoms. However, anomalies, such as Schofield’s case, indicate that more study is needed on the virus’ longevity. Schofield is fearful of the long-term implications of these lingering symptoms. “I just want someone to be able to tell me something,” she said. “Give me an answer. Am I going to have it forever?”

First Gov. Andrew Cuomo blamed nursing homes for a widely criticized directive from his Health Department barring the facilities from turning away coronavirus-positive people — now he’s pawning it off on the White House. Critics should “ask President Trump” about it, the governor said Wednesday, arguing that the federal government actually cooked up the mandate — and that New York was just following Washington’s lead. “Anyone who wants to ask, ‘Why did the state do that with COVID patients in nursing homes,’ it’s because the state followed President Trump’s CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] guidance,” Cuomo told reporters in Albany who pressed him on whether he had any regrets about the directive, which may have played a role in the deaths of thousands of nursing home residents. “They should ask President Trump. I think that will stop the conversation,” he repeated. Despite frequently jousting with the president throughout the pandemic, however, Cuomo betrayed no regrets on adopting that March 25 directive, even with well over 5,000 confirmed or suspected coronavirus deaths now reported in nursing homes. “You have to remember the facts,” the governor said. “The CDC guidance said a nursing home cannot discriminate against a COVID patient.” But the directive was also motivated by a desire to keep hospital beds free by shifting those with minor infections elsewhere, Cuomo continued — even if that meant putting them in nursing homes, among some of the most susceptible to the disease. “Is the best use of a hospital bed to have somebody sit there for two weeks in a hospital bed when they don’t need the hospital bed … and you need that hospital bed for somebody who may die without it?” asked Cuomo. Cuomo — who has maintained that he, the Department of Health and other state officials did “everything we could” for nursing homes — has announced a state attorney general probe, not of the policy, but of the facilities. A flood of state lawmakers, however, have in turn called for independent investigations into what role the March 25 directive played in the hellish nursing home death tolls. He also reiterated Wednesday his insistence that nursing homes always had the right and responsibility to turn away patients for whom they were unprepared to care. Asked point-blank if the state’s adherence to that policy fueled the nursing home death toll, Cuomo gave a flat denial — but said that if there is any blame, it lies with the facilities. “No. Because you’d have to be saying the nursing homes were wrong in accepting COVID-positive patients,” he said. The governor partly curbed the policy earlier this month by ruling that hospital patients must test negative for the coronavirus before they can be discharged to nursing homes. Cuomo on Wednesday repeated his assertion that such bipartisan calls are “politics,” but said he was open to a review. “I’m not resistant,” he said. “If the federal government wants to start a probe, then they can start a probe. “It is irrelevant to me. … President Trump does what he wants to do. He doesn’t listen to a governor.”

WASHINGTON — This Capitol spat just keeps getting uglier. A day after President Trump said she has “mental problems,” House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on Wednesday likened the commander-in-chief to a child with “doggy doo on his shoes.” The unusual jab escalates tension between Pelosi (D-Calif.) and Trump — after she called Trump “morbidly obese” on Monday. Pelosi launched into an extended attack on Trump at a press conference when asked about his tweet urging police to investigate the 2001 death of an intern who worked for MSNBC host Joe Scarborough, then a Florida GOP congressman. “You’re asking me about the appropriateness of the actions of this president of the United States? So completely inappropriate in so many ways that it’s almost a given,” Pelosi said. “It’s like a child who comes in with mud on their pants or something — that’s the way it is, they’re outside playing. He comes in with doggy doo on his shoes and everybody who works with him has that on their shoes, too, for a very long time to come.” Pelosi went so far as to claim she’s spoken to doctors about Trump’s mental state. “I hear doctors talk to me about saying, ‘What’s matter with him?’ The things he says are so inappropriate for a president of the United States,” Pelosi said. “There’s a word somebody used to me. They said you would understand it better if you knew what a confabulator is — look up the word confabulator — someone who just really doesn’t even know what the truth is. And just says anything. And because he says it, then he believes it,” Pelosi went on. And she defended her Monday evening remark on CNN that Trump is “morbidly obese” and should not take the drug hydroxychloroquine to protect against the coronavirus — saying twice that she gave Trump “a dose of his own medicine,” while also claiming she was being compassionate. “I was only quoting what doctors had said about him. So I was only being factual, and in a very sympathetic way. I said he’s our president, we don’t want our president taking something that could be dangerous as the scientists said it could be. … again, a dose of his own medicine,” Pelosi said. The increased tension comes as Senate Republicans and House Democrats are at an impasse over a potential fifth coronavirus package. The House passed a $3 trillion bill Friday, but Senate GOP leaders say they won’t consider the overloaded package and want to take time to evaluate potential next steps. The relationship between Trump and Pelosi grew increasingly acrimonious since the House impeached him last year. In February, Pelosi tore in half a copy of Trump’s State of the Union speech. Days later, Trump bristled at Pelosi’s frequent public claim that she prays for him. “Nancy Pelosi is a horrible person,” he said. “I doubt she prays at all.”

A new study suggests that a cycle of 50 days under strict lockdown — followed by 30 days of loosened restrictions — could help countries to reduce coronavirus deaths while keeping economies afloat. The European Union-backed study modeled several different lockdown and reopening strategies in 16 countries across Africa, South and West Asia, Australia, Western Europe, North America and South America, according to researchers at the University of Cambridge. The US was not included in the study, which was published in the European Journal of Epidemiology. The researchers came to the conclusion that if countries used the 50-30 cycle, the reproduction rate of the virus — a figure that represents how many people one infected person can transmit the virus to — would fall 0.5, according to the report. Additionally, ICU demand would stabilize at a level that each of the countries could handle, the study found. Under that model, COVID-19 deaths across all 16 countries studied would fall around 130,000 — though the pandemic period would be extended beyond 18 months in all nations, the researchers found. “This intermittent combination of strict social distancing, and a relatively relaxed period, with efficient testing, case isolation, contact tracing and shielding the vulnerable, may allow populations and their national economies to ‘breathe’ at intervals — a potential that might make this solution more sustainable, especially in resource-poor regions,” said Dr. Rajiv Chowdhury, a global health epidemiologist at the UK’s University of Cambridge. Other models examined by the researchers proved ineffective, the study found. One of them, a complete reopening, would lead to a whopping 7.8 million deaths in just those 16 countries. Another plan involved 50 days of mitigation measures — which are not strict lockdowns — followed by 30 days of loosened restrictions. That strategy would work for the first three months, but the study found it would ultimately result in 3.5 million deaths in those 16 countries and the pandemic could last for 12 to 18 months. New coronavirus cases would fall to zero if the countries opted for three straight months of strict lockdowns, or looser mitigation rules lasting more than six months. But the economic cost is too high, they found. “Countries — particularly low-income countries — will have to weigh up the dilemma of preventing COVID-19 related deaths and public health system failure with the long-term economic collapse and hardship,” said Professor Oscar Franco from Switzerland’s University of Bern.

Dr. James Mahoney died in the fight of his lifetime. James, an intensive care doctor who worked nearly 40 years in Brooklyn hospitals, was known to the residents he mentored as “Our Jay-Z.” But when the coronavirus struck, the father of three put off retirement to serve on the front lines of the pandemic. While treating countless patients with the virus at the height of its scourge in low-income areas of New York City, he contracted it himself. On April 27, he passed away from the disease, sources confirmed to The Post. He was 62. “He was still working from home, telling patients to wash their hands, even as he was getting sicker every day,” Natasha Edwards, who works in the philanthropy department of SUNY Downstate Health Sciences University, tells The Post. James split his time between University Hospital of Brooklyn — where he worked since the start of his career — and Kings County Hospital Center. He followed his older brother, Melvin Mahoney, into medicine. His father Oscar Mahoney, 89, tells The Post that his son was dedicated to helping his patients since day one. “Any endeavor, he went all out for it,” Oscar says. “He put his all into it — he didn’t hold back,” adding that Oscar always told him “‘Don’t ever be a half-stepper. Put your whole heart into it.'” The gregarious, down-to-earth doctor who resided in Freeport, NY, was a hospital fixture, perhaps best known for his mentorship to young physicians of color. “As an African American medical student, meeting James during medical school was like meeting a celebrity,” Olu Akindutire, who worked with Mahoney as a resident from 2014-18, tells The Post. Akindutire adds that while most attending physicians could be intimidating, James “was humble and spoke to you with respect,” says Akindutire, 30. “He really made you feel like your opinion mattered. He was a true superhero to young physicians of color.” Those he mentored — and countless others inspired by his selfless work — have started a scholarship fund to help African-American students attend SUNY Downstate Medical School, where James graduated from in 1986. By Wednesday afternoon, the fund had already raised more than $42,000. “He was an exemplary physician and a great advocate for young minority physicians,” reads the GoFundMe, started last week by James’ boss, Dr. Robert Foronjy. “He passed away saving lives during the COVID-19 pandemic. Education was important to Dr. Mahoney and this fund is a fitting tribute to his legacy of teaching and mentorship here at our institution.” Staffers at Kings County Hospital say the loss has been especially devastating given the death of their emergency room’s head nurse, Maria Guia Cabillon, who died the day before James, also of the virus. James, who treated patients in the AIDS epidemic, the 9/11 terrorist attacks and Hurricane Sandy, told his family he wasn’t going to sit out the coronavirus pandemic, despite being near retirement. But, mid-April, after working closely with patients with the illness, he developed a fever. He began working from home, consulting with patients virtually. But his symptoms worsened. He was admitted to the University Hospital on April 20. Though his family couldn’t spend his final days with him due to hospital restrictions, he was immediately surrounded by his medical family, Oscar says. Later that week, James was rushed to Tisch Hospital in Manhattan. Five of his colleagues from Brooklyn followed him in the ambulance — and were with him when he passed away there.

Amanda Stanton isn’t apologizing for crossing state lines during the coronavirus crisis for the sake of her hair. The “Bachelor” alum, 30, revealed on Monday that she drove from LA, where salons remain closed, to Arizona to get her tresses touched up. “Drove very very far to get my hair done & may have peed on the side of a dirt road because I’m scared to use public restrooms,” Stanton captioned a since-expired photo shared to her Instagram Stories. She later shared that the schlep “was worth it,” and that she felt “like a new person.” The “Bachelor in Paradise” star also shared shots of her new and improved ‘do on her feed, captioned, “never been so early to a hair appointment in my life.” Many fans weren’t pleased about Stanton’s choice to ignore LA’s shelter-in-place orders, and their criticism prompted the social media star to defend her actions in another post on her Stories Tuesday. “I’ve been very strict with staying home since 3/14. I haven’t even gone to the grocery store,” Stanton wrote. “I hadn’t had my hair done since January and my hairstylist who I’ve been doing to for years JUST opened her salon. I thought I’d rather when she JUST opened than later when more people had been there.” She added that she and her 8-year-old daughter Kinsley, who joined her for the trek, both tested negative for COVID-19 before departing, and that the pair are “going to quarantine again” before seeing family and friends. “Some might think this is going to great lengths to get my hair done but honestly, I have nothing else to do and isolating for a couple of weeks when I get home was something I was willing to do. To each their own,” Stanton continued. “I’m confident that I’ve been making responsible choices during this time and am proud of myself!” As for why she chose to speak up about the outing? “I really don’t think I have anything to hide,” she concluded. “I feel really good about doing my part during this pandemic.”

Eight in 10 graduating college students believe their college experience has been robbed by the COVID-19 pandemic, according to new research. The study asked 1,000 college students graduating this spring about their thoughts about the coronavirus’ impact on their final days as undergraduates. And as students have transitioned from lecture halls to their living rooms, 66 percent of college students surveyed said the biggest hurdle of remote learning is staying motivated. Another 59 percent said they’re having a hard time staying focused during online lectures. With these complications, 69 percent of college students polled said they feel like they’re learning less due to the switch to remote learning. Conducted by OnePoll on behalf of Canva, the survey also found 35 percent of students surveyed worry they may not pass classes they need to graduate. And with commencement ceremonies canceled, 59 percent of college students surveyed said they would be content with having their diplomas mailed to them. However, 69 percent of respondents said they would likely attend a virtual commencement ceremony – with 35 percent saying they were “very likely” to attend. Despite cancellations and postponements due to COVID-19, 71 percent of college students surveyed still plan on taking graduation photos and 47 percent still plan on sending graduation announcements. Nearly four in 10 students also said they plan on having a virtual graduation party to celebrate. The survey also polled 1,000 general population Americans and found 77 percent are sympathetic with the class of 2020 and feel sad they won’t have the final college experience of their commencement ceremony. Sixty-four percent also said they believe universities should still hold a physical commencement ceremony for the class of 2020 once social distancing measures are lifted. The survey also asked these respondents about their virtual event habits since they’ve entered self-isolation due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Respondents reported they’ve missed an average of four events but have attended five virtual events to make up for these cancellations. Thirty-five percent of those surveyed have hosted a virtual birthday party and 24 percent have hosted an anniversary party and a graduation party. “Connecting with the ones you love may be in the form of a digital birthday celebration at such a unique time as we are in now, but it can also take the form of a card, photo or photo book created and sent to them to cherish for an even longer time,” said Jim Towle, Head of Print at Canva. Despite staying in touch digitally, 68 percent of respondents said they’ve experienced increased feelings of loneliness. And once social distancing measures are lifted, 72 percent of those surveyed said they plan on making up for lost time to make new memories with their loved ones. “It is more important now than ever to stay positive and stay connected during this time of global isolation; reaching out to colleagues, friends and family to maintain that sense of human connection and belonging is vital,” added Towle. Help is available, speak with a counselor today. National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-8255 Most difficult parts of remote learning for the class of 2020 Top events missed due to COVID-19 Top virtual events hosted during COVID-19

Harley-Davidson is reopening its factories this week at lower production rates and sending dealers a narrower range of motorcycles, the Wall Street Journal reported on Wednesday. The US motorcycle maker, which closed its US plants in March due to the coronavirus outbreak, may not ship any additional new motorcycles this year to about 70 percent of its 698 dealers in the country, the report said. The company did not immediately respond to Reuters request for comment. Harley would reopen its plants in Wisconsin and Pennsylvania and accelerate production in phases that would be limited to bestselling models and palette of colors and without customizable features for the rest of the year, the report said. The company has failed for years to increase sales in the US, its top market, which accounts for more than half its motorcycles sold. As its tattooed, baby-boomer consumer base ages, the Milwaukee-based company has found it tough to attract new customers. To make matters worse, the pandemic has further dented demand as Americans stay at home. In April, then-acting Chief Executive Jochen Zeitz, who has since taken a permanent role at Harley, told investors about plans to cut costs and “de-emphasize” some of its unprofitable international regions. Jochen and team have been working on a new five-year strategic plan here to revive sales, which the company plans to reveal in the second-quarter earnings update. Harley has also moved the launch timing of new models to the early part of the first quarter from August to better align with the start of the riding season. That provided some boost to its US retail sales in the first quarter. Harley’s annual dealer meet, usually held in August, will now take place early next year.

The city is ramping up coronavirus testing and staffing at Big Apple nursing homes as part of a new plan to fight the deadly bug in hard-hit elderly communities, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Wednesday. Starting next week, the city will offer free, on-site diagnostic coronavirus tests to all 169 nursing homes across the five boroughs, de Blasio said during his daily press briefing as he outlined the four-part plan. “Whatever amount of testing, whatever amount of lab capacity they need, we will find it for them,” de Blasio said. The mayor, who noted that the majority of nursing homes in the Big Apple are private enterprises, said the city expects to provide 3,000 tests a day. “If this needs to go on for months and months, it will go on for months and months,” said de Blasio. As part of the plan, de Blasio said, the city has already sent 240 personnel to nursing homes as a way to fill the gaps if staffers there contract coronavirus and have to isolate for a required 14 days. “We are committed to filling those gaps to make sure there’s enough personnel,” de Blasio said, adding, “We will continue to fulfill the requests from every nursing home.” The city is also implementing 10 “outbreak response teams” — each composed of three members, including a head epidemiologist — to aid nursing homes and assisted-living facilities, said de Blasio. “The goal here is to keep containing the coronavirus, to keep pushing it back,” the mayor said, adding, “The second there’s any sign of a problem, this team can go in, can oversee the response, help control infection, make sure the PPE is where it needs to be, make sure retesting is done in the facility.” The teams will be led by the city Health Department. Part four of the plan focuses on a shift to home-based care for the city’s senior citizens, de Blasio said. “We’ve learned in this crisis, and even before, that there may be a better way … having folks at home is in many ways not only a better quality of life, but it’s a better place to care for someone done right,” the mayor said. Hizzoner said the idea “will be a part of our recovery planning.” “We’re going to look at how to maximize home-based care rather than nursing home care,” he said. More than 5,000 nursing home residents in New York have died from confirmed or presumed cases of coronavirus. Meanwhile, the city’s latest daily coronavirus statistics showed that hospitalizations were slightly up, but that intensive care unit admissions were down, de Blasio said. Patients in ICUs for suspected coronavirus across the city’s 11 public hospitals went down from 492 on Sunday to 483 on Monday, while the number of people admitted to Big Apple hospitals went up from 57 on Sunday to 63 on Monday, according to the data, which has a two-day reporting lag. “Not too bad, but we want to do better,” de Blasio said of the hospital admissions stat. The percentage of people tested citywide who are positive for COVID-19 dipped from 9 percent Sunday to 8 percent Monday, the data shows. “Isn’t it great to see these single digits,” said Hizzoner.

China’s Communist Party is again seizing factory lines churning out the world’s supply of medical safety gear — sparking fears the country is preparing for a second wave of the coronavirus, American traders in China told The Post. New Yorker Moshe Malamud, who has done business in China for over two decades, was moving tens of millions of pieces of protective gear to the US at the height of the crisis but said suppliers in recent weeks had been overwhelmed with orders from the Chinese government. “I was placing a larger order with one of the bigger distributors and he tells me, ‘I can complete this order but after this we’ve been contracted by the Chinese government to produce 250 million gowns,'” said Malamud, who lived in China for a decade before founding aviation company M2Jets. He said he heard a similar story about another manufacturer making thermometers. Zhang Jinchuan/China News Servic WANG ZHAO/AFP via Getty Images WANG ZHAO/AFP via Getty Images View Slideshow “We hear how China is up and running and the virus is past them, so I asked, ‘What are they ordering 250 million gowns for?’ and of course no one is talking.” “I’ve been hearing this a lot from other manufacturing institutions that say, ‘We can give you a little bit, but basically we’re concentrated between now and the end of the summer manufacturing stuff for the Chinese government in anticipation of a second wave,'” he continued. Last month, leading US manufacturers of medical safety gear told the White House that China had prohibited them from exporting goods as the crisis mounted, a Post report revealed. A leaked Department of Homeland Security intelligence report also concluded China downplayed the severity of the virus to stockpile medical supplies needed to fight the outbreak. One senior White House official told The Post they were concerned PPE would be used as a “blackmail tool,” with China wielding its manufacturing power to alter foreign policy decisions. The warning comes after China’s top medical adviser this week told CNN he feared a second wave of COVID-19, with fresh clusters emerging in different parts of the country. Michael Kule, founder of Hong Kong-based AFA Sourcing, said it had been “very challenging” to get goods out of China, citing constantly changing export rules, but added he didn’t believe Chinese authorities were doing it out of malice. “I don’t feel like the Chinese government is making an attempt to not get goods to the American public,” Kule said. “I do think that they are looking out for themselves so that if they need something, they’re going to get first priority.” “If there’s a very good factory making very good product, then they’ll take over. I’ve been involved with a factory that the Chinese government placed 200 million pieces with and now I can’t place any more orders.” “It was a really good set-up and they said, ‘Sorry, no more orders. Go find another factory.'” Kule and Malamud said they were still getting materials out of China, citing their decades of experience in the region, but were both shocked by the rush from inexperienced opportunists who had been price gouging desperate hospitals by marking up medical materials by up to 300 percent. Both men sounded the alarm over a US overreliance on China for essential goods and said the Trump administration would be smart to diversify. “Why wouldn’t the White House bring in people who do this for a living, who are experts in sourcing and manufacturing, and come up with a strategy of how we’re going to manufacture this stuff, not just in China but in Bangladesh, in Africa, in the Caribbean, in Honduras and Vietnam?” Malamud asked. Lawmakers on Capitol Hill share this sentiment and have joined the international community in calling for an investigation into China’s handling of the crisis, which broke out in Wuhan in December last year. “In a time of a global pandemic, lies cost lives,” Rep. Max Rose (D-NY) told The Post. “Reports of the Communist Chinese government downplaying the severity of the coronavirus while simultaneously stockpiling PPE strikes to the core of why they cannot be trusted,” he continued. “That’s why I’ve made a bipartisan request for our Intelligence Community to get facts because the world deserves to know the truth,” he said. Rose, chair of the Homeland Security Subcommittee on Intelligence and Counterterrorism, is calling on the Department of Homeland Security to increase its focus on China’s activity and intelligence regarding the Communist Party’s response to COVID-19. A State Department spokesman said they were working with Chinese authorities over delays in goods. “We continue to work closely with US companies exporting PPE from China and to raise related issues such as export delays with the People’s Republic of China authorities,” he said.

Rolls-Royce plans to cut at least 9,000 jobs, or more than a sixth of its workforce, in the latest blows to the UK economy and aviation industry dealt by the coronavirus pandemic. The company, which makes engines for planes such as the Boeing 787 and Airbus 350, said on Wednesday it could also close factories as it shrinks to fit the smaller market it expects to emerge from the crisis. Airlines and their supplies have been among the hardest hit businesses by lockdowns to contain the pandemic, with passenger air travel grinding to a virtual halt. Britain, like many other economies, is also bracing for a deep recession, with jobless claims in April leaping to the highest in nearly 24 years. “We have to reduce our cost base and adapt to the new world, matching our capacity with expected demand,” Rolls-Royce chief executive Warren East told reporters, unveiling the company’s biggest round of cuts since privatization in 1987. The 9,000 jobs, out of a global staff of 52,000, will go predominantly from Rolls’ civil aerospace business, which generates just over half of its 15 billion pounds of annual revenues. Rolls said it was targeting 1.3 billion pounds of annual cost savings, with about 700 million coming from layoffs plus other cuts that could include factory closures. Headquartered in Derby, central England, about two-thirds of Rolls civil aerospace jobs are based in the UK, East said, adding that was “probably a good first proxy” of where the jobs were likely to be lost. East said Rolls had 16 to 17 major civil aerospace manufacturing locations across the world, including big presences in Germany and Singapore. Consultations with unions will now get underway, with job losses also expected in office support functions. Rolls’ defense unit will be spared, though, as military demand remains robust. Forecasting air travel will not recover for three to five years, East said Rolls was preparing for aviation activity to be about a third less than in 2019. Government schemes to help pay workers had been useful in the short term, with Rolls’ furloughing 4,000 staff under the UK scheme, but the company needs to prepare for a future where its airline customers fly less, East said. The cuts follow a 2018 program to axe 4,600 jobs, although 1,000 job losses outstanding from that round are included in the 9,000. Rolls has also been grappling with a long-running engine problem which forced airlines to ground planes. Its shares have dropped 62% this year to 11-year lows.

The Chinese city at the center of the coronavirus pandemic has banned the consumption of wild animals — while offering cash incentives for farmers to quit breeding exotic creatures, according to a report. Wuhan, in China’s Hubei province, officially prohibited eating wild animals as well as hunting them within city limits, declaring itself a “wildlife sanctuary” Wednesday, CBS reported. The virus is widely believed to have emerged from a wet market in the city, possibly jumping from bats to humans via an intermediary animal such as a pangolin. The only exception for hunting would be for “scientific research, population regulation, monitoring of epidemic diseases and other special circumstances,” the report said. Officials said that rearing wild animals for the purpose of eating them was also banned and announced it would participate in nationwide efforts to buy out these breeders. China already banned wildlife trade nationwide to prevent the spread of COVID-19, which has now infected more than 4.9 million people worldwide. The finance ministry has also issued new incentives to get wild creatures out of the country, offering tax rebates to export animal products such as edible snakes and turtles, primate meat and rhino horns, the Wall Street Journal reported. But a report by the US Congressional Research Service warned that incentivizing the sale of wild animals abroad, while banned at home, “could spread the risk to global markets,” according to the outlet.

A mall in Thailand has swapped lift buttons for foot pedals in an effort to prevent the spread of the coronavirus as well as help restore normalcy and get shoppers spending again. Customers at Bangkok’s Seacon Square were surprised and confused this week to find pedals in front of the elevators and inside, but they welcomed the new hands-free enhancement as a smart move to stay healthy. “They did a good job in preparing this. I feel much safer because we use our hands to do various things all the time,” said a customer who disclosed only her first name, Watcharaporn. “Now that we can use our foot to press the elevator, it’s really great.” Thailand opened malls and department stores on Sunday for the first time since March, its second phase of relaxing measures as the number of new coronavirus cases slows. It has confirmed 3,034 cases and 56 deaths. Its economy, Southeast Asia’s second largest, contracted at its sharpest pace in eight years in the first quarter, pushing it into recession sooner than expected, as the coronavirus outbreak hit tourism and domestic activity The central bank cut its benchmark interest rate for the third time this year to a record low on Wednesday. Prote Sosothikul, vice president of Seacon Development, which oversees the mall, said the foot pedals gave shoppers some peace of mind. “The easiest way to get infected is when you touch an object that has been contaminated,” he said. “Eventually touch your face and the virus will go into your mouth, your eyes, or whatever. So we came up with this idea of hand-free, foot-operated elevator.”

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Wednesday suggested this year’s canceled in-person Group of Seven summit could be back on — a potential meeting of the world leaders signaling the worst of the coronavirus is over, he said. The June G7 meeting at the presidential Camp David country retreat in Maryland was canceled in March as the coronavirus pandemic spread around the globe and was replaced with a video conference. “Now that our Country is ‘Transitioning back to Greatness’, I am considering rescheduling the G7, on the same or similar date, in Washington, D.C., at the legendary Camp David,” Trump tweeted Wednesday. “The other members are also beginning their COMEBACK. It would be a great sign to all – normalization!” he continued. The high-profile gathering of the world’s leading industrial economies includes Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan — some of the countries hardest hit by the COVID-19 pandemic. Group of Seven leaders have continued speaking on the phone and are reportedly concerned with China’s response to the virus, with Trump telling advisers they are “not happy people,” The Post understands. As the president looks to reopen the country and start traveling again, he has spent two of the past three weekends at Camp David huddling with advisers. Trump previously announced the 2020 G7 meeting would happen at his National Doral golf resort in Miami but was forced to cancel after a tsunami of criticism that it was in violation of the Constitution, which says the president cannot profit from his office.

Josephine Skriver is putting her wedding plans on pause due to the coronavirus pandemic. The Victoria’s Secret model, 27, confirmed on Wednesday that she and fiancé Alexander DeLeon have decided to postpone their nuptials, but are remaining positive despite the unexpected change. “We’re just happy that our family and friends are happy and healthy,” she told People magazine. “People around the world are going through so much worse than a wedding postponement. It would be selfish of us to complain.” However, Skriver did admit that the call to cancel was a “tough decision to make.” She also said on her Instagram Stories, “Some days I’m just like, ‘F–k you, COVID!'” “When you wait for a moment your entire life and then have to postpone, it’s never easy,” Skriver told People. “We debated it for weeks, trying everything we could to make it work. At the end of the day, the safety of our friends and family was the most important.” While the model didn’t disclose when the wedding was supposed to take place, she added that part of the reason they had to be halted was because there was a delay in the making of her dress. “The fabric for my dress actually got stuck in production because of COVID, so I wasn’t even sure we could make it in time and wasn’t even ready to fully try it on,” she shared. “I’m sure so many brides are dealing with the same thing and I feel for them more than ever!” Aside from the date, the soon-to-be bride said not much else has changed in her wedding plans. “I’m excited it’s already rolled out and ready to get set up,” she said. “I think the one year move-back will give me time to really enjoy the process more. It was a lot more stressful than I thought and I’m excited to use this time to make it even more special.” Skriver and DeLeon got engaged in November 2018. The musician popped the question while the couple were vacationing together in Finland.

Dutch authorities believe a mink may have transmitted the coronavirus to a farmworker in what may be the first animal-to-human case detected since the original outbreak in Wuhan, China. The government said the infection appears to be linked to the outbreaks detected on mink-breeding farms in April, when keepers noticed that some of the animals were having trouble breathing. “On the basis of new research results from the ongoing research into COVID-19 infections at mink farms, it is plausible that an infection took place from mink to human,” officials said, according to CNN. In a letter sent to parliament on Wednesday, agriculture minister Carola Schouten said the worker had a strain of the virus similar to the one found in an animal on the premises, according to EuroNews. “These new research results have a major impact on the owners, families and employees of mink companies as well as on the local communities,” Schouten said in the letter. Schouten warned the outbreak may be linked to cats, which were found to also be positive at one of the country’s infected farms, according to CNN. “In the course of this investigation, it is advised that infected mink farms ensure that cats cannot enter or leave the farm premises,” the government said. The Netherlands will start screening mink farms in the country for coronavirus antibodies in “the interest of the health of employees,” Bloomberg reported. The pandemic is believed to have originated from bats, but there have been no known reports since of animals spreading the virus to humans. Animals do appear to be susceptible to catching the virus from humans, with the Bronx Zoo announcing last month that several big cats tested positive after being exposed to an infected zookeeper. With Post wires

Hal Steinbrenner and Jeff Wilpon DNA-ed their way into jobs. Whatever you think of Jacoby Ellsbury and Yoenis Cespedes, they used talent to gain their contracts. There was no inheritance, nepotism or being born on third base. Players earn what franchises are willing to pay. Scott Boras, for example, has been accused of many tricks to get clients such as Ellsbury terrific deals. But there has never been a report that he brought a gun to the proceedings. The owners give the contracts under free will. So when I refer to a contract negatively, it is always over what else it prevents a team from doing within its self-imposed budget. I never criticize the player for getting the money, just as I would not Jennifer Lawrence nor Adam Sandler if they were in a bomb. These are big businesses paying what they can afford because fan appetite fills the coffers. MLB was nearly an $11 billion business last year and if all the players were paid $50,000 each, MLB still would have been an $11 billion business, just a greater share would have gone to the owners. Of course, MLB will not be an $11 billion business this year. Like just about every corporation on the planet, MLB is being walloped by the impact of the coronavirus pandemic. Even if somehow an 82-game regular season is played and a more lucrative, expanded playoffs completed and corporate logos are put on uniforms and fans can return for a portion of the schedule, MLB is going to take in a lot less dough than last year. MLB’s view is it never would have given out the current player contracts if owners knew this was their revenue and, thus, players should accept less. Players argue that when owner revenue goes up in a particular season, players don’t suddenly receive larger checks, so why should they share the burden when the revenue goes down? Both claim the March 26 agreement validates their position. Players point to a portion of the document that says they will be paid a prorated portion of their 2020 salary based on how much of the season is played. The owners can cite a portion that reads, “the Office of the Commissioner and Players Association will discuss in good faith the economic feasibility of playing games in the absence of spectators.” In general, when it comes to player pay, I see the March 26 agreement as a Rorschach Test — you can see what you want to see in the ink. If forced to pick, I would say the agreement calls for another negotiation to be had if games are to be played without fans, which will be the case at least to begin if there is a season. That was my lean even before The Post on Tuesday revealed a smoking gun email that seemed to corroborate that the Players Association understood that condition as well. Still, that just means there needs to be a negotiation. It does not mean that the players have to accept what was floated by ownership but never formally offered to players — a 50-50 revenue split for 2020. Heck, if the players wanted more than the pro-rata salary for 2020, go for it. They are going to be the ones taking the risks. I suspect Steinbrenner, Wilpon and Chris Ilitch will not be in clubhouses. Neither will Bruce Sherman, John Sherman or Joel Sherman — at least in 2020, I assume no clubhouse access for reporters. Even in a pandemic, I will never criticize what players negotiate to receive. But I do think rather than stating the issue already is resolved, the players should negotiate — and come with ideas. The union, if it allows itself, could actually be in a position of leverage. It is clear how desperate MLB is to want to play some form of a season and, especially, postseason. Perhaps, so desperate that all the union has to do is keep saying “no” to everything and eventually MLB will cave and give the pro-rata salaries to save the season. But that is risky. There are owners who would rather not play than add to their 2020 losses. If MLB doesn’t blink, then the staredown becomes mutual suicide. Should the sport somehow receive the governmental and medical blessings to play and then doesn’t due to a financial stalemate, then the reputations of leadership on both sides will be destroyed forever and the damage to the game will register between immense and irreparable, a result ruinous to both sides. Thus, the players also have to be in the solution business. Perhaps, as I have written previously, take the pro-rated contracts over several years so they are made whole and the owners are helped with present cash flow. And definitely extract some guarantees for the future, maybe around the manipulation of service time or better compensation for free agents beyond the star level. After all, this is not a one-year problem. The losses incurred by owners now and the debt taken on will be felt in player salaries in the near future regardless of how this year is settled (or not settled). Thus, the Players Association should be using this moment to not myopically look at just getting every penny in 2020. This is a chance to see a bigger picture, to maybe trade some now for later and — vitally — help save the status of the sport. Whatever the players fight for and receive, no qualms, no criticism. Now, just get in a room and negotiate.

My grocery store has replaced the salad in the salad bar with…. liquor. pic.twitter.com/eGemUkvbj8 — Emily A. (@emzorbit) May 19, 2020  They put the “bar” in salad bar! A Missouri supermarket is selling miniature liquor bottles instead of veggies at a serve-yourself salad station during the coronavirus crisis, according to a viral tweet. “My grocery store has replaced the salad in the salad bar with…. liquor,” shopper Emily A. posted on Twitter, along with a photo of the boozy bar she says was found at a Dierbergs market. The image — which shows piles of 99-cent hard liquor bottles on one side of the station, along with beer on the other — drew cheers from pandemic-weary boozehounds on social media. “Best. Salad. Bar. EVAH,” one person wrote on Twitter. One observer added, “That is the most quarantine thing I’ve ever seen”  — while another quipped, “It’s for sanitizing.” A rep for the store said workers simply got creative after the greens were removed two months ago to prevent customers from spreading germs. “Looking for a way to leverage an empty salad bar, which has been closed since March of this year during the COVID-19 operational changes, Rick Rodemacher, our store director at our Manchester [branch] had the idea to place beer cans in the empty space,” store spokesman Jamie Collins told the Post. “It started with beer cans and then liquor bottles.” Collins added, “It’s a safety precaution and not [due to food] supply issues.” Dierbergs operates 25 stores in Missouri and Illinois.

“Saturday Night Live” ended its season just weeks ago, but the show is still playing a part in coronavirus-era life at NBCUniversal. NBCSN, the company’s sports-cable network, will fill next week’s primetime schedule with “SNL” repeats featuring prominent athletes as hosts. It’s just the latest programming maneuver by sports-media outlets to get something on the air for audiences at a time when the coronavirus pandemic has scuttled the majority of professional sports matches. ESPN has used everything from games of cornhole to Disney sports movies like “The Rookie” and “The Greatest Game Ever Played” to classic WrestleManina bouts from the WWE to keep the lights on. MLB Network has relied on baseball films like “Major League II.” NBCSN intends to broadcast 20 different “SNL” episodes overall, with some of them dating back to the early 1990s (a 1989 broadcast featuring hockey great Wayne Gretzky, who took the opportunity to play in a spoof of Elvis movies alongside cast member Jan Hooks, will probably not be shown, but why not a 1990 broadcast hosted by former Yankees owner George Steinbrenner and musical act Morris Day & The Time?). Episodes hosted by Michael Jordan, LeBron James, Charles Barkley, Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, Eli Manning, J.J. Watt, Dwayne Johnson, Andy Roddick, John Cena, Ronda Rousey, Michael Phelps, and Derek Jeter will all be used. Athletes have often proven to be interesting hosts for the venerable NBC late-night mainstay. They typically have no movie or TV show to promote and often are more open to testing new abilities by plunging themselves into various “SNL” sketches. On the other hand, they aren’t actors and may rely more heavily on the show’s cast to keep things going.

President Trump on Wednesday blamed China’s “incompetence” for allowing the coronavirus to spread around the world and kill more than 320,000 people. “Some wacko in China just released a statement blaming everybody other than China for the Virus which has now killed hundreds of thousands of people. Please explain to this dope that it was the ‘incompetence of China’, and nothing else, that did this mass Worldwide killing!,” Trump wrote on Twitter. The president didn’t name the source of the finger-pointing statement from China. But China’s foreign ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian accused Trump of trying to make the World Health Organization a scapegoat over his “incompetent response” to the pandemic. “The US tries to use China as an issue to shift responsibility and bargain on its international obligations to the WHO,” Zhao said in response to a letter from Trump to WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus. Trump has been highly critical of Beijing’s response to the pandemic, blaming China for using its influence with the WHO to downplay the severity of the virus and for failing to accurately report the number of cases in the country after the initial outbreak in Wuhan in December. The president threatened to permanently halt US funding for the WHO unless the United Nations agency commits to “substantive improvements” within the next 30 days. “It is my duty, as President of the United States, to inform you that, if the World Health Organization does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the World Health Organization permanent and reconsider our membership in the organization,” Trump wrote to Tedros on Monday. With Post wires

“Vanderpump Rules” star Dayna Kathan spilled her secrets on surviving quarantine amid the coronavirus pandemic. First and foremost, the 29-year-old Bravolebrity suggests staying off your phone as much as possible. “During quarantine, I feel like we’re all pretty drunk all the time, so probably just stay off your phone in general,” she told Page Six, adding, “Don’t text anyone. Just maybe a weekly update that you’re still with us. A quick Instagram update, but stay off your phone.” Kathan also believes taking up a new hobby that “suits the new normal” will also help with quarantine survival. “If you’re not a drink maker, start making cocktails,” she suggested while showing off her cocktail made with Vitaminwater and vodka. “You have to keep in mind that this isn’t a craft cocktail,” she continued. “This is whatever you have around the house to keep you f–king sane.” Skipping out on her own tip to steer clear of the phone, Kathan decided her new hobby would be to create a “photorial video series” on her IGTV where she posts advice, makeup tutorials, and other content that she says she has “no f–king business giving advice on.” “It keeps me sane and I hope people aren’t taking it too seriously,” she said. Kathan also urged social media users to limit reading comments about yourself to avoid any negativity. “It’s really scary in there,” she warned. Lastly, to stay social while in isolation, she added,. you can have a virtual cocktail with friends, or in her case, whichever castmate she’s not fighting with that week.

As temperatures rise and sunny skies and mild breezes coax people out of quarantine, many are wondering about the likelihood of catching the coronavirus while outdoors. “Everyone’s itching to get outside, I think it can be done. We just have to pay very close attention to doing it safely,” Dr. Jason Farley, nurse epidemiologist trained in infectious disease and professor at Johns Hopkins University School of Nursing, told Fox News. “I really think a practical and common-sense approach right now is what’s called for.” While experts agree the great outdoors reduces the risk of virus transmission as compared to confined areas with stagnant air, they also say there is still a theoretical risk. Critical factors influencing virus transmission from an infectious person to a susceptible person involve physical distancing, duration of time together and surrounding ventilation, doctors say. Dr. Timothy Brewer, professor of medicine and epidemiology at UCLA, told Fox News ventilation outdoors will rapidly disperse any viral particles in the air. When people engage in conversation, they express clouds of aerosols or respiratory droplets. The ventilation outdoors plays a role in dispersing these particles, which is a good thing. “In the hospital, when we design a negative pressure room, we want to have at least 12 complete air exchanges in the room to prevent transmission of airborne infections or respiratory droplet infections,” Brewer explained. “If you’re outside, your ventilation greatly exceeds that, so being outside will disperse any viral particles in the air very rapidly.” Brewer explained that talking generates particles of different sizes. Particles larger than five microns are most likely to transmit a respiratory infection like COVID-19 and tend to travel short distances — within three to six feet. Gravity then carries down the particles until they impact the ground or land on another person. Particles smaller than five microns can float and any air current at all will disperse them, the doctor said. However, Farley said wind would not stop the expressed droplets from traveling within arms distance, unless it was blowing “pretty significantly.” There is limited data so far on the likelihood of coronavirus outbreaks originating outdoors. One study (not yet peer-reviewed) published in early April by six scientists across several Chinese universities examined 318 outbreaks of COVID-19 in 120 cities in China between Jan. 4 and Feb. 11 and found that outbreaks of three or more cases were largely confined to enclosed spaces, such as home and transportation and that only one outbreak originated outside. “Among the identified outbreaks, 53.8 [percent] involved three cases, 26.4 [percent] involved four cases and only 1.6 [percent] involved 10 or more cases,” researchers wrote in the study’s abstract. “Home outbreaks were the dominant category (254 of 318 outbreaks; 79.9 percent), followed by transport (108; 34.0 percent; note that many outbreaks involved more than one venue category). Most home outbreaks involved three to five cases. We identified only a single outbreak in an outdoor environment, which involved two cases.” “All identified outbreaks of three or more cases occurred in an indoor environment, which confirms that sharing indoor space is a major SARS-CoV-2 infection risk,” the researchers concluded. Sunlight also helps to disinfect particles, though the key factor in reducing virus transmission outside is the dispersion of viral particles by the wind, according to Brewer. Both Brewer and Farley advise those venturing outdoors to maintain at least six feet in physical distancing. Face masks can also help to reduce virus spread. Farley told Fox News of steps he’s taking to change his own behavior when outdoors. A group of his close friends wanted to meet up for a run, he said. The runners maintained at least six-feet distance and enjoyed a tailgate afterward with cars appropriately spaced apart. Brewer said people should continue to wear masks outdoors, particularly if they don’t have trouble breathing. “We [could] still be with one another and enjoy each other’s company but we did so in a safer manner,” Farley said. While the health experts advise exercise like walking or jogging outdoors, Farley said to be as respectful of others as possible. “If you’re passing someone, do so with a wide gait, or a wide girth around the person, try not to brush elbows with them as you run by,” he said. Experts also advised caution when touching potentially contaminated surfaces, like door handles at public restrooms at the beach. Appropriate levels of hand hygiene need to be maintained even in outdoor spaces, Farley said. Washing hands after returning from trips to the grocery store is also advised. “People should be very mindful that just because some of the restrictions are being lifted, it does not mean it is over,” Dr. Humberto Choi, pulmonary and critical care physician at Cleveland Clinic, told Fox News. He shared his experience working in the intensive care unit, where doctors are still seeing “many patients who are very sick from coronavirus.” “People still need to take this very seriously,” he said. Choi suggested planning in advance before heading outdoors. Go shopping for groceries when stores are less busy, he said and stay away from team sports. Opt for tennis or throwing a frisbee instead, which present a much lower risk of infection than group sports like football or soccer.

US stocks jumped Wednesday as continued hopes for a recovery from the coronavirus crisis helped investors shake off questions about a potential vaccine. The Dow Jones industrial average climbed as much as 359.73 points, or 1.4 percent, to 24,566.59 in early trading to recover most of the prior day’s 390-point loss. The S&P 500 and the Nasdaq posted early gains as large as 1.5 and 1.7 percent, respectively, after tumbling in a volatile Tuesday session as experts cast doubt on Moderna’s COVID-19 vaccine candidate. Wall Street appeared to hold onto optimism about states across the US easing lockdowns aimed at curbing the coronavirus without seeing a substantial second wave of infections. Federal Reserve chairman Jerome Powell also reminded Wall Street that he’s prepared to do whatever it takes to shore up the economy in his Tuesday testimony to the Senate Banking Committee, where he also made the case for more stimulus spending. “Investors feel like they escaped the Titanic in lifeboats and have been rescued by the USS Jerome Powell,” said Gerald Sparrow, chief investment officer of the Sparrow Growth Fund. “However, markets in rescue operations are like the weather — they’re hard to predict and subject to change.” Tuesday’s jump came despite lingering questions about the potential coronavirus vaccine produced by Moderna. The biotech company inspired a market rally with its Monday announcement that the vaccine was generating immune responses to the virus in an early trial. But experts were skeptical because Moderna has not released crucial data from the trial involving just 45 participants, STAT News reported Tuesday. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, which is leading the phase-one trial, also did not comment on Moderna’s announcement. “Every specialist seems to indicate that a vaccine will take some time to develop, yet markets treat each trial announcement like we are on the cusp of a huge breakthrough that could see everything swiftly return to normal,” said Joshua Mahony, senior market analyst at IG.

The coronavirus will infect more than 5 million people — and kill nearly 300,000 — across the US by late July if states fully reopen without social distancing measures in place, according to a new analysis. The projected figures, detailed in the new Penn Wharton Budget model, forecast potential outcomes under various reopening scenarios. If states fully reopen, with “reduced distancing,” more than 5.4 million people nationwide will be infected and 292,692 will have died by July 24, the analysis indicates. Partially reopening states while keeping social distancing measures in place will result in a different scenario — about 3.2 million positive cases and nearly 173,000 deaths by the same date, according to the modeling. Previous forecasts from the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School of Business model projected a death toll as high as 350,000, according to a Yahoo! Finance report. Though the new numbers are lower, they are still higher than other models predict, the outlet reported. Even for states under a full lockdown, the model estimated a death toll at just over 156,000, up from its previous forecasts of 117,000, according to the report. By late Wednesday morning, more than 1.5 million coronavirus cases and nearly 92,000 deaths had been reported in the US, Johns Hopkins University data shows. While the Wharton modeling seems to warn against a full reopening, it does point to the economic benefit of loosening restrictions. Continuing the lockdown, with full social distancing measures in place, will cause the US GDP to plummet by 10.8 percent compared to last year, by July 24, according to the report. If states reopen while maintaining social distancing, the GDP would see a smaller decline of 7.7 percent within the same time frame. If social distancing is reduced, the GDP would decline by only 6.6 percent, the data shows.

Long after the coronavirus pandemic is declared over, another health plight could take its place: a mental health crisis, experts have warned. But according to a new study, practicing yoga may help to offset the blues, at least somewhat. Researchers with the University of South Australia, in a partnership with the Federal University of Santa Maria, UNSW Sydney, Kings College London and Western Sydney University, conducted what is said to be the first “world study” on the mental health benefits of practicing yoga. In a meta-analysis of 180 studies across six countries that involved some 1,080 participants —  all of whom had a “formal diagnosis of a mental disorder, including depression and anxiety,” as per a news release on the findings — researchers found that the participants’ mental health improved with “movement-based yoga,” with the benefits “being incremental with the amount of yoga they practiced,” they said. Movement-based yoga was defined by the researchers as “any form of yoga where participants are physically active at least 50 [percent] of the time, that is forms of yoga that emphasize holding poses and flowing through sequences of poses,” as per the news release. “As self-isolation escalates and people find themselves working from home and unable to physically catch up with their friends and family, we’re likely to see more people feel lonely and disconnected,” said lead researcher and University of South Australia Ph.D. candidate Jacinta Brinsley, in a statement. “Exercise has always been a great strategy for people struggling with these feelings as it boosts both mood and health. But as gyms and exercise classes of all kinds are now closed – even jogging with a friend is strongly discouraged – people are looking for alternatives and this is where yoga can help.” “Our research shows that movement-based yoga improved symptoms of depression (or improved mental health) for people living with a range of mental health conditions, including anxiety, post-traumatic stress and major depression. So, it’s very good news for people struggling in times of uncertainty,” Brinsley added. The study was published in the British Journal of Sports Medicine.

A Florida nurse was found dead in his car from a suspected overdose after struggling with the trauma of treating coronavirus patients, friends and relatives said. William Coddington, a nurse at JFK Medical Center in West Palm Beach, was tormented by the cases of fatally ill COVID-19 patients in his intensive care unit, friends and family told Reuters. “What you or I may find as upsetting, or bothersome – that life could be devastating to him,” friend Robert Marks told NBC Miami. A recovering addict, the 32-year-old was unable to go to his 12-step recovery meetings in person during the pandemic. “He couldn’t meet with his sponsor,” said his mom, Carolyn Coddington. “And his friends, nobody wanted to see him because he worked in a hospital, not even to sit 6 feet apart.” In his final weeks, William began to retreat more into himself, speaking less to his mother, whom he lived with, and spending more time alone in his room. “It was despair … creeping in,” his friend Skye Alexander said. Coddington had complained in mid-April on Facebook about the lack of PPE in the hospital as he worked on a coronavirus floor. “In my hospital we are rationing 1 n95 mask for my whole shift,” Coddington wrote. “We are running out of gowns. We are having people make makeshift face shields that end up snapping.” Days before he died, his face shield fell off while he was helping intubate a patient, his father said. “He literally felt things splash on his face,” Ronald Coddington recalled his son telling him. Family and friends said they began to check in more often with him, fearing that he might relapse in his decade-long battle with opioid addiction and other substance abuse. “You are so needed right now by others. You can be great,” his father wrote to him in text messages on April 1. “Please please bury me some day. Don’t make me bury you … I love you.” After getting into a fight, his mother checked his phone location on April 25 and saw that he wasn’t at the hospital. She drove to a Deerfield Beach hotel parking lot, where she found him dead from what the family believes was an overdose. His father said police told him they obtained a video showing his son sitting in his car when another vehicle pulls up and “some kind of exchange” occurs that he suspects was a drug deal. The Broward County Sheriff’s Office said it is still investigating his death but does not suspect foul play. Kathryn Walton, a spokeswoman for JFK Medical Center, declined to comment on William’s death, but said the hospital’s goal was always to protect employees. She said the hospital had “adequate supplies of PPE” and is “taking steps to conserve PPE because we do not know what our future needs will be.” She also noted that the hospital offers mental health counseling by phone and video, but William’s family doesn’t know if he tried those services. With Post wires

There’s a new crisis emerging amid the coronavirus pandemic — New York City children aren’t getting their shots. Child vaccination rates in the Big Apple have dramatically plunged during the coronavirus pandemic, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Wednesday, calling the revelation “quite shocking and troubling.” “The sheer magnitude has become clear to us in the last few days,” de Blasio said during his daily coronavirus press briefing as he explained that the city’s health care leaders are “very worried” about the declining rates. Over a six-week period during the COVID-19 crisis from March 23 to May 9, the city found that vaccine rates in children age 2 and younger dropped 42 percent, while vaccination rates in kids older than 2 saw a “shocking” 91 percent dip, de Blasio said, explaining that these are “everyday vaccinations that kids get to keep them safe.” In the same six-week period in 2019, there were 400,000 doses administered to Big Apple kids, while there were fewer than 150,000 doses administered during that time frame this year, the mayor said. De Blasio attributed the decline in child vaccinations rates to the fact that doctors’ offices have largely been closed and families have been afraid to go to ones that have been open due to the COVID-19 pandemic. “It makes sense,” said de Blasio, who added, “Something has to be done immediately to address this and we intend to work with parents and families to do that right now.” Hizzoner called on parents to “get your child vaccinated.” “Now is the time to get your child vaccinated,” de Blasio said. “This is essential work. Getting your child vaccinated is a reason to leave your home.” De Blasio noted that an “un-vaccinated child has a greater threat of contracting a disease” like pneumonia. If a child gets pneumonia, de Blasio said, that child is likely to be hospitalized and therefore has a greater chance of contracting coronavirus. “We don’t want to see any of that happen to any child,” he said. De Blasio continued, “Let’s protect our kids and protect each other by making sure all our children are vaccinated.”

Global stay-at-home orders have caused a dramatic plunge in carbon emissions. Daily carbon dioxide emissions worldwide dropped 17 percent, researchers reported in a study published Tuesday in Nature, going from about 100 million metric tons to about 83 million metric tons in early April compared to a year ago. The coronavirus pandemic shutdowns emptied out airports and freeways. Climate scientist Corinne Le Quéré of the University of East Anglia in Norwich, England and colleagues used daily data such as electricity demand, city congestion and home smart-meter readings to estimate emissions for 69 countries, according to the study’s abstract. Scientists then created something called a “confinement index” based on the restrictiveness of government-imposed policies in different locations and over time. If the world goes back to a pre-coronavirus pandemic level of activity by the middle of June, this year’s emissions will be about 4 percent lower than in 2019, according to researchers. If some restrictions remain through the end of the year, 2020 emissions could still be as much as 7 percent lower. As of Tuesday afternoon, more than 1.5 million people were infected and at least 91,570 were killed in the US from COVID-19.

Jason Wahler is donating therapy sessions to families who are grieving the death of loved ones lost to coronavirus. “The Hills” alum partnered with singer Hilary Roberts and The Red Songbird Foundation to launch the #GiveGriefAChance campaign. “We’re looking to help at least 20 people with up to 12 therapy sessions at no cost, who are grieving during COVID-19,” Wahler, 33, said in a video posted to Roberts’ Instagram account. The pair also asked that mental health professionals volunteer to provide free services. The foundation is also hoping to raise an additional $25,000 in funds to secure free therapy sessions for 20 more grieving individuals. Families interested in the program can fill out a questionnaire online for a chance to be selected. According to its website, The Red Songbird Foundation is a nonprofit organization that aims to help individuals dealing with addiction and trauma survival-related issues. In October of last year, the foundation announced Wahler as a co-chair and marketing director. The reality star has struggled with his own substance abuse issues in the past. In February, Wahler acknowledged having “another slip” in his sobriety. “What keeps me going is the honesty, the transparency and being vulnerable,” he told E! News. “By expressing vulnerability, it creates humility and lets people know they are not alone when this stuff does happen.”

Heidi Klum couldn’t bear the thought of one more bad hair day. The supermodel, 46, got a house call from hairstylist Lorenzo Martin on Tuesday to touch up her blond tresses, and showed off the process on Instagram. “Dahhling we found a way !😷😷 Social distancing highlights,” wrote Klum, who wore nothing but black lace lingerie, fishnet tights, high heels and a face mask for her appointment. Martin also wore a mask, along with gloves, glasses and a makeshift body shield fashioned out of a black umbrella. Plenty of people praised Klum’s creativity in the comments. “Only you !! Love it,” wrote fellow catwalker Naomi Campbell, whose own safety precautions during the coronavirus crisis have made headlines. “Omg amazing!!!” added celebrity makeup artist Linda Hay. But others weren’t impressed by the “America’s Got Talent” judge’s decision to bend social distancing guidelines. “This is a joke, right?” one person asked, while another commented, “I thought social distancing meant 6 ft away?” “What’s the point of the umbrella,” another perplexed follower asked, to which Klum replied, “To maybe get a smile.” The supermodel fell ill in mid-March and was tested for COVID-19 along with her husband, Tom Kaulitz; the couple, who isolated from each other while awaiting their results, both tested negative for the disease.

The “Real Housewives” are stepping up to raise money for coronavirus relief. Former “Real Housewives of Miami” star Ana Quincoces has organized an auction of very special items to help support first responders. Bravolebrities from Orange County to New Jersey have donated designer gowns they wore during infamous reunion tapings or opening credits of their respective shows, some valued at more than $5,000. Sonja Morgan donated four dresses of her own design, while “RHONJ” cast members Teresa Giudice, Jennifer Aydin, Jackie Goldschneider and Margaret Josephs, “RHOC” stars Shannon Beador, Braunwyn Windham-Burke and Emily Simpson, “RHOP” star Monique Samuels and “Real Housewives of Washington D.C.” alums Mary Amons and Lynda Erkiletian also chipped in. Sutton Stracke, the newcomer in Beverly Hills, donated a black dress even though the season’s reunion has yet to air. Former “Housewives” Tamra Judge, Dina Manzo, Caroline Manzo, Heather Dubrow, Camille Grammar, Eileen Davidson, Lizzie Rovsek and Joyce Giraud also sent in gowns, as did Quincoces’s former “Miami” cast mates Karent Sierra, Lauren Foster, Joanna Krupa, Adriana De Moura, Alexia Echevarria and Marysol Patton. Patton even sent in a rosary necklace that belonged to her late mother, the beloved Mama Elsa. Besides Sonja by Sonja Morgan, some of the featured designers include the infamous Jovani, Cushnie & Ochs, Zac Posen and more. Not to be outdone, Andy Cohen himself donated a Todd Snyder suit and perhaps the most enviable item of all: a Q&A notecard used during the most recent “Real Housewives of Atlanta” reunion show and signed by the host himself. Bidding starts on May 22 at 9 a.m. EST and will continue for two weeks. Proceeds will benefit First Responders First, an organization providing medical professionals with essential supplies including PPE, food and more.

Target Corp’s quarterly online sales surged 141 percent due to panic buying in the coronavirus crisis, the retailer said on Wednesday, driving results past Wall Street expectations even as its operational costs soared. The company said it had set aside nearly $500 million to spend on maintaining safety standards at stores and pay employees higher wages for working through the pandemic. “Last quarter was unlike anything I’ve ever seen,” Chief Executive Brian Cornell told reporters. “It was intense, it was volatile, it was stressful for our guests and the country.” Stay-at-home orders imposed to contain the virus powered a 141-percent jump in Target’s online comparable sales, accounting for almost all of its same-store sales growth. Although sales at stores opened for at least a year rose 0.9 percent, including digital they jumped 10.8 percent in the first quarter ended May 2, beating expectations, according to IBES data from Refinitiv. At the start of the quarter, Target, like Walmart, benefited from customers stockpiling staples and cleaning products, but as the lockdown extended and the stimulus checks arrived, demand rose for discretionary goods. Cornell said he expects demand for non-staple items like beauty products, home goods and clothes to continue into the current quarter. Target, which has already pulled its financial targets for the year, said it would scale back planned investments to focus on meeting increased demand. “There’s just so much uncertainty as I think about the balance of the year … Obviously we’re watching closely to see what happens from an economic standpoint,” Cornell said. The company’s net earnings fell 64.3 percent to $284 million in the quarter. On an adjusted basis, the company earned 59 cents per share, beating already lowered expectations of 40 cents. Last month, Target warned that higher expenses would pressure margins, prompting analysts to lower their estimates.

A man refused to wear a face mask while shopping at a Costco outpost because he “woke up in a free country” — and was then booted from the chain store by an employee, a now-viral clip of the incident shows. The defiant, shades-but-no-mask-wearing shopper filmed the interaction, which reportedly happened at a Costco in Colorado, and told the employee he wanted to put him on his “3,000-follower Instagram feed.” “Hi everyone, I work for Costco and I’m asking this member to put on a mask because that is our company policy. So either wear the mask …,” the masked worker, whose badge identified him as Tison, said to the camera in the 36-second clip, which has received millions of views on Twitter. The rebellious patron then turned the camera on himself, saying, “And I’m not doing it because I woke up in a free country.” That’s when Tison took matters into his own hands, and told the man to “have a great day” as the employee pulled the customer’s paper towel-loaded cart away from him. “So you’re gonna take this cart from me full of stuff?” the shopper asked, to which Tison replied, “You are no longer welcome here in our warehouse. You need to leave, thank you very much.” As Tison walked away with the shopping cart, the eighty-sixed consumer said, “He’s gonna take the cart away because he’s a p—y little bitch.” “There he goes walking away with all my stuff, there he goes because I’m not a f–king sheep,” he added. Like many stores, Costco implemented a policy due to the coronavirus pandemic that all members and guests must wear a face covering at all times while in the store. As the video went viral this week, Twitter users hailed Tison as a “hero” and demanded that Costco give the employee “a raise.” A Twitter user claiming to be Tison thanked commenters for their support. “People of Twitter thank you for all of the support,” @Thoff821 tweeted. “I was just trying to protect our employees and our members #Tison.”

A Christian high school in Oklahoma hosted a jam-packed graduation ceremony with hundreds in attendance — despite concerns about spreading the coronavirus, according to reports. Guests were seen on a livestreamed broadcast Saturday seated shoulder to shoulder to watch graduates walk across the stage at Community Christian School in Norman, news KROR reported. “People wore masks but not everybody was required to wear masks, obviously, but people did wear masks,” Matt Cox, the school’s assistant principal, told the outlet. The school handed out 12 tickets to each of the 60 seniors, which ended up drawing 600 people to the 2,500-person stadium, the outlet reported. But the event didn’t have any rules about spacing out seats, resulting in many guests clamoring for one of 300 chairs on the floor, according to the report. “We told them that we had available seating there, we pointed to other directions, did not force anybody to sit anywhere that they didn’t want to sit,” Cox told KFOR. “We told anybody that was fearful or felt that they needed to take extra precautions to obviously do what they needed to do.” Cox also claimed that the school had received the green light from the Norman city manager to hold the commencement — which he said fell under the same regulations as churches. “Churches are allowed to be open and we definitely shared the gospel,” he said. “It was a church service-type event as well too, another reason why we were definitely within the guidelines.” KFOR KFOR KFOR KFOR View Slideshow But city spokeswoman Annahlyse Meyer said the school wasn’t given “permission” as much as “acknowledgment” that the town did not have any power to regulate the graduation, according to CNN. City manager Darrel Pyle said he was “disappointed to learn through social media” that the event didn’t abide by the town’s social distancing guidelines, which urge people to stay in groups of less than 10 and wear face coverings in public, CNN reported. The state’s stay-at-home orders expired earlier this month, allowing people to return to restaurants, malls, other stores and churches. Oklahoma has seen 5,489 confirmed COVID-19 cases as of Wednesday morning, including at least 293 deaths, according to the latest data from Johns Hopkins University.

This one might hit a little close to home. Director Michael Bay is cashing in on the increasingly viral pandemic movie craze with a bleak new thriller about a virus that never goes away. The Paramount film’s announcement comes just as world governments are starting to reopen in anticipation of the end of the coronavirus scourge. The dystopian downer, entitled “Songbird,” will purportedly depict a world just two years in the future where the pandemic has mutated into something even worse after lockdowns are lifted prematurely, reports Deadline. Not much is disclosed beyond that, however the apocalyptic flick will reportedly be in the vein of films like “Cloverfield” and “Paranormal Activity,” sans the supernatural elements. Instead, Deadline suggests that the more realistic “Songbird” will be rife with “government conspiracy and paranoia” much like the prescient pandemic thriller “Contagion.” In an added dose of realism, “Songbird” will be be shot in mid-lockdown Los Angeles starting in five weeks. Naturally, the film has drawn comparisons to the current situation, where people live in bubbles (sometimes literally), isolationists scramble to stockpile supplies, and fake news runs as rampant as the coronavirus itself. Doesn’t sound like your typical explosion-filled Michael Bay fare? The modest-budget film will reportedly be sold at the upcoming Virtual Cannes Market by ICM Partners. In the director’s chair will be Adam Mason of Hulu’s hit horror anthology series “Into The Dark.” The cast list and release date have yet to be announced.

Australian airline Qantas plans to lure back wary travelers with flights as cheap as $12.50 – admitting Wednesday that it wants to pack planes without social distancing in its new coronavirus safety protocols. The hard-hit airline‘s chief executive, Alan Joyce, announced plans for $19 flights between Melbourne and Sydney – equivalent to $12.50 US – as part of a push to get back to “40 to 50 percent of pre-COVID-19 operation” by July. “We have to offer really cheap airfares to get people to overcome their reluctance around COVID-19,” he told 9News’ “Today” show, with current bookings just 5 percent of normal. His company also revealed a series of new “Fly Well” safety measures to start on June 12, including contactless check-in, sanitizer wipes, extra cleaning and masks handed to every traveler. But the airline – which previously planned to remove middle seats to maintain space – insists it is not needed because the pressurized cabin along with medical-grade filters keeps travelers safe. Joyce said that because passengers face the same direction with “a barrier of a seat in front of them” there is “a very low risk of transmission.” He also claimed that “we don’t know of a single person-to-person transmission on an aircraft” connected to the pandemic that has infected more than 4.9 million people worldwide. “With the cabin, with the measures we’re introducing – the masks, the sanitizers for people to wipe down, the extra cleaning we’re doing ourselves, hand sanitizers all the way through the terminals – we’re very comfortable you don’t need social distancing on an aircraft,” he told the show. If Qantas had to fulfill even 5 feet between passengers, it would leave just 22 people onboard an Airbus SE A320 made for 180, the chief executive said. “That means airfares are going to be eight to nine times more than they are today,” he said. “It economically will not be justified.” Joyce claimed that 98 percent of the company’s frequent fliers had indicated they were raring to get back in the air. While masks will be handed out, they will not be mandatory to wear, the company said in announcing its “Fly Well” safety features. “We’re relying on the cooperation of passengers to help make these changes work for everyone’s benefit,” Joyce said in a statement. As of Wednesday morning, Australia had recorded 7,079 confirmed coronavirus cases, with 100 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University data. With Post wires

The Academy Museum is now the proud owner of Florence Pugh’s iconic floral dress from “Midsommar.” The organization behind the Oscars was the highest bidder in an auction held by A24, with proceeds going to coronavirus relief efforts. The final bid went for $65,000, per A24’s website, though the Academy Museum declined to confirm the price point. The May Queen dress is one of several props, wardrobe items and set pieces that A24 has been auctioning off to raise money for the FDNY Foundation, a non-profit that supports New York City firefighters and their families who have been impacted by the coronavirus pandemic. So far, A24’s auction has raised over $200,000 to benefit the hardest-hit communities in New York City. The frock in particular, made of 10,000 silk flowers and worn by Pugh in the final scene of Ari Aster’s 2019 horror film, was such a hot item that it caught the eye of Ariana Grande, among others. Grande shared a screenshot on her Instagram story in April of conversations with Pugh, indicating she was eyeing the elaborate gown. “i’m crying / also i’m bidding as soon as possible,” she wrote at the time. Halsey also appeared to be vying for the dress, tweeting “dont [sic] bid for the midsommar may queen outfit.” The Academy Museum has not determined how or when the dress might be displayed. The May Queen dress isn’t the only “Midsommar” prop that sold for a few grand. The matching flower crown went for $15,000. The bear headdress, worn in the movie by Jack Reynor, sold for $5,750 and the fishing mallet went for $10,000. In total, items from “Midsommar” alone raised about $100,000 dollars for the FDNY Foundation. Recognizable items such as the burgundy jacket worn by Zendaya’s character in “Euphoria” ($8,000) and the skateboard from Jonah Hill’s directorial debut “Mid90s” ($7,500) were also sold. Collectibles still up for grabs include a bejeweled Furby pendant and the Weeknd’s wig from “Uncut Gems,” as well as the mermaid carving and Wake’s pipe from Robert Pattinson’s “The Lighthouse.” The remaining prop auction ends on May 20.

A “tidal wave” of buyers are fleeing the coronavirus-ravaged concrete jungle for Connecticut, creating an unexpected uptick in the real estate market, according to a new report. Real estate agents told the Stamford Advocate that their well-to-do New York City clients have been snapping up single-family homes in areas like Westport, Greenwich, Litchfield County and east of New Haven. “I think there’s going to be a trend of people renting and then buying second homes,” Candace Adams, CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Home Services New England Properties, told the Advocate. “I don’t know that they necessarily want to stay outside of the city — they just want to have an option to go someplace else.” Holly Giordano, an agent for William Pitt Sotheby’s International Realty, told the publication that sellers have been getting their asking price — and benefiting from bidding wars among eager buyers. One property in Wilton sold for $1.9 million, she said — an all-cash deal. “What I’ve seen more of is all my city clients are looking in Weston, Wilton, Ridgefield, Easton — areas that normally wouldn’t be someone’s go-to because of the train aspect … but when you are coming from the city, they feel very far,” Giordano said. “There was such an initial rush on all the rentals, that there’s hardly any left. … We’ve always benefited from the New York City market, but it’s just been a tidal wave.” One homeowner in Westport received five offers in a day from city slickers. “One … called me up and said, ‘Do you know of anything else?’” said Mark Pruner, an agent for Berkshire Hathaway Home Services New England Properties. “She lives in a beautiful, 10-story coop on Park Avenue in New York, but every time [she] gets in the elevator … she is afraid.” The Post reported last month that other COVID-19-wary city dwellers have been packing up and shipping out — some for good.

Tom Brady launched a new “immunity” multivitamin supplement this week — and critics quickly tackled the quarterback for the timing of the release during the coronavirus pandemic. Brady, 42, newly signed with the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, announced the release of the “immunity blend supplement,” called Protect, through his company, TB12 Sports, on social media Monday. “Over the years, I’ve learned how important it is to be proactive in taking care of my own body,” Brady said in a video posted to Instagram. “I’m really proud to announce this amazing new product from TB12 that will provide you guys exactly what you need to stay healthy, strong and resilient for whatever comes your way.” It is sold as a 30-day supply, or 60 tablets, for $45, according to the TB12 website. Critics bashed him on Twitter for the not-so-coincidental timing of the release — and for capitalizing on people’s fears amid the pandemic. In Brady’s new home state, nearly 47,000 coronavirus cases and over 2,000 related deaths have been reported, according to the Florida Department of Health. “Oh Tom this is so disappointing,” Julia Offord Pearman tweeted. “The marketing of this product is clearly playing on people’s fears over Covid and a belief that the immune system just needs a boost to recover from it. If it’s an athlete recovery supplement say that, don’t play up to people’s fears about Covid.” “What does your product ‘PROTECT’ us from Tom?” said a person with the handle @katherine_jj6. “Does it protect the millions out of work from being duped to pay a ridiculous amount of money for this? This is a new low for you and [business partner] Alex [Guerrero].” “The reason Tom Brady doesn’t have coronavirus isn’t an immune boosting supplement, it’s because he’s obscenely rich and can isolate unlike delivery drivers, cleaners, meat workers, grocery store workers, nurses and doctors,” wrote Dr. Kate Gregorevic, who identified herself as a geriatrician. “Using this crisis to enrich himself is disgusting.” But TB12 CEO Johns Burns told Yahoo! Sports that “now more than ever, it’s important to have daily support for a healthy immune response as our bodies are subject to constant stressors that deplete its resources.” Brady’s company touts the drug for “supporting natural killer cells” and “replenishing antibodies post-exercise,” helping to “activate your immune system and counter stress-induced immune suppression,” according to a product description. The supplement contains vitamin C, zinc, Beta Glucan — a form of soluble dietary fiber that helps improve cholesterol levels and heart health — as well as larch tree extract, which has been used to defend against the common cold and upper respiratory infections. At the end of March, earlier in the pandemic, Brady promoted a similar supplement bundle that is selling for $147 on the TB12 website, MassLive.com reported. Florida moved into Phase 1 of its reopening plan, allowing gyms and fitness centers statewide to operate up to 50 percent capacity, on Monday — the same day Brady released his product. In March, Brady signed a two-year contract with the Buccaneers, worth a guaranteed $50 million — with up to $9 million more in performance and team success incentives and a no-trade clause.

This naughty nurse is going viral. A nurse in Russia was suspended from the hospital where she worked in Tula, 100 miles south of Moscow, after she arrived at her shift in the all-male coronavirus patient wing with no clothing save for her skivvies under her transparent personal protective equipment. The unidentified staffer told her managers at Tula Regional Clinical Hospital that she was “too hot” to wear clothing underneath the head-to-toe vinyl gown, which protected her from contracting COVID-19. The incident was first reported by a local news outlet, the Tula Pressa newspaper. While there were reportedly “no complaints” from her patients, hospital chiefs punished the nearly nude nurse for “non-compliance with the requirements for medical clothing.” The nurse claimed she did not realize that her underwear was showing through the PPE. However, the regional health ministry confirmed that “a disciplinary sanction was applied to the nurse of the infectious diseases department who violated [uniform] requirements,” the Sun reports. They did not elaborate on what exactly the disciplinary measure would be. The hospital administration originally claimed the woman in her 20s had been wearing “lingerie” — but later clarified the two-piece ensemble was possibly a “swimming suit.” The overheated health care worker has yet to make a public statement on the incident. However, readers of the Tula Pressa had plenty to say. “At least someone has a sense of humor in this gloomy, gloomy reality,” said Sergey Ratnikov. Marina Astakhova added, “Well done, she raised the mood of the patients.” And Valery Kapnin asked, “Why punish the nurse? You need to reward her. Seeing this outfit, no one wants to die.” As of Wednesday, there have been approximately 309,000 cases of COVID-19 reported in Russia, and nearly 3,000 deaths.

President Trump threatened to “hold up funding” for Michigan and Nevada if the states follow through with initiatives for residents to cast mail-in or absentee ballots for upcoming elections. “Breaking: Michigan sends absentee ballots to 7.7 million people ahead of Primaries and the General Election. This was done illegally and without authorization by a rogue Secretary of State,” the president wrote on Twitter Wednesday morning. “I will ask to hold up funding to Michigan if they want to go down this Voter Fraud path!” A little more than an hour later, Trump lashed out at Nevada for its plan to allow mail-in voting. “State of Nevada ‘thinks’ that they can send out illegal vote by mail ballots, creating a great Voter Fraud scenario for the State and the U.S. They can’t! If they do, ‘I think’ I can hold up funds to the State. Sorry, but you must not cheat in elections,” the president wrote. Trump has previously warned that allowing people to vote in ways other than in person could lead to rampant fraud — as Democrats pursue other alternatives because of health risks during the coronavirus pandemic. “Mail ballots — they cheat. OK? People cheat,” he said last month. “There’s a lot of dishonesty going along with mail-in voting.” His post comes a day after Michigan Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson said the absentee ballot applications will be sent to all of the state’s 7.7 million registered voters so they can participate in the August and November elections without appearing in person, according to the Detroit Free Press. Benson, a Democrat, said she made the move because of the risks associated with the coronavirus, which has killed nearly 5,000 people in Michigan. She said the likelihood of people becoming ill because of the virus is still too great for people to show up as a group in the Aug. 4 and Nov. 3 elections. Benson responded to Trump on Twitter to say she’s doing what Republican-run states are doing. “Hi! I also have a name, it’s Jocelyn Benson. And we sent applications, not ballots. Just like my GOP colleagues in Iowa, Georgia, Nebraska and West Virginia,” she said in a posting. Nevada Secretary of State Barbara Cegavske said county election officials began mailing out ballots for the June 9 primary election in early May because of health concerns related to COVID-19. “Mail-in ballots provide Nevadans an accurate and valid way to vote this primary election in the comfort, safety and privacy of their own homes by simply mailing it or dropping it off,” Wayne Thorley, deputy secretary of state for elections, said in a statement released on May 1. Cegavske said Nevadans who are not now registered to vote must do so by Thursday’s deadline to receive a mail-in ballot to the June primary. Nevada Gov. Steve Sisolak, in a tweet, said it is “inappropriate and outrageous” for Trump to threaten to remove federal funds during a pandemic when a state is “exercising its authority to run elections in a safe and legal manner.” Trump’s re-election campaign is promoting mail voting options, but cautioned that all-mail elections are “an invitation to fraud.” The president and first lady Melania Trump cast their ballots in Florida’s primary election in March by mail. With Post wires

It was shear madness. A 28-year-old Washington state man said he drove more than 600 miles to get a haircut in California after seeing a friend’s Facebook post about getting a trim when most barbershops are shuttered amid the coronavirus pandemic, the LA Times reported. “I immediately started making preparations,” said J Farr, whose locks were growing wild under lockdown in his Olympia apartment. Farr, who has lost his job as a paint sprayer, would get his hair cut every few weeks before the outbreak. He was getting so desperate lately that he even considered shaving his head, according to the paper. But when he heard from his pal in Yuba City, north of Sacramento, Farr came up with his hair-raising plan to hit the road for the long trip to the Butte House Barber Shop in Sutter County. Hair salons remain closed in Washington state and most of California, but officials in Yuba and Sutter counties allowed the businesses to reopen ahead of the state’s plan, the LA Times reported. Finally, he arrived last week to a busy shop, where the barber wore a face mask but Farr didn’t. “When I got in there it was exactly what I had hoped for,” Farr told the paper. “I’ve been isolated for the last three months and that’s the first time I had that type of social interaction in that period. It’s a really good feeling to feel like there’s other people in the world who aren’t going to sit inside in fear when there’s nothing to be afraid of,” he added. Shop owner Wes Heryford, 42, said he has been cutting the hair of customers near and far. “There’s not very many options and people are excited that there is someone cutting hair, so they have no problem to drive three or four hours to come see us,” he told the paper. After paying $20 plus a tip, Farr left sporting a fade cut with a quarter-inch taken off the top.

Sweden had the highest number of coronavirus deaths per capita in Europe over the last week, new data shows. The Scandinavian country — which has allowed most schools, restaurants and businesses to remain open during the global pandemic — saw 6.25 deaths per million inhabitants per day in a rolling seven-day average between May 12 and May 19, according to Ourworldindata.org. Though deaths in Sweden are on the decline, the per-capita figure was the highest in Europe and just above the United Kingdom, which had 5.75 deaths per million. Sweden has been both criticized and lauded by the World Health Organization for its lax approach to battling coronavirus, including relying on residents to self-regulate. More than 3,700 people died of COVID-19 in Sweden as of Tuesday, according to the Financial Times. Neighboring countries Denmark, Norway and Finland, which have implemented stricter measures, have recorded 551, 233 and 300 deaths, respectively. With Post wires

It’s enough to wipe the smile off the Mona Lisa. Tech entrepreneur Stephan Distinguin has suggested that France can offset its financial losses from the coronavirus pandemic by selling Leonardo da Vinci’s masterpiece — arguably the most famous artwork in the world, according to the Independent. Distinguin, founder of innovation agency Fabernovel, told Usbek & Rica Magazine that the country should “sell the family jewelry” for at least 50 billion euros, or $54.7 billion. “Day after day, we list the billions engulfed in this slump like children counting the fall of a stone into a well to measure its depth,” Distinguin told the mag. “We are still counting, and this crisis seems unfathomable.” He continued: “As an entrepreneur and a taxpayer, I know that these billions are not invented and that they will necessarily cost us. An obvious reflex is to sell off a valuable asset at the highest price possible, but one that is the least critical as possible to our future.” The early-16th-century masterpiece known as La Gioconda in Italian, the Mona Lisa has long captivated visitors to the Louvre museum in Paris, as she smiles coyly at first, but then appears to actually be sneering mockingly or sadly the longer one looks. Distinguin argued that “a painting is easy to move and therefore to hand over.” “And we have a lot of paintings … In 2020, we have to get the money where it is. So sell family jewelry … The price is the crux of the matter and the main subject of controversy,” he said. “The price has to be insane for the operation to make sense. … I was told that my estimate was very overvalued, even far-fetched, but each time without real arguments,” he added. Distinguin also suggested that the painting could be “tokenized” with a form of cryptocurrency allowing it to be easily shared between countries. “It would be like a big global subscription,” he said. “Legally and technically, this solution would have many advantages: it would allow France and the Louvre to keep control of the painting. “One can even imagine that this ploy would garner the assent of the great Leonardo da Vinci, he who painted but also mastered all the sciences and technologies of his time.” Last year, the Louvre began work on a virtual reality program that would allow visitors to experience the Mona Lisa up close and away from the teeming masses.

A Denver man was accused of shooting a Waffle House cook after being asked to wear a face mask inside the late-night eatery, according to a report. Kevin Watson, 27, was arrested Monday and charged with attempted first-degree murder in connection with the shooting in the parking lot of the waffle joint on East Mississippi Avenue in Aurora, Sentinel Colorado reported. Witnesses told police that two unmasked men walked into the restaurant about 12:30 a.m. Thursday, but line cook Brian Gruhler, 25, told them they had to wear face coverings to be served, according to the news outlet. The two men left the restaurant and returned later with masks — but they were holding them, not wearing them as they were required to do amid the coronavirus pandemic. One of the men then flipped out and began threatening Gruhler, according to an arrest affidavit cited by the outlet. “You better shut the f— up before I pull a gun and blow your brains out … I’ll come back there and shut you the f— up! Make my food!” he shouted, according to the document. A waitress said she saw the suspect covering a handgun on the counter while he was shouting at the cook, though police were unable to corroborate that claim when watching surveillance video. The next evening, Watson returned to the restaurant — this time wearing a mask — and again berated Gruhler before hitting him in the face, authorities said. Gruhler fled to the back of the restaurant and exited through a back door, but Watson accosted him again, saying, “You better shut the f— up and serve me!,” according to the affidavit. He was then shot once in the chest and ran to his nearby home, where he called 911. Police linked Watson to the shooting after obtaining a receipt with his name on it from a transaction at the restaurant as well as vehicle records of a BMW that was in the parking lot at the time of the shooting. The same vehicle was determined to be linked to another shooting at a tow yard in Denver on April 23. Several Waffle House workers also ID’d the suspect from photo lineups, including a waitress who inadvertently picked up a gold earring that fell out of the pocket of the man who lashed out at Gruhler. She determined it matched an earring seen in an old mugshot of Watson. Several employees also told investigators that Watson is a regular customer at the restaurant. Watson is being held on a $100,000 bond at the Arapahoe County jail pending a court appearance on May 22. Waffle House rep Njeri Boss issued a statement to KDVR. “This case involves a senseless act of violence that should not be tolerated in any community. We are very thankful that neither of our associates who were working when the incident occurred, suffered any life-threatening injuries,” Boss said. “Our thoughts and well wishes remain with our associate who was injured and now is recovering at home.”

A 43-year-old California man has shared a shocking photo of the toll the coronavirus has taken on his strapping body — turning it into an emaciated shell during his six-week stay in a hospital, according to a report. Mike Schultz, 43, a nurse from San Francisco with no underlying health conditions, weighed about 190 pounds when he pumped iron almost every day, according to BuzzFeed News. But after dropping 50 pounds amid the ravages of COVID-19, Schultz decided to share two images to his 30,000 Instagram followers — one taken about a month before he fell ill, the other snapped at a Boston hospital. “I wanted to show it can happen to anyone. It doesn’t matter if you’re young or old, have pre-existing conditions or not. It can affect you,” Schultz told BuzzFeed. “I knew what I thought going in [about the coronavirus]. I didn’t think it was as serious as it was until after things started happening,” he said. “I thought I was young enough for it not to affect me, and I know a lot of people think that.” Schultz said he was exhausted just standing up briefly to take the harrowing photo. “I was so weak. This was one of the most frustrating parts,” he told the news outlet. “I couldn’t hold my cellphone — it was so heavy. I couldn’t type, because my hands shook so much.” Schultz, who went to the hospital March 16, also had completely lost track of time, saying: “I thought only a week had gone by.” He arrived in Boston to visit his boyfriend, Josh Hebblethwaite, 29, on March 14 — a week after they had traveled to Miami Beach for a festival where at least 38 people later tested positive for the illness and three men died, BuzzFeed reported. “We knew it was out there,” Schultz said. “There were no real restrictions in place, though. No lockdowns. We just thought, ‘Well, we gotta wash our hands more and be wary of touching our face.’” A couple of days after arriving in Beantown, Schultz began feeling very sick and headed to a hospital. He had a 103-degree fever and his lungs were filled with liquid. “They took him right in and didn’t let me stay to say goodbye,” Hebblethwaite said. Schultz was given oxygen and was then sedated. “One of the doctors said early on I was probably going to be intubated, and it freaked me out,” he told BuzzFeed. Schultz was later transferred to a larger hospital, where he was intubated for four and a half weeks. Hebblethwaite arranged to become his medical proxy. “There was no one else around, and I would be the one to make decisions for him,” he said. “It was definitely scary.” He added: “About four weeks in, the nurses were nice enough to FaceTime with him. It was pretty much like he was in a coma. It was definitely scary. But I was so happy to see him at that point.” Schultz said he and Hebblethwaite have been assailed online for attending the party in Florida — with some even saying he deserved to get sick. “The negative stuff bothers me,” he said, “but it doesn’t bother me that much, because I’ve gotten so much positive feedback.” Meanwhile, Schultz has finally been released from the hospital and said he relished the two double cheeseburgers, small fries and strawberry shake he ordered at McDonald’s. “It did taste different. I think lost some of my taste,” he said, “but it was good.”

A Malaysian man who was accused of “masterminding” a 2011 heroin deal was reportedly sentenced to death by hanging via a Zoom call. Punithan Genasan, 37, was the first person in Singapore to be given the death sentence over the video teleconference hearings during the coronavirus pandemic, according to the country’s Straits Times. A spokesperson for Singapore’s supreme court said that the hearing was held on Zoom due to restrictions over the spread of coronavirus. “For the safety of all involved in the proceedings, the hearing for Public Prosecutor v Punithan A/L Genasan was conducted by video-conferencing,” the spokesperson said. Genasan was found to be complicit in trafficking heroin when he introduced two couriers to each other and telling one to drive into Singapore to meet the other. Singapore has very stict drug laws, sentencing people to death for possession of even small amounts. With Post Wires

U.S. births continued to fall last year, leading to the fewest number of newborns in 35 years. The decline is the latest sign of a prolonged national “baby bust” that’s been going on for more than a decade. And some experts believe the coronavirus pandemic and its impact on the economy will suppress the numbers further. “This unpredictable environment, and anxiety about the future, is going to make women think twice about having children,” said Dr. Denise Jamieson, chair of obstetrics and gynecology at Emory University. The latest numbers were released Wednesday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The report, which is considered preliminary, is based on a review of more than 99% of birth certificates issued last year. The CDC found the number of births fell about 1% from 2018, to about 3.7 million. Birth rates continued to fall for teen moms and for women in their 20s. Aside from a one-year uptick in 2014, U.S. births have been falling every year since 2007, when a recession hit the country. The drop continued even after the economy rebounded. Experts say there are a number of causes, but chief among them are shifting attitudes about motherhood: Many women and couples delay childbearing and have fewer kids once they start. The economy is a factor, but not because of short-term cycles in hiring. Many jobs are low-paying and unstable, and that coupled with high rents and other factors have caused women and couples to be much more cautious about having kids, said Dr. John Santelli, a Columbia University professor of population and family health. It’s unclear what will happen to births this year, said Brady Hamilton, the CDC report’s lead author. The impact of the last few months’ events won’t become clear in maternity wards until late this year or early next, he said. Santelli said it’s possible births will go up, at least among some groups. Access to birth control and abortion has become more difficult, and some homebound couples may find themselves with greater opportunity to conceive, he said. But others say it’s more likely births will plummet. The idea that there will be a lot of “coronababies” is “widely perceived as a myth,” said Hans-Peter Kohler, a University of Pennsylvania fertility researcher. The debate most demographers are having is not about whether there will be a decline, but whether it will be lasting, he said. “The decline due to COVID-19 might be different given the extent and severity of the crisis, and the long-lasting uncertainty that is caused by it,” Kohler wrote in an email. Other highlights from the CDC report: — Birth rates fell last year for nearly all age groups up to 34 years old, but rose for women in their early 40s. — The birth rate for 15– to 19-year-olds dropped 5% from 2019. It’s fallen almost every year since 1991. — The cesarean delivery rate dropped to under 32%. — The percentage of infants born at less than 37 weeks of gestation inched up for the fifth year in a row, to more than 10%.

Group fitness classes can be a hotbed for the spread of coronavirus, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has warned in a new report. The study, coming as states begin to reopen, highlights how a single workshop among 27 dance fitness instructors in South Korea was responsible for more than 100 coronavirus cases spread across 12 fitness facilities in the city of Cheonan. Eight instructors at the Feb. 15 meeting had the coronavirus but they hadn’t known yet — they were asymptomatic. Over the course of the next 24 days, by March 9, the virus spread across fitness classes to 112 participants, according to the research team at Dankook University Hospital. High-octane workouts in confined spaces can be ripe environments for the spread of the virus, the researchers said. “Characteristics that might have led to transmission from the instructors in Cheonan include large class sizes, small spaces, and intensity of the workouts,” wrote the scientists in their research letter published by the CDC late last week. “The moist, warm atmosphere in a sports facility coupled with turbulent air flow generated by intense physical exercise can cause more dense transmission of isolated droplets.” Each dance class linked to transmission had between five and 22 students. About half of the 112 cases were transmitted from instructors to students, the contact tracers found. In all, 54 students out of the 217 attending the classes who were exposed to the virus ended up testing positive, an infection rate of 26 percent. The rest of the cases stemmed from the sick students who then passed the virus to family, friends and co-workers. The infected students didn’t start displaying symptoms until about 3.5 days after attending the class, on average, the researchers found. The study found that several lower-intensity workouts weren’t as effective in transferring the virus. One of the instructors from the initial workshop also taught yoga and pilates classes for groups of seven to eight people. But researchers found that none of the students in those classes ended up catching the bug. “We hypothesize that the lower intensity of Pilates and yoga did not cause the same transmission effects as those of the more intense fitness dance classes,” the researchers wrote.

A medical institute in Australia will administer a trial at hospitals across the country to determine if the anti-malaria drug hydroxychloroquine can prevent the spread of coronavirus. The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research is spearheading the study on frontline workers in an effort to find a preventative measure to stop the spread of the virus. “The trial is focused on our frontline and allied healthcare workers who are at an increased risk of infection due to repeated exposure caring for sick patients,” said Professor Ian Wicks, joint head of clinical translation at the Institute. “Our aim is to help people stay safe, well, and able to continue in their vital roles.” A total of 2,250 workers from hospitals in Victoria, New South Wales, and South Australia will participate in the study, which will last four months. Half of the participants will be given hydroxychloroquine, while the other half will receive a placebo. The study takes place as other preventive measures, such as vaccines, are being tested. President Trump said on Monday that he has been taking hydroxychloroquine to ward off the coronavirus. While some initial studies appeared to support the drug’s benefits, others showed mixed results or even that it could be dangerous for people with certain conditions. The Veterans Health Administration study examined more than 300 COVID-19 patients and concluded the drug could be dangerous and even lethal. The president said Monday that some people at the VA “aren’t big Trump fans.”

The NFL isn’t expecting to strike out coronavirus. Some facilities around the league, in states where it is permitted by the government, reopened Tuesday for a limited number of employees — who undergo daily temperature screenings. Coaches and most players (exception for injury treatment that began before the March 25 shutdown) are prohibited from returning to even the open sites. “Everyone who is around each other in a football environment is going to share risk and share some common exposure,” NFL chief medical officer Dr. Allen Sills said. “We fully expect that we will have positive cases that arise, because we think this disease will remain endemic in society, so it shouldn’t be a surprise that new positive cases arise. Our challenge is to identify them as quickly as possible and to prevent spread.” The Giants’ and Jets’ facilities remain shuttered under New Jersey orders. There is concern among coaches an uneven playing field could be created if some teams are allowed to bring back staff and players before others. “Competitive issues are always important, and they always are considered in a way to try to preserve equitable treatment of all 32 clubs,” NFL lead counsel Jeff Pash said. “Certainly our goal will be to try to have all 32 clubs operating safely [simultaneously].” NFL minicamps scheduled for June could be held virtually — just like current OTAs — because Sills said science and technology will dictate a return to the field rather than the NFL calendar. “You can imagine the competitive advantage,” one NFL coach told The Post. “As long as all 32 teams are doing the same thing, there is not a huge anxiety yet to change things. We are first dealing with a pandemic that has killed thousands of Americans.” Sills expects “very rapid evolution” in testing methods before training camps are scheduled to begin in late July. “We want to make sure we are in no way affecting the supply of tests that are needed by the healthcare system in any of our markets around the country at large,” Sills said. The Rooney Rule for ensuring diversity was expanded Tuesday: Teams now must interview at least two external minority candidates for head coach vacancies, at least one minority for any of the three coordinator vacancies and at least one external minority for the senior football operations/general manager position. The NFL tabled a proposal to reward teams with better mid-round draft positioning for hiring a minority as head coach or GM. Commissioner Roger Goodell said “there was a great deal of support” from team owners but also feedback on how to strengthen it. Teams no longer can block position coaches under contract from interviewing for another team’s coordinator vacancy. All assistant jobs previously were bunched together, limiting upward mobility.

Americans are being tricked into buying nonexistent puppies online during the coronavirus pandemic. With pet adoptions soaring during the COVID-19 outbreak, the Better Business Bureau is warning of an uptick in complaints from people who say they’ve been duped by phony pet dealers online. The consumer watchdog has fielded more reports on fraudulent puppy sales in the month of April than the first three months of the year combined, with complaints typically involving offerings for pets that don’t exist or are never shipped to the would-be owner. “Scammers frequently take advantage of the news to find new avenues for targeting victims,” the BBB said in a recent scam alert. “The uncertainty surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic, along with some quarantined families’ decision to adopt a pet sight unseen, has created fertile ground for fraudsters.” The pet scammers rely on ”bogus, often sophisticated advertisements,” according to the BBB. A 2017 BBB study into fake pet sales found that 80 percent sponsored advertising for pet sales on internet searches could be fraudulent. One woman told the BBB she lost $1,000 on two different puppy scams this April. In the first scheme, she said a fraudster agreed to sell her a pug puppy for $500 — but made her pay with a prepaid gift card he instructed her to buy at Walmart. The seller eventually told her that the pandemic delayed her puppy order and that he wouldn’t issue a refund. She then tracked the gift card and found it had been spent in a Texas Target. The woman then reached an agreement with a second so-called pug pusher, who agreed to sell her a puppy for $620. After she paid half the price, another person claiming to be a third-party shipper contacted her demanding $750 for a fancy climate-controlled crate. She sent the shipper $300, but the puppy never came. “This seller absolutely played on my emotions and vulnerability,” the woman told BBB. “I’m a highly educated person, but I’ve never felt so stupid in my entire life.” The BBB advises would-be pet owners not to buy a pet without seeing it in person and to avoid payments through wire transfers, cash apps or gift cards. The group recommends buyers check local animal shelters, which are in need of fosters during the pandemic.

Two people infected at least 35 members of a rural Arkansas church with the coronavirus in March, sparking an outbreak, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reported Tuesday. The report showcases how quickly COVID-19 can spread in faith-based communities and may have implications as places of worship eye reopening amid the pandemic. The CDC began it’s investigation on March 16 into a cluster of cases in rural Arkansas, tracing them back to an unnamed church. According to the report, two people with symptoms of the virus attended children’s events at the church from March 6 to 8. Neither of those two people, who later tested positive, reported traveling outside of the area, and had no known contact with other confirmed cases. On March 10, the pastor’s wife developed a fever and a cough, and he later began to experience symptoms. But on March 11, he attended a bible study group, unwittingly exposing dozens to the virus. Of the 92 people who attended one of the church gatherings from March 6 to March 11, 38 percent tested positive, including the pastor and his wife. Three people died. Two children also tested positive, but were not severely ill. The couple closed the church after learning of the infections in their congregation, the report said. But it was too late. An additional 26 people in the community tested positive due to contact with people infected in the church. Of those, one of them was hospitalized and died It’s possible others were infected as well but never got tested. “This outbreak highlights the potential for widespread transmission of [the coronavirus] both at group gatherings during church events and within the broader community,” the researchers wrote in the report. “These findings underscore the opportunity for faith-based organizations to prevent COVID-19 by following local authorities’ guidance,” and federal guidelines, the researchers added.

Prince Charles urged students and furloughed workers to help farmers harvest crops during the coronavirus pandemic. The Prince of Wales posted a video on Twitter pleading people to take on the “unglamorous” task to pick fruits and vegetables as he stands outside by green pastures. “If we are to harvest British fruit and vegetables this year, we need an army of people to help,” Prince Charles said. “Food does not happen by magic. It all begins with our remarkable farmers and growers. If the last few weeks have proven anything, it is that food is precious and valued and it cannot be taken for granted.” He compared the need for harvesters for the “Pick for Britain” campaign to the importance of the Land Army in World War II, a movement where women and girls volunteered or were conscripted into undertaking agricultural work after many men left the country to fight. "If we are to harvest British fruit and vegetables this year, we need an army of people to help." The Prince of Wales has shared a message in support of the #PickForBritain campaign. 🍓🍏🍅@DefraGovUK pic.twitter.com/a7WIDYo7E0 — Clarence House (@ClarenceHouse) May 19, 2020  “In the coming months, many thousands of people will be needed to bring in the crops. It will be hard graft but is hugely important if we are to avoid the growing crops going to waste,” he said. “I do not doubt that the work will be unglamorous and at times challenging, but it is of the utmost importance and at the height of this global pandemic you will be making a vital contribution to the national effort,” said the Prince of Wales. The 71-year-old heir to the British throne, tested positive for the coronavirus in March and has since recovered.

A thrash metal drummer says he visited hell during a coronavirus-induced coma — and Satan wasn’t as cool as he thought. Will Carroll, of the band Death Angel, was comatose at the California Pacific Medical Center for two weeks in March after catching the virus on a European tour earlier that month, according to the San Francisco Chronicle’s Datebook. During that time, Carroll, 47, said he had disturbing dreams of visiting the afterlife. There, the devil — a woman in this case — punished him for the deadly sin of sloth and turned him into a “Jabba the Hutt-like-monster” who vomited blood until he had a heart attack, the outlet reported last week. When he opened his eyes on March 30, there were “tubes coming in and out of me, and there was a nurse right there,” Carroll recalled. “My first words were, ‘Am I still in hell?’” “She ignored me.” For most of his time under and on a ventilator, Carroll was in critical condition and came close to dying, doctors told the outlet. “He still was near the limits of what we could do with our supportive care, and we were very worried about him,” said Dr. George Horng, a pulmonologist. “He wasn’t getting worse, but if he were to get worse, there wasn’t much more that we could have done.” The Bay Area rocker’s near death-experience prompted him to make some big life changes. In an effort to be healthier, he said he’s quitting hard alcohol and bong rips, narrowing his substance use to the occasional hard cider and marijuana edible. As for his faith, Carroll said he now believes in a higher power — and feels prayers from his family and friends helped him pull through. “I’m still going to listen to satanic metal, and I still love Deicide and bands like that,” Carroll told the Chronicle. “As far as for my personal life and my experience of what I went through, I don’t think Satan’s quite as cool as I used to.”

Brazil on Tuesday tallied its highest daily jump in coronavirus deaths — 1,179 — as the country’s president continued to promote chloroquine as a possible treatment to the illness. The nation’s highest reported daily deaths from the virus before Tuesday was 881 on May 12. Tuesday in Brazil also marked the highest daily increase in coronavirus cases, 17,408, raising the country’s total infection count to 271,628, according to its Health Ministry. The South American country has the third-highest number of confirmed infections globally. Brazil’s President Jair Bolsonaro, who opposes coronavirus lockdown measures meant to keep populations apart, said new guidelines will be issued Wednesday promoting the use of the anti-malarial drug chloroquine to treat the coronavirus. Bolsonaro on Tuesday also revealed that he always keeps a supply of the drug on hand in case his 93-year-old mother needs it. Two of Brazil’s past health ministers, trained doctors, resigned in the past month as Bolsonaro defies public health expert advice. With Post wires 

The Metropolitan Museum of Art announced plans to reopen to the public in mid-August or “perhaps a few weeks later,” according to a statement released Tuesday. The museum says that the opening is being planned in tandem with New York State’s cautious, phased plan for reopening the city as coronavirus cases retreat. “The Met has endured much in its 150 years, and today continues as a beacon of hope for the future,” President Daniel H. Weiss wrote in a letter. “This museum is also a profound reminder of the strength of the human spirit and the power of art to offer comfort, inspiration, and community.” “As we endure these challenging and uncertain times, we are encouraged by looking forward to the day when we can once again welcome all to enjoy The Met’s collection and exhibitions.” The Met shut down on March 13 and more than 80 employees were laid off. The institution may face a staggering $150 million shortfall. When it reopens, museum officials said, the days and hours in which visitors will be welcomed are likely to be reduced, “given the need to provide an environment that respects social distance requirements”. The MET will not have tours, talks, concerts, or events through calendar year 2020. The museum expects to resume these activities in 2021, including a belated celebration of its 150th anniversary.

The Trump administration Tuesday indefinitely extended an executive order allowing border agents to block most migrants from entering the country over coronavirus fears. The order, which President Trump first issued in March for both Canadian and Mexican borders, was extended for another month in April. The latest version has no fixed end date, though it gives the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention the authority to review health data every 30 days to determine if it’s still necessary. The policy grants Customs and Border Protection powers to swiftly boot migrants, including those seeking asylum. The measure has been championed by administration officials as an important way to stop the spread of the coronavirus, though those supporters have long sought tighter borders before the pandemic. “This order has been one of the most critical tools the Department has used to prevent the further spread of the virus and to protect the American people, DHS frontline officers, and those in their care and custody from COVID-19,” said Chad Wolf, the acting secretary of the Department of Homeland Security, in a statement. The order has federal authorities turning away migrants who could have otherwise stayed in the country for months or years as they legally pursued asylum. CBP agents have been sending Mexican and Central American migrants along the southern border back to Mexico in a span of about two hours. Immigration and Customs Enforcement is in charge of making sure migrants from other countries are quickly repatriated. Within two and a half weeks of the order, nearly 10,000 migrants were barred from entering the country at the southern border, according to the CBP at the time. Advocates have claimed the Trump administration is using the virus as an excuse to deny the rights of asylum seekers. “Trump’s goal is not to protect our health, it’s to sow division and advance his political agenda,” said Andrea Flores, deputy director of immigration policy for the American Civil Liberties Union. Dr. Robert Redfield, director of the CDC, noted when he issued Tuesday’s order that vaccines and treatment for COVID-19 could still be months away. He said the order would continue until “the danger of further introduction of COVID-19 into the United States has ceased to be a serious danger to the public health.” With Post wires

Thirty-seven Planned Parenthood affiliates applied for and received a total of $80 million in loans from the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP), Fox News’ “Tucker Carlson Tonight” has learned — and now the federal government wants the money back, saying the affiliates should have known they weren’t eligible for the coronavirus stimulus payouts. The Small Business Administration (SBA) is reaching out to each involved Planned Parenthood affiliate explaining that affiliates of larger organizations with more than 500 employees aren’t eligible for PPP distributions, Fox News is told. The Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PFFA) alone has had more than 600 employees. A Planned Parenthood affiliate in Metropolitan Washington (PPMW), for example, will receive a letter stating that although self-certified that it was eligible for a $1,328,000 PPP loan in accordance with the SBA’s affiliation rules, it will need to return the money. PPMW’s request for money from the Trump administration came just months after the affiliate’s president and CEO, Laura Meyers, promised to turn down federal funds. “Planned Parenthood is never going to allow the Trump-Pence administration to bully us into withholding critical health information from our patients,” Meyers said last August, after the White House banned Planned Parenthood clinics from making abortion referrals if they wanted to continue receiving federal funds. At the time, Planned Parenthood vowed to give up federal funds entirely, rather than comply with the order. The SBA warned more “severe penalties” were possible, beyond mandatory repayment. In particular, incorrect or false eligibility certifications by PPP recipients could result in criminal or civil sanctions if the SBA determined borrowers made knowingly false statements, the SBA letter read. The letter explained that PPFA affiliates clearly were covered by the PPP affiliate rules. “PPFA’s bylaws, a version of which is publicly available, reveal that becoming a PPFA affiliate requires a certification by the PPFA board,” the document continued. “Once certified, “[e]ach Affiliate shall be governed by written bylaws, which conform to PPFA policies.” The largest single government loan was a $7.5 million allotment to the Planned Parenthood of Orange and San Bernardino Counties in California. One Planned Parenthood affiliate received a loan but declined it. Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., who serves as chairman of the Senate Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship, called for an immediate investigation Tuesday evening. “There is no ambiguity in the legislation that passed or public record around its passage that organizations such as Planned Parenthood, whose parent organization has close to half a billion dollars in assets, is not eligible for the Paycheck Protection Program,” Rubio said. “Those funds must be returned immediately. Furthermore, the SBA should open an investigation into how these loans were made in clear violation of the applicable affiliation rules and if Planned Parenthood, the banks, or staff at the SBA knowingly violated the law, all appropriate legal options should be pursued.” This past January, Planned Parenthood reported a record-high number of abortions and government funding for 2018-2019. At the same time, Planned Parenthood claimed abortion constituted just a small percentage – 4 percent in 2018-2019 – of its services, and that federal funds didn’t go directly to abortions. Some 98 percent of PPP loans have been less than $1 million; the program has provided an average loan of $118,000. Canceled or returned funds can be used during future PPP rounds. Republicans have strongly resisted reported efforts from some Democrats to push abortion-related spending amid the pandemic. In March, The Daily Caller reported House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., tried to include federal funding for abortion in the coronavirus stimulus bill. Multiple senior White House officials told the oulet that speaking to Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin, Pelosi sought a provision for up to $1 billion to “reimburse laboratory claims.” That might set a precedent for health-related spending without the protections of the Hyde Amendment, a compromise restricting federal funds for abortion in most cases. “A new mandatory funding stream that does not have Hyde protections would be unprecedented,” a White House official said. “Under the guise of protecting people, Speaker Pelosi is working to make sure taxpayer dollars are spent covering abortion — which is not only backwards, but goes against historical norms.”

Brad Pitt surprised graduating seniors at Missouri State University with a special video message from quarantine. The video was posted on MSU’s Twitter feed and starts with the university’s president, Clif Smart, alongside mascot, Boomer the Bear, saying he had special guest to deliver a message to students of the class of 2020, who were graduating at home due to the coronavirus pandemic. Then to everyone’s shock and awe, Pitt popped up on the screen, in a green shirt. “Hi everyone. Brad here from quarantine with a shout-out to the graduating class of Missouri State University. Yeah, it must be very strange doing this in these trying times, but know we’re rooting for you,” said the Oscar winner. Pitt, 56, continued, “Our money’s on you to make this world a better place. And we wish you all the best in your future endeavors. So, you did it. You made it. Enjoy. Congrats again, and think big.” On May 12, assistant professor Elizabeth King posted a video on social media asking Pitt to record an uplifting message to the graduates amid the coronavirus pandemic. “I had a wild idea that Brad Pitt would do his hometown a solid & cheer up @MissouriState grads who won’t walk this Friday. Haven’t heard from anyone I emailed, so here’s a video I never thought I’d share. Last shot for my students. Twitter, do your thing,” wrote King. The “Once Upon a Time in . . . Hollywood,” actor grew up in Springfield, Missouri, where the university is located and attended MSU, although he did not graduate. Instead, he packed up his car and drove to Hollywood to pursue his dreams of becoming an actor. The national treasure was two credits shy of finishing his journalism degree.

A Texas man was charged Tuesday after allegedly claiming to have a business with 400 employees in a bid to secure $5 million in forgivable federal loans meant to help legitimate employers through the coronavirus crisis. Samuel Yates, 32, was unable to cash in on the massive loan from the Small Business Administration, according to the Department of Justice. But in a separate application, the feds said he managed to get a $500,000 loan from the agency after claiming to employ 100 workers at his purported business. The loans Yates targeted are offered to small businesses as part of the government’s Payment Protection Plan. Funding for the program was included in a massive federal coronavirus stimulus package. Yates used a random name generator from the internet to name his alleged employees, according to a federal criminal complaint. He’s also accused of using forged tax documents in his applications. He was charged with wire fraud, bank fraud, false statements to a financial institution and false statements to the SBA.

A pair of EMS heroes fighting on the front-lines of the coronavirus pandemic tied the knot in Times Square Tuesday — during a live-streamed ceremony that aired on “Good Morning America.” EMT Kyle Short, 26, and paramedic Meagan Herlilhy, 25, said their “I dos” from the balcony of the Hard Rock Cafe during a segment on the ABC show, as their loved ones looked on virtually on a jumbo screen. “We feel incredible and very appreciated and loved by more people than we could ever imagined,” the thrilled bride told The Post following the ceremony, which was officiated by GMA co-host Michael Strahan. The couple, who both work for the ambulance service AMR of Central New York in Syracuse, met on the job about three years ago and became engaged in April of last year. They understood that getting married amid the outbreak would mean not having a traditional ceremony but said they “couldn’t wait” to be husband and wife. The pair were chosen among thousands of couples to have their ceremony aired as part of a week-long segment for GMA showcasing love stories amid the pandemic. 		  “We are speechless. It’s wonderful,” the groom said about having his virtual wedding held at the Crossroads of the World. The newlyweds danced on the Hard Rock’s balcony as a slideshow with photos of them played on the nearby jumbo screen and passerbys stopped to congratulate them. Some of their co-workers and other healthcare workers also came out to witness the ceremony. Post-festivities, the couple said they were looking forward to heading back to their hotel for cake. “I feel like we have been waiting for this for a long time and we’ve kind of always called each other wife and husband,” the bride said. “Now we are not lying, now it’s real!”

A Texas court tried something new and held the first jury trial over Zoom amid the coronavirus pandemic — only for a prospective juror to wander off-screen to take a phone call. The incident — which was streamed live on YouTube — occurred during jury selection for the one-day trial in an insurance case in Collin County District Court. Attorneys first questioned 12 prospective jurors in a Zoom videoconferencing room — while Judge Emily Miskel had the other 14 prospective jurors wait in a breakout room, reported Law.com. After the lawyers questioned the first group of potential jurors, Miskel spoke with the attorneys privately in a separate breakout room — and returned to find that a candidate had walked off-screen. He was heard talking on his phone. The man was called to come back but there was no response since his computer audio was hooked into headphones that he was not wearing. Finally, the man returned, and the attorneys for both sides announced they had picked their group of 12, allowing the others to sign off. The jurors heard a condensed version of the case and delivered a non-binding verdict. The parties, having seen how their case could fare before a jury in a full-blown trial, will sit down for mediation and try to negotiate a settlement on Tuesday.

New York City residents should be allowed on Long Island’s beaches, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Tuesday — after being ripped as “irresponsible” by a top Nassau County pol for closing the Big Apple’s own shores amid the coronavirus pandemic. “This should not be about any ill feeling toward people depending on where they come from,” de Blasio told WPIX 11 News. A day earlier, a rep for Nassau County Executive Laura Curran had blasted the mayor’s decision to keep city beaches closed for Memorial Day weekend and at least until mid-June — calling the move “irresponsible and short-sighted” as city dwellers will be sure to flock to the neighboring open beaches The back-and-forth came as Nassau County’s legislature prepared a measure to ban non-county residents from the county’s Nickerson Beach. Neighboring Suffolk County already approved such a measure Monday. Proponents say the move is necessary to keep the Long Island beaches from being flooded by city residents amid state-imposed limits on shore crowd sizes and social-distancing rules. But de Blasio said Tuesday that even with the state’s restrictions, there shouldn’t be a problem with city residents flocking to Long Island’s shores. “There are really clear limits on beaches that will be open, and everyone needs to respect that to keep us all healthy and safe in the entire metropolitan area,’’ he said. DeBlasio’s call for Long Island to open its beaches to New Yorkers was a far cry from the hard line he vowed to take with anyone who swam on city beaches in recent days. “Anyone tries to get in the water, they’ll be taken right out of the water,” the mayor said Monday. A day earlier, he said, “If people don’t get it right, if we start to see a lot of violation of those rules, up will come the fences closing off those beaches.”  After de Blasio’s Tuesday remarks, Curran firmly sided with fellow Nassau County legislators and backed closing the shoreline to non-residents, at least until the city reopens its own beaches. Jones Beach, on Nassau’s South Shore, is a state park and still will be open to all, although under the social-distancing guidelines. Towns in Nassau that have their own beaches, including Oyster Bay, Hempstead and North Hempstead, will be making their own decisions on whether to allow non-residents amid the contagion. City Hall responded defensively to Curran’s keep-out warning, saying, “Opening our beaches puts all our people and progress in jeopardy and would cause dangerous overcrowding on public transportation — a lesser factor in other areas. “What is important for all of us to focus on is limiting the number of people on beaches, not where they come from.” But state Sen. Todd Kaminsky (D-Nassau) ripped de Blasio’s crash-the-beach sentiment, saying, “It’s a shame Long Island has to turn away city beachgoers to protect its residents and ensure safe beaches, but until the mayor gets his act together and makes his own beaches safe, that’s the only responsible move.”

Even the homeless have to practice social distancing these days. San Francisco has set up a sanctioned outdoor encampment with dozens tents spaced out to house the city’s vagrants during the coronavirus outbreak. The tents were set up last week in a parking lot between the city’s art museum and library — and just steps away from San Francisco City Hall. The “Safe Sleeping Village” is a response to unsanctioned shanty towns that have popped up across California city during the pandemic, according to Curbed. “So while in normal times I would say that we should focus on bringing people inside and not sanctioning tent encampments, we frankly do not have many other options right now,” tweeted San Fran Mayor London Breed. “Having places with resources serving people in the neighborhood is better than unsanctioned encampments.” But the move has done little to appease homeless advocates, who argue that officials should have moved to shelter the homeless long ago — and who point to the thousands of hotel rooms that are sitting empty. “Don’t get me wrong, I’m happy that this is here,” Brian Edwards, an advocate with the San Francisco Coalition on Homelessness, told Vice News. “But when I said I wanted to sanction encampments this year, I wasn’t thinking in the middle of a f–king pandemic when people should be in hotel rooms.” The city’s Board of Supervisors asked that the city lease 7,000 hotel rooms for the homeless by the end of last month, but Breed called the timetable unrealistic. Breed said in a Twitter post that 1,000 homeless people had been moved from shelters into hotel rooms, but said “the logistical challenges of this are immense,” hence the need for the tent city. Officials have also set up a sanctioned encampment in the city of Santa Rosa’s encampment, which is expected to house 140 people by the end of the week, and is being overseen by Catholic Charities of Santa Rosa, the Santa Rosa Press-Democrat said. “The only reason we’re doing this is in response to our health emergency,” Santa Rosa Mayor Tom Schwedhelm said. There are an estimated 3,000 homeless people living in Santa Rosa and the surrounding region, VICE said.

Princess Eugenie and her family were told to “prepare for the worst” after her father-in-law contracted COVID-19. George Brooksbank, father of Eugenie’s husband Jack, was put on a ventilator for five weeks following a trip to France, but the 71-year-old has now recovered from the life-threatening illness. His wife Nicola, who also contracted the disease — but didn’t need hospital treatment — thanked the British National Health Service for saving her husband’s life, and told The Telegraph: “Without doubt, they saved him, and we could not be more grateful. We were not able to see him throughout his treatment and more than once we were told to expect the worst.” Brooksbank’s condition finally improved following a tracheotomy, and he thanked the staff at both the Chelsea and Westminster Hospital in London and the Royal Brompton Hospital for saving his life. “The point I really want to get across is that I think the NHS is absolutely magnificent. The way I was treated was incredible. Nothing was too much trouble and at no point did I get a sense of a shortage of doctors or nurses or any impression that the service was in any way overwhelmed.” “I certainly owe them my life,” he added. After emergency treatment following Brooksbank’s initial diagnosis, he was moved to a ward at the Royal Brompton Hospital which specializes in heart and lung conditions in people recovering from Covid-19. He then underwent a further period of rehabilitation. The retired chartered accountant is now “absolutely fine” and said: “There was always somebody at hand. I want to offer profound thanks to everyone who was involved. It was a real eye-opener for somebody who has not been in hospital before for any length of time. I certainly owe them my life.” Eugenie, the youngest daughter of Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson, married Jack — who works for George Clooney and Rande Gerber’s billion-dollar tequila brand Casamigos — in 2018.

About 100 workers at three Louisiana crawfish farms have tested positive for the coronavirus, according to state health officials. The stricken employees, from three farms in the state’s Acadiana region, include migrant workers but state officials released no details on how they may have contracted the potentially deadly bug. “There was one outbreak in a group of workers who work in a crawfish farm and life, I think, in dormitory-like settings,” said state Assistant Secretary of Health Alex Billioux. “That led to broader testing.” The department did not reveal the exact location of the farms, saying in a statement that “these are active, evolving, protected investigations.” The cases were part of a 12-page list released by Louisiana officials detailing where some of the state’s COVID-19 oubreaks have occured. Among the sites noted in the report is the Southeast Louisiana War Veterans Home, where 80 residents tested positive and 28 died. Other elder-care facilities on the list were the Old Jefferson Community Care Center in East Baton Rouge, where 82 tested positive and 21 died, and Legacy Nursing and Rehabilitation of Franklin, where 73 residents tested positive and 15 died. Overall the state said there were more than 34,700 COVID-19 cases on Monday, with 2,440 deaths. With Post wires

Subway slashed 150 jobs this week — the latest in a series of cutbacks at the struggling sandwich chain that kicked off before the coronavirus crushed restaurant sales nationwide. The latest cutbacks add to the 300 people Subway laid off in February amid record store closures that have plagued the company for years. In total, the 450 cuts have reduced its staff, which stood at about 1,200 at the start of the year, by 38 percent, sources said. “The COVID-19 pandemic has forced us to accelerate a restructuring plan for which we had been preparing,” a company spokesman said. Subway in this round fired people who helped lease real estate for its restaurants, which are all owned by franchisees, a source said. Chief Executive John Chidsey, a former Burger King executive who took over at Subway late last year, was striking a much happier tone on April 29 when he touted the company’s ability to tackle the pandemic on CNBC and Fox Business. “Sales have been fairly decent for the most part,” Chidsey said to CNBC. “We’ve improved a lot in the last few weeks.” “I actually think we’re ideally suited for an environment like this,” he said. Chidsey explained that because Subway has physically smaller stores than peers like McDonald’s, franchisees have lower rents and less labor than their rivals. Chidsey boasted that the chain is “ubiquitous,” with more than 27,000 US restaurants. In fact, Subway this month reported 23,802 US stores at the end of 2019, as a net 996 US eateries closed. In New York State, the number of Subway restaurants fell 9 percent, from 1,016 to 937. Subway declined to comment further for this story.

We might have to wait a little longer to find out who’s in the envelopes next year. The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences is considering pushing back the 2021 Oscars, according to Variety. “It’s likely they’ll be postponed,” a source told the industry pub. However, the insider added that there has been no formal proposal to delay the show yet, and that the ceremony is still set to air Feb. 28 on ABC. The academy recently changed its eligibility rules, temporarily, to allow streaming-only films to compete at the 93rd annual telecast due to the coronavirus pandemic, which has halted the release of many films. While that shift would provide for plenty of nominees, it would do nothing to ensure a glamorous red carpet full of photographers and in-your-face interviews, or a packed house at the 3,400-seat Dolby Theatre in Hollywood.

Germany thinks America is the wurst. Nearly three-quarters (73 percent) of Germans say their opinion of the US had deteriorated over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic, according to a poll from the German non-profit Körber-Stiftung published Monday. “While skepticism towards Washington predates the pandemic, America’s response to the virus has clearly accelerated a feeling of estrangement on the German side,” the pollsters wrote in their report. By comparison, 5 percent said they had a better opinion of the US and 17 percent said their views were unchanged. Meanwhile, just 36 percent of German respondents said their opinion of China had slumped, despite the country coming under scrutiny from the international community over its response to the outbreak. Still, a majority of those polled said they either “fully” or “somewhat” agreed that more transparency from China could have curbed the impact of the pandemic. The survey also found that despite close ties between Washington and Berlin, only 10 percent of Germans consider the US their closest partner in foreign policy. That’s compared to 19 percent of respondents to the same poll in September 2019. Between that time period, the number of Germans who prioritize buddying up to Washington over Beijing decreased from 50 percent to 37 percent, pointing to a “trend toward transatlantic estrangement,” the researchers said. The researchers noted that experts and politicians predict that Germany will eventually be forced to choose sides should the rivalry between the US and China continue on its current trajectory. “Beijing’s growing popularity will undoubtedly complicate such a decision,” they wrote. More than 1,000 Germans were interviewed for the poll, which was conducted between April 3 and April 9.

They’re single and have the paperwork to mingle. Singles across the country are boasting about their coronavirus antibody test results when they’re out on the prowl. Some are even including the status of the test results in their online dating profiles, using their possible immunity to score a lover in the middle of a pandemic. “About a week and a half ago, my clients started asking questions like, ‘Maureen, this person that you matched me with, do you think they’ve had the coronavirus?’ ” says Maureen Tara Nelson, a Long Island-based matchmaker who plans to ask new clients about their COVID status going forward. “We’re asking people if they’re comfortable sharing if they’ve had it, and if they’d like to to know if the person they’re matching has had it.” Nelson says the health precaution “keeps clients more safe, and in the know,” but a clean bill of health doesn’t necessarily mean singles are safe for sex. Expect apps to do some screening too. S’More, a dating app founded by a former Bumble exec, recently partnered with tech company digiD8 to develop features “to ensure that your relationship with your own health is in your control,” according to a press release. While a positive antibody test can provide accurate evidence of an immune reaction to COVID-19, it’s still not a fool-proof immunity passport nor a barrier to reinfection. So even as the tests become more accessible, singles remain wary of hooking up or even meeting up with anyone, antibodies or not. Still, antibody talk is something Breanna Locke has already started seeing on the dating apps. “One guy on Hinge tried to convince me to come over by saying that he’d already had the virus and recovered, so I wouldn’t get it from him,” Locke tells The Post. On Twitter, she called the COVID cop “the new … lie men are telling to try and get laid.” And she’s not the only one who finds the move cringeworthy. “I was talking to a guy on FaceTime, and he had his mask off when we were chatting. He was saying how he had the antibodies, and had gotten tested,” Hell’s Kitchen resident Lauren Harkness, 41, tells The Post. “He was a little casual with his boundaries and I thought, ‘Ugh, I can’t meet you. I don’t feel safe.’ It was a turnoff. He basically said ‘Hey, do you want to meet? We live so close.'” Harkness, who works as a sex coach, doubts the man even fully understood the test he’d taken, although she admits she doesn’t either. “I don’t think he even knew what the antibody thing meant,” she says. “He said he was talking to the doctor who was telling him that he still had it, or that it was active. But then he texted me today to see if I wanted to go on a walk. I’m confused by the antibody thing too.”

The five Republicans on a new House committee dedicated to coronavirus oversight are calling for a focus on China’s role in the pandemic  — and they want the Chinese ambassador called in to testify. China “downplayed” the initial outbreak of COVID-19 while “stockpiling medical supplies” and then “manipulated” the World Health Organization to circulate false information, the GOP lawmakers write to committee chairman Rep. Jim Clyburn (D-SC). The Republicans demand testimony not only from China’s US ambassador, Cui Tiankai, but also from World Health Organization Director-General Tedros Adhanom, whom they accuse of being a willfully blind China cheerleader. “We urge you to immediately join our investigation and hold hearings to determine why the Chinese government denied and downplayed the severity of the COVID-19 outbreak, and how China is now attempting to exploit the pandemic it caused,” they wrote. A Democratic spokeswoman for the committee promptly denied the request. “The Select Committee will follow its mission to ensure that taxpayer money appropriated to address the pandemic is used efficiently, effectively, and equitably. This body is not directed to focus on the origin of the virus,” the spokeswoman said. The WHO and the Chinese embassy in Washington did not immediately respond to requests for comment. House Minority Whip Steve Scalise of Louisiana signed the letter to Clyburn, which was obtained by The Post, as did Reps. Jim Jordan of Ohio, Blaine Luetkemeyer of Missouri, Jackie Walorski of Indiana and Mark Green of Tennessee. The GOP request would broaden the committee’s focus as Republicans including President Trump express concern that the panel will be primarily an election-year attack vehicle. House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) recently noted that Clyburn’s endorsement of former Vice President Joe Biden reversed his fortunes to make him the Democrats’ presumptive presidential nominee. Trump told The Post in an Oval Office interview this month that he perceived the Democratic committee members as hostile toward him. “They are trying to form a committee. Every one of the names is a total kill, okay? It’s a total kill,” he said. Committee Democrats include Reps. Carolyn Maloney of New York, Maxine Waters of California, Nydia Velazquez of New York, Jamie Raskin of Maryland, Bill Foster of Illinois and Andy Kim of New Jersey. The Republicans argued in the seven-page letter to Clyburn that China should be a focus, in part, because of a drop in medical exports and continued actions to pilfer intellectual property. “While stealing American pharmaceutical research with one hand, China is brazenly using the other to limit pharmaceutical exports to the United States,” the lawmakers wrote. “The Chinese government’s efforts to undermine the American effort to combat COVID- 19 and sabotage the global economic recovery are ongoing.”

WASHINGTON — President Trump on Tuesday defended his decision to take antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine to ward off coronavirus — charging that a study which found it to be potentially lethal was a “phony investigation.” “This was a false study done where they gave it to very sick people — extremely sick people, people ready to die — given obviously by people who are not friends of the administration,” Trump said during a cabinet meeting at the White House. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar and Veteran Affairs Secretary Robert Wilkie also defended the commander-in-chief during Tuesday’s cabinet meeting as the “right to try president” and said the drug had been used to safely treat other diseases for decades. While some initial studies appeared to support the drug’s benefits, the Food and Drug Administration has warned against the use of hydroxychloroquine for COVID-19 outside of a hospital setting or clinical trial, due to potential heart complications. The Veterans Health Administration study referenced by Trump examined more than 300 COVID-19 patients and concluded the drug could be dangerous and even lethal. “Hydroxychloroquine has been approved by the FDA for decades in the US for prevention of malaria and the treatment of lupus,” Azar told reporters. “This is the right to try president. He for the first time got historic right to try legislation for experimental therapies but that applies to our existing regime, which is approved products may be used in the judgement of a physician in consultation with their patient,” Azar continued. Wilkie also poured cold water on the study, telling reporters it was not done by his department but by researchers using their data, and said the numbers were not clinically reviewed and did not take into account how sick the veterans already were. “We’ve been taking this drug for years. As the president mentioned, the Department of Defense and VA have been using it for 65 years. On any given day the VA uses 42,000 doses of this drug,” he said. “We did this in consultation with our doctors under FDA guidelines so I want to knock down the phony story that this is somehow the VA going back on what the president told us to do, which is use every means possible to protect and preserve the lives of our veterans,” he continued. The president sparked headlines on Monday when he announced he had been taking hydroxychloroquine for several weeks after the White House physician said he could take the drug. Trump doubled-down on his remarks Tuesday, saying he was taking the antimalarial pill as “a line of defense” after seeing many positive studies on the effects of hydroxychloroquine in Italy, he said. “I’m the president and I’m dealing with a lot of people,” he said, speculating the drug had only received bad publicity because he was promoting it. “If anybody else was promoting it, they’d say this is the greatest thing ever,” he added. In an interview earlier Tuesday, Vice President Mike Pence said he did not take the drug despite being quarantined after his spokesman came down the coronavirus because his doctor had not recommended he take the drug. But Pence defended Trump’s decision to do so. “I’m not taking it but I would never begrudge any American taking the advice of their physician,” Pence told Fox News. “My physician has not recommended that but I wouldn’t hesitate to take the counsel of my doctor, any American should do likewise,” he added. A Chinese journalist with close ties to the ruling Communist Party mocked Trump for taking hydroxychloroquine, charging that the commander-in-chief was using “witchcraft” to try to combat the pandemic.

Farm animals have had a rough go of it during the coronavirus, but this flock has been lucky enough to fly the coop. Rescuers from the nonprofit Animal Place saved 1,000 hens last week from an Iowa egg farm that’s culling its flock as the pandemic roils the nation’s food supply chain. Instead of being gassed as the coronavirus reportedly crushes demand for eggs, the hens are now getting their first taste of freedom at Animal Place’s northern California sanctuary. And the group is now working to find them new homes, according to executive director Kim Sturla. “They’re actually doing pretty well considering what they’ve been through,” Sturla told The Post. “They’re starting to experience life as it should be for them.” Although the coronavirus has resulted in meat and egg prices skyrocketing at the grocery store, US farmers have had to kill off healthy chickens and pigs as the pandemic temporarily shuttered slaughterhouses, resulting in an oversupply. Farms that sell to restaurants, which have closed en masse during crisis, have also been forced to dump cow’s milk and cull their herds. Sturla declined to identify the Iowa farm where Animal Place conducted its rescue except to say that it was planning to shut down and gas most of its 140,000 chickens to death. Most had already been killed before the rescue, which Animal Place arranged with the farm, she said. Instead, the group dispatched two staffers who drove 30 hours from California to pick up the hens with help from eight local volunteers. The lucky birds were packed into crates and loaded onto two chartered airplanes, paid for by a donor, for an eight-hour flight from Fort Dodge, Iowa, to Truckee, California, Animal Place said. Iowa is the nation’s biggest egg producer with more than 57 million hens as of January 2019, US Department of Agriculture data show. Many of the saved hens were “terribly weak” after spending most of their lives crammed in cages — but only one died during the rescue, Sturla said. Animal Place expects to place 150 to 200 of the survivors for adoption by the end of this week into small “backyard flocks,” Sturla said. But they’re struggling to adjust to their newfound freedom, she said. “They have access to outside as well as to their barns, but they’re too fearful to explore,” Sturla told The Post. “Space is a foreign concept and they’re fearful of it because they know nothing else but crammed conditions.” Animal Place has carried out dozens of large-scale rescues but the Iowa operation was the first directly related to the coronavirus crisis, Sturla said. Like other animal-rights advocates, she suggested that the culling caused by the pandemic is no more horrific than business as usual in the beleaguered meat industry. “To me, the horror is the standard operating procedure,” Sturla said. “The horror is that we have to resort to such incredibly cruel processes for our food supply.”

With each day comes a new crate of tea leaves, hints and clues of what’s to come, and when. We gauge ebbs and flows of “momentum” — toward the resumption of sports, away from it, who wants to play, how can they play, will they be safe, will the people care? NBA superstars hold a conference call, and the message is this: ‘We want to play.’ The NHL commissioner expresses confidence in a 24-team playoff. The governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, declares his state “a ready, willing and able partner,” says “the state will work with [teams] to come back.” It is impossible not to feel small jolts of hope. Always, though, there is the thousand-pound buzzkill in the room. Always, there is the bottom line, especially in the sport so many have entrusted as being the guidepost through all of this — baseball. It is baseball that has begun to aggressively get its house in order, issuing a thorough 67-page outline of protocols and procedures designed to ensure a safe return. It is baseball that has thrown the most spaghetti against the most walls, gaming out plans that make the most sense. And it will be baseball that must, eventually, discuss and debate what will surely be the sourest aspect of all of this: whether players will agree to play for the prorated portion of their contracts, which is what the Players Association wants, or if they’ll agree to a strict (and, for now, temporary) revenue-sharing split. We are, of course, in absolutely no mood for this bickering as a nation, and will have no patience for the perennial quarrels between millionaire players and billionaire owners. There are, at last count, 36 million out-of-work Americans. The COVID-19 death toll will soon surpass 100,000. In other times, Blake Snell might simply be dismissed as just another chatty baseball player with little self-awareness. In these times, he might well become a pariah of piggishness, the very symbol of self-indulgence, if this labor civil war actually draws blood. The players, after all, have never enjoyed support in the court of public opinion in any of this, no matter how noble their cause might be. It is a useful coincidence that 50 years ago this week, inside room 1505 of the federal courthouse at Foley Square, Curt Flood squared off with MLB in the first genuine showdown over the fundamental rights of players. The reserve clause had existed for a century, a standard part of a baseball contract which, in essence, bound a player to a team for life, unless the team chose to trade or release him. Players railed against this for years but the standard reply, every bit as loud in 1920 as 2020, was this: Shut up and play. Flood had been traded from the Cardinals to the Phillies after the 1969 season. He refused to report to Philadelphia. He chose to challenge the reserve clause in court, backed by the union, and much of the theater of Flood v. Kuhn was equal parts comedic and infuriating. At one point, as Flood nervously gave testimony, the judge, Irving Ben Cooper, interrupted. “I presume you are not finding this as easy as getting up to bat,” he said, and it is impossible to believe he ever said something like that to a jumpy plaintiff in, say, any wrongful-death suit he oversaw. Flood was actually asked to recite the back of his baseball card at one point. But his most compelling testimony has lived on, eternally, as the lasting battle cry of the MLBPA: “I didn’t think that after 12 years I should be treated like a piece of property,” he said. Flood, famously, lost the case and, in essence, sacrificed his career for the cause, but the union was forever emboldened. It was a pyrrhic victory for baseball, which has endured 50 years of bludgeonings by the union, making up for a prior century of paternalistic power. The two sides were already headed for confrontation in a year. The pandemic has sped up that schedule. Whether the rest of us are ready for it or not.

President Trump tore into Nancy Pelosi on Tuesday, saying the House speaker has “mental problems” after she poked at his weight in a TV appearance. “Pelosi is a sick woman. She’s got a lot of problems, a lot of mental problems,” Trump told reporters on Capitol Hill after attending a lunch with Senate Republicans. Trump made the remark during a lengthy answer about the Justice Department moving to drop its prosecution of former national security adviser Mike Flynn. Trump listed accomplishments that he said he was able to accomplish despite “an illegal witch hunt” into claims his 2016 campaign colluded with Russia. “We’re dealing with people that have to get their act together for the good of the country,” Trump said. Earlier in the gaggle with reporters, Trump declined to directly respond to Pelosi saying Monday night on CNN that Trump should not be taking the drug hydroxychloroquine to protect against contracting the coronavirus because he is “morbidly obese.” “I don’t respond to her. I think she’s a waste of time,” Trump initially said on Tuesday. Trump and Pelosi have traded barbs for years, including over her frequent public assertion that she “prays” for him. Trump, meanwhile, has smarted over House Democrats impeaching him last year for pressuring Ukraine to investigate Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden and his son Hunter, who held a cushy board job at a Ukrainian energy firm. Trump told The Post in an Oval Office interview this month that he objected to the tenor of Democrats on Capitol Hill. “It’s not a good working environment. And it’s caused by them, it’s not caused by me, it’s caused by them,” Trump said. “I could totally do the impeachment hoax, you know, as an example — the impeachment hoax. Total hoax.” Pelosi’s office did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

The MTA is rolling out a new weapon in its battle to keep the city’s buses and trains clean during the COVID-19 pandemic — coronavirus-killing ultraviolet lamps. The agency will roll out 230 far ultraviolet-C lamps next week on select trains, buses and agency facilities, MTA Chairman Pat Foye said Tuesday. “These UV lights that we have on site today efficiently kill the virus that causes COVID-19,” Foye said before a demo at the Corona yard in Queens. “We believe this is a big deal for the MTA — for our customers and employees, and the future of our system.” The lamps will be used out of view of straphangers — in yards and depots and during overnight station closures, the MTA said. Foye said the decision to advance the pilot comes after months of tests by the MTA and Dr. David Brenner, a professor of radiation biophysics and director of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University. Manhattan’s popular Magnolia Bakery is also working with Columbia to test out the tech, known as “far-UVC” for short, its owners told The Post Monday. While normal ultraviolet light is harmful to humans, the gentler far-UVC is not, according to Brenner. Brenner and his team have tested the tech on lab rats for eight months and found no detrimental impact, he said earlier this week. The cash-strapped agency is paying PURO Lighting $1 million for the lamps. If the MTA decides to expand the program system-wide, PURO will have to bid against other companies for a long-term contract, Foye said. He emphasized that the lamps are just one piece of a large virus-fighting strategy. Earlier this month, the MTA instituted a nightly shutdown to allow for frequent cleaning. And Foye has suggested straphangers may even need to pre-book trips via a Ticketmaster-style service to keep crowds down in the future. “I don’t want to mislead everybody into thinking this is a cure-all. There is significant work to be done,” Foye told reporters.

A political activist from New Orleans who once pleaded “no contest” to masturbating during an Uber ride paid a Brooklyn barber $500 to open for the day in a publicity stunt protesting coronavirus lockdown restrictions — but was quickly cut short by cops. Police closed down Beard Barberia Cut & Shave in Williamsburg just minutes after Liberate America founder Frank Scurlock cut his girlfriend’s hair for $1 as part of the stunt, but neither Scurlock nor shop owner Ilya Iskhakov were cited for violating the restrictions — and got off with a warning, Scurlock said. It was the only haircut of the day, and it was unclear if cops were already there when it happened. “I cut her hair and then the police showed up and said they would give us a summons,” said Scurlock, a New Orleans mayoral candidate in 2017 when he was charged with pleasuring himself during a California Uber ride. “It’s not their fault,” he said of the NYPD. “They’re just enforcing the stupid law. They were even apologetic about it. I was kicked out. They just gave us a warning.” In a press release announcing the stunt, the carpetbagging Scurlock billed the event as pushback from immigrant barbers and small business owners to the lockdown. But except for his girlfriend, the only others on hand were Iskhakov, who hails from Uzbekistan, and two of his employees, who had just one potential customer that was turned away when cops threatened to fine him if he went ahead and cut the man’s hair. “I was ready to start working today, honestly,” the 29-year-old told The Post. “I know the summonses are high and I didn’t want to take any summons for $5,000 to $10,000 because I am thinking about all the debt I already have.” Iskhakov said he has been hurting since the lockdown in March, which has him $12,000 behind on his rent and forced him to move back in with his mother. While he made up to $30,000 a month before the pandemic hit, he’s down to about $200 a week making house calls, he said. Scurlock maintains he’s been trying to champion small business owners like Iskhakov. He said he and his girlfriend, Hillary Barque, have been staying in the Big Apple for about two weeks “unifying business owners and helping all small businesses that are hurting right now.” Officials at City Hall said no summonses were written because the stunt “wasn’t an actual reopening” and lasted just 10 minutes. They said police reported that no money changed hands during the brief reopening, although Scurlock and Barque confirmed the transaction to The Post. The de Blasio administration did not respond to questions about how it defines “reopening.” Officials said the NYPD reported that no money had been exchanged. State officials did not immediately respond to the question of whether Scurlock broke the law by taking money for the haircut despite not being a licensed barber. Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Mayor Bill de Blasio have increasingly faced a backlash from lockdown-weary residents and merchants, who complain that they’ve been crippled by the lengthy shut down of all non-essential businesses. This weekend, about 200 people, including small business owners, rallied on Staten Island demanding an end to the lockdown. Earlier this month, nine protestors were arrested outside City Hall for social-distancing violations while demanding that the restrictions be lifted. Scurlock claimed his Brooklyn barbershop stunt was yet another demonstration. “Let common sense prevail and let people get back to work,” he said. “This should be the city that allows people to work and they’re frustrated.” Scurlock pleaded no contest to lewd and dissolute conduct in public for the masturbation allegation in 2018 and was ordered to serve one year of summary probation and “follow all mental health directives, including mental health counseling and taking all prescribed medication,” according to the New Orleans Times-Picayune, which said at the time that details on the mental-health order were not available.

New York City’s mass transit system has kept running throughout the coronavirus pandemic — but it is a ghost of its former self. Ridership on the subway is down 90 percent. Service is running at 75 percent. For the first time ever, the subways close for four hours every night so the MTA can clean and cops can clear out the homeless who have flocked to the system. Even ridership on the breezier New York City Ferry Service is down 80 percent. Meanwhile, almost half of New York City residents plan to avoid mass transit when coronavirus lockdowns begin to ease off, according to one survey — and drivers are already roaring back into the streets. As the Big Apple moves towards lifting lockdowns, here’s what experts say the future of commuting in New York City could look like. It’s been more than 70 days since Mayor Bill de Blasio first told New Yorkers to avoid mass transit, and MTA officials continue to push the message that the system is reserved only for essential workers. “Our goal right now is to carry first responders and essential employees to and from work,” MTA chairman Pat Foye told WCBS Radio on Friday. “Those are nurses and doctors and utility workers and grocery store workers and transit workers of course, and all the other people who are keeping New York running right now.” But even as the city’s economy reopens and the MTA welcomes other commuters aboard, health experts expect many former riders to opt out until there is a coronavirus vaccine. “Any time there’s a lot of crowding — especially if people are coughing and sneezing and you’re in an enclosed space — that’s not a good place to be,” said Dr. Isaac Weisfuse, a medical epidemiologist from Cornell University Public Health and the former deputy commissioner of the city health department. “People who might have relied on the subway a lot more in the past will probably rely on it less.” The state-run agency itself has said it expects ridership to be at a mere 50 to 60 percent of pre-pandemic levels at the end of the year. Many of those opting out could instead start crowding the roads — or CitiBike docks. According to a recent poll by research firm Elucd, 31.5 percent of locals plan to use transit less by walking, biking or driving when lockdowns are lifted. Biking and driving already appear to be on the upswing. Vehicle miles traveled across the New York region rose to 50 percent of pre-crisis levels for the first time earlier this month. And bike crossings over the four East River bridges during the first weekend of May this year were nearly double an average May weekend last year. For those who do brave the transit system, the MTA is already requiring riders to wear masks and has placed social-distancing floor markings at a handful of Upper East Side stations. It has also ramped up cleaning, and is trying out special “anti-microbial” disinfectants, as well as UV lamps on trains, in an effort to kill the virus. But officials have already admitted that keeping six feet of distance between riders on trains and buses will be all but impossible in the future. Foye last last week said “everything is on the table” as the agency tries to figure out how it can move forward. One idea he has pitched is reserved seating using “Ticketmaster technology” to ensure fewer straphangers — though he admitted it would be logistically challenging. Experts have suggested a number of other measures to make transit safer — or at least make commuters feel like it is. Ideas that have been floated include: cordoning off every other seat, opening windows to bring in more fresh air, splitting trains into “A” and “B” cars so that only certain doors open at certain stations, installing hand sanitizer dispensers, creating apps to tell riders if the next train or bus is too full, and tech that can identify people with fevers. AECOM Digital Innovation VP Orla Pease said her firm is helping connect American transit leaders with ideas being tested in Asian and European countries that are further along in the pandemic. One novel idea: turning up the lights, which Pease said will make stations at least feel cleaner. “When you go to a darker part of the station, it gives the perception that it isn’t as clean,” she said. The already cash-strapped agency is facing a huge financial loss thanks to the virus, but health experts said money will have to be invested to get results. “There are things that you can do that, yes, they may require more public resources, but will have a bigger impact,” said Hofstra University public health professor Dr. Anthony Santella. “You can’t just tell everyone not to use public transportation.” The level of overcrowding may also depend on decisions made outside transit agencies, experts said — employers can help by keeping workers at home, or staggering start times if they can’t. “In 1918 [during the Spanish Flu pandemic], what they did is they made certain time periods for certain industries. If you were a grocer, you could take the subway between 9 and 9:30, for example,” Weisfuse said. Meanwhile, the city’s roads will become even more gridlocked than before as commuters ditch mass transit — unless leaders start preparing to make changes now. If just one out of every four former transit commuters switched to driving, the average car trip would increase by over seven minutes, according to an analysis by Vanderbilt University engineering professor Dan Work. “If they’re in single-occupancy vehicles, then we’re looking at a post-pandemic reality where traffic is worse,” he said. Mohamed Mezghani of the International Association of Public Transport put it more bluntly. “The city will collapse because of the increased congestion,” he said. “That’s the main challenge.” Additional reporting by Gabrielle Fonrouge

Not even the coronavirus pandemic could stop Texas’ annual “Go Topless Jeep Weekend” — a wild party that resulted in nearly 200 arrests and raised eyebrows on social media. A viral local news report about the boozy beach bash in Galveston showed maskless revelers drinking, twerking and driving around in ATVs, as resigned cops admitted it was “impossible” to enforce social distancing. “We been in quarantine and like, I need to get out and party,” beachgoer Chelsey Coyer told 12 News Now in the report. She then warned viewers to “Wash your hands for 20 seconds!” to ward off the virus. The segment quickly became an instant classic, with dozens sharing it on social media. “Not even SNL could not write something as ridiculous as this actual, real news report from my local station,” tweeted @Maria_Rendon97. The rager resulted in two men getting shot after a fight and 189 people arrested, the majority for traffic citations and drug possession, according to the Galveston County Sheriff’s Office. “We do what we can, we can not control individuals or what people do as far as their life. We just try to manage the best way and whatever scenario occurs,” Galveston County Sheriff Henry Trochesset told the outlet.

Air pollution in China has rebounded rapidly from welcomed lows observed during the country’s coronavirus lockdown — even exceeding pre-crisis levels, worrying data shows. The Asian nation recorded a spike in air pollution levels in April which surpassed what was recorded for the same time last year, according to a report from Finland-based Centre for Research on Energy and Clean Air obtained by CBS News. The researchers now warn that this could signal the beginning of a “dirty” economic recovery from the coronavirus pandemic in China. “Air pollutant levels plummeted during the national lockdown in February, bottomed out in early March and have now overshot their pre-crisis levels,” the group said. Though air quality was expected to deteriorate again with lockdowns lifted, the group said it was not anticipated that it would “overshoot pre-crisis levels, especially when many economic sectors are still reeling.” “Such an overshoot would signify a ‘dirty’ recovery in which the more highly polluting sectors are leading,” the group warned. Experts blamed the rebound on industrial emissions, noting that the country has allowed most economic activity to resume, according to CBS. “Large-scale enterprises in construction and manufacturing are understandably desperate to resume production as urged for economic recovery,” Ma Jun, founder of Chinese non-profit organization, the Institute of Public and Environmental Affairs, told the outlet. “Though the risk it’s posing to the environment shouldn’t be overlooked and strict supervision is required.”

A Manhattan steakhouse has redesigned its restaurant for a post-coronavirus world — setting up Plexiglass table dividers between tables to keep germs from fellow diners contained.  Stratis Morfogen from downtown’s Brooklyn Chop House unveiled the changes on his Instagram account and said guests can expect full body temperature scanners at the entrance, hats with plastic shields for front- and back-of-house staff, triple-layer AC filters and a host of other safety measures.  “If you’re not adapting you will not succeed when the city reopens! STATE GUIDELINES HAVE NOT GONE FAR ENOUGH FOR RESTAURANT OPENINGS! This is @BrooklynChopHouse NEW Responsible Looks!” Morfogen wrote on Instagram May 9.  The dividers are outfitted with a classy, black border and are designed to bring diners peace of mind if they decide to go out to eat when restaurants can reopen, likely by mid-July.    Morfogen also plans to implement CDC-grade disinfectants in the walls and ceiling and will have staff deliver glassware and utensils in saran wrap to further prevent germ spread. Additionally, they’ll be using ultra-violet technology to keep the place sparkling clean and will give customers Clorox wipes at the table to disinfect themselves. 

Roll up the red carpet, because there will be no Met Gala in 2020. Following the Metropolitan Museum of Art’s mid-March decision to close its doors and postpone the glitzy ball “indefinitely” in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Met announced on Tuesday that this year’s event has been called off entirely. The Costume Institute’s “About Time: Fashion and Duration” exhibit, which would have set the theme for the 2020 fête, is still set to open on October 29 and run through February 7, 2021. The Met now plans to reopen around mid-August, although all talks, tours, concerts and events have been canceled through the end of the year. A spokeswoman for the Met told WWD that the 2021 gala will be focused on next year’s Costume Institute exhibition, which has not yet been announced. When it was initially announced that the Vogue-hosted bash wouldn’t take place on the usual date, fashion-hungry fans sprang into action, recreating iconic looks from past Met Galas at home. Celebrities like Mindy Kaling and Adam Rippon got in on the fun, too — and Katy Perry even shared a glimpse at the baby bump-accommodating look she’d planned to wear on the big night. Time to start looking forward to the first Monday of next May.

Coronavirus-induced cutbacks at Condé Nast, which resulted in 100 US layoffs last week, appear to have stirred labor unrest at the glitzy but struggling publisher. Wired’s editorial union has fired off a letter to Condé Nast CEO Roger Lynch blasting the company for its coronavirus severance packages after a majority of editorial staffers last month indicated that they want the NewsGuild of New York to be their bargaining agent. “We were deeply disappointed to learn that many of our laid off colleagues were offered meager or nonexistent severance packages, even though in your letter to the company on Wednesday (5/13) you stated that ‘supporting people in their transition was of utmost importance,’” said the letter, which drew support from three other unionized Condé brands: The New Yorker, Ars Technica and Pitchfork. The union also blasted the company for its treatment of freelancers: “Our freelancer and subcontractor colleagues, some of whom worked for WIRED full time for years in a shameful two-tier system, were left with no severance pay or health coverage whatsoever in the middle of a pandemic that has caused the worst economic downturn in generations.” After a first round of cuts unveiled in late April that resulted in pay reductions, the magazine publisher followed up last week by axing nearly 100 employees in the US, where about half of its 6,000 worldwide employees work The Wired union also called on Lynch “to immediately recognize our union by participating in a card check conducted by a neutral third party.” The 70-member Wired union said on April 22 that the overwhelming majority of editorial staffers turned in cards asking for NewsGuild representation, but the company has yet to officially recognize the union as the bargaining agent as it did for The New Yorker and the other two units at the family-owned magazine giant, which had been union-free until last year. The company, owned by the billionaire Newhouse family, had not responded to the letter by press time.

Five McDonald’s workers in Chicago filed a class-action lawsuit against the chain on Tuesday, accusing it of failing to adopt government safety guidance on COVID-19 and endangering employees and their families. McDonald’s failed to provide adequate hand sanitizer, gloves and masks and has not notified its staff when an employee has become infected with the new coronavirus, according to a copy of the lawsuit provided by a spokesman for the workers. McDonald’s said in a statement that the allegations were inaccurate and that safety, including wellness checks and protective gear, was a top priority. The workers requested the Illinois state court issue an injunction, which would make McDonald’s stop requiring workers to reuse masks, mandate face coverings for customers and require the company to inform employees if a coworker becomes infected. Separately, McDonald’s workers at three California locations on Tuesday filed administrative actions over allegedly unsafe conditions with the California Division of Occupational Safety and Health. Employees at restaurants, warehouses and other essential businesses that remained open during the COVID-19 outbreak have protested and walked off the job over fears of getting sick. Trade groups have warned of a wave of litigation over the pandemic, but few cases have been filed. Retailer Walmart and meat producers JBS and Tyson Foods were each sued over employee deaths from COVID-19. Smithfield Foods was sued by a workers group demanding safety measures in a lawsuit that, like the McDonald’s case, alleged the company was a public nuisance. The Smithfield case was quickly dismissed because the judge said workplace conditions were a matter for the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, part of the Department of Labor.

Emily Gerteis is a nurse practitioner, but she’s not toiling away at Big Apple hospitals — she’s a primary care medical provider for homeless New Yorkers.  “It really is a crisis within a crisis,” Gerteis, 34, told The Post of how the pandemic has compounded the city’s enormous homeless dilemma.  “They don’t have access to stay at home. They don’t have a home, so they do not have that privilege to self-isolate, to quarantine themselves away from others. They don’t have access to bathrooms to wash their hands. They don’t have money for masks or gloves,” Gerteis, a medical director at the Center for Urban Community Services’ Janian Health, went on.  “They rely on folks to help work with them to get them housed and to get them off the street. And with essential staffing and things like that [cut during the crisis], they have less help these days, there’s less to be had, so they’re particularly at risk for getting ill and not being noticed.”  Early on in the crisis, Gerteis came down with what she’s sure was COVID-19 but she was unable to get tested, so she hunkered down and waited for the symptoms to subside while continuing to work from home.  “There was too much to do. There were too many things changing at that time … I couldn’t stop,” Gerteis, who lives in Bedford-Stuyvesant with her wife and two cats, explained.  “There’s no one to cover you, right, when you work in this type of work.”  By Monday, March 30, after a little over a week at home, Gerteis was already back at the Times Square Hotel where CUCS runs a supportive housing program for formerly homeless individuals with a history of mental illness or serious chronic health conditions.  “We have some high-risk staff that we had to pull from the field … I felt a big responsibility to my patients to return and to make sure that their health is managed,” Gerteis said of her decision to come back so quickly.  “It’s so amazing seeing all these [medical workers] coming back and you know, the military coming in to help the hospitals in New York City, but we know in our line of work that there’s no one that’s going to relieve us, so we have to keep going.”  Gerteis said she provides “typical family doctor services” — like getting patients to cardiology appointments, prescribing them medication, helping with wound care and counseling them on their diabetes.  She’s still doing that now — but with the “added twist” of dealing with her patient’s normal physical and mental illnesses and how they’re compounded with “a lot of anxiety” and “a lot of fear” that arose during the crisis.  “Whatever you’ve been dealing with day-to-day during normal life is being exacerbated right now,” Gerteis explained.   “So if you hear voices, the voices are definitely having an uptick. If you have anxiety and depression, those are getting worse. And you know, if you are easily kind of startled or easily quick to anger, those things are hard for you to handle right now.”  She said the underlying issue for most of the homeless she serves is “fear.” For many, it’s difficult to enter the shelter system but the pandemic has made it that much harder.  “They’re afraid that there is no safe place to go and the places that we normally create, right, these mental health shelters for people that have lived on the street for a year or more, right, they no longer feel safe at these places because of coronavirus,” Gerteis said.  While her work is difficult, Gerteis finds joy in tackling those tough issues. She described how she taught a patient who suffers from schizophrenia how to wear a mask properly, what the virus is all about and how they can keep themselves safe.  “People already have difficulties with their day-to-day living when they have a mental illness,” Gerteis said.  “So being able to be that resource, just being able to be there for folks in this time, to be someone to lean on, it’s amazing, it really is.”  Do you have a nominee for The Post’s Hero of the Day? Email heroes@nypost.com.

City building inspectors are running speed trap-style operations to catch contractors violating a coronavirus ban on “non-essential” construction work — and to slap homeowners with maximum, $10,000 fines, The Post has learned. A Department of Buildings inspector spent at least 45 minutes Tuesday morning staked out at the intersection that leads to the ritzy Douglas Manor neighborhood in northwestern Queens. “I’m an elevator guy normally but they got us all doing this now,” the inspector told The Post. “Except for essential work, there are no inspections. So to keep us all working, they got us out making sure everybody complies with the governor’s order.” Meanwhile, an electrician who was hired by a nearby homeowner said he was “followed” to the house by a different inspector on Monday — then drove off when the inspector pulled alongside his van and parked across the street. The electrician said that he wanted to work, but that getting fined “makes it not worth it.” Last week, he said, the same inspector who tailed him had pounced on a floor re-finisher, slapping the contractor with a $2,500 fine, plus $1,000 for each of his helpers — along with a maximum, $10,000 fine for the homeowner. “They had just opened the van and brought the floor sanders onto his property,” the electrician said. “The homeowner said, ‘Pack up all this crap and get the hell out of here.’ ” That inspector told The Post that a violation occurs as soon as a contractor “steps onto the property.” “The fine for having any work done is $10,000. First offense. No exceptions,” he said. Under restrictions imposed by Gov. Andrew Cuomo that went into effect March 31, new construction work on private homes is generally limited to jobs “necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants,” according to information posted on the DOB’s website. Violators face fines as high as $10,000 each. The inspector who was staking out the intersection of Douglaston Parkway and Northern Boulevard on Tuesday said his duties included checking on job sites that were shut down due to the pandemic. The inspector, who was behind the wheel of a dark Toyota Prius with DOB markings, said he’s also under orders to investigate the activities of any contractors he’s able to spot. “I go and check it out. Make sure they’re complying,” he said. HVAC contractor John Heffernan, who owns Pride Maintenance & Mechanical Inc. of Bayside, said he was working at a house in Sheepshead Bay two weeks ago when a DOB inspector “boxed in my truck” with his car “and ran into the house I was working on.” “He told the homeowner he was getting a $10,000 fine and I was getting fined $5,000 for each employee,” Heffernan said. “I had to prove I was fixing the heat before he let us off.” The DOB denied that it had a policy of lying in wait for contractors to violate the ban on non-essential work, but said that inspectors are expected to investigate if they see something suspicious. “We are aggressively enforcing the governor’s ban on non-essential construction to help stop the spread of COVID-19 and fight this pandemic,” spokesman Andrew Rudanksy said. “Our fellow New Yorkers depend on us to do our jobs, especially during this crisis, and we will not let them down.” The DOB said it had issued about 200 stop-work orders and related violations at both commercial and residential worksites, and said they could result in around $2 million in fines. The agency also noted that homeowners can apply for permits for non-essential work that’s “being completed by a single worker who is the sole employee/worker on the job site.”

Zoey Deutch has revealed that she contracted coronavirus before the shutdown began, and even admitted she felt guilty for recovering. In a new Vulture essay, the 25-year-old actress said, “People keep asking me, ‘Where did you get it?’ and I wish I knew.” “I’m okay now,” Deutch, who continued to test positive for a month, said. “I’m so grateful for my health and I also feel guilty, in a way, for making it out okay. I think this virus is bringing up so many conflicting emotions.” She continued, “I have to say I’m also so grateful for my inherent neuroses, which caused me to stay inside before I was supposed to. I’ve been quarantined longer than there was a mandated shut-in.” “The Politician” star said she’s decided it’s time to speak out about her experience to encourage people to wear masks. “I am so lucky to be healthy, that I’m safe and not immunocompromised and have access to doctors; I am incredibly privileged. But not everyone shares that privilege — so we need to be extra careful for those who don’t by wearing masks.” Deutch’s essay goes on to detail her days in quarantine, which includes lots of cooking and binge-watching “The Sopranos.” She also noted that she is having major feelings over the recent internet squabble between Alison Roman and Chrissy Teigen. “Nobody has reached out to me to ask how I’m doing in regards to my two crushes, Alison Roman and Chrissy Teigen, who are engaging in an internet fight,” she complained. “I’m not kidding when I say I am distraught over it. I am torn apart. My No. 1 ingredient is shallots and, same as Chrissy, whenever I see my shallots, I cry. My greatest passion in life is food and eating.” Luckily for Deutch, the foodie feud ended as quickly as it began earlier this month.

Analyst: Dems Can’t Count on ‘Angry Voters’ Joe Biden and other Dems “looking to replicate Barack Obama’s multiracial coalition” can’t count on anti-Trump fury to bring victory in ­November, warns Matt Grossmann at FiveThirtyEight: Because “the voters most energized by anger are white.” Political scientist Davin Phoenix notes that nonwhites turn out when moved by “pride or hope” — and the 2016 Hillary Clinton campaign’s “ ‘basket-of-deplorables’ messaging” was “a severe miscalculation of the way people of color respond.” Biden’s move left won’t help, either, notes Grossman: “Even on issues of race, nonwhite voters are no longer significantly more liberal than white Democrats.” Biden needs black leaders to push hard for turnout, but “that’s hard advice for Biden’s currently homebound campaign to heed at the moment.” From the left: Liberals Give Up on Civil Liberties When Judge Emmet Sullivan refused to let the Department of Justice drop charges against Michael Flynn, you “had to search far and wide to find a non-conservative legal analyst willing to say the obvious, i.e., that Sullivan’s decision was the kind of thing one would expect from a judge in Belarus,” sighs Matt Taibbi in his newsletter. The rare exception was professor Jonathan Turley’s warning that this “could create a threat of a judicial charge even when prosecutors agree with defendants.” More typical, notes Taibbi, was “the preposterous ‘leak’ of news that the dropped case made Barack Obama sad.” In reality, the Flynn case was based on serial abuses: “Warrantless surveillance, multiple illegal leaks of classified ­information, a false-statements charge constructed on the razor’s edge of Miranda and the use of never-produced, secret counterintelligence evidence in a domestic criminal proceeding — this is the ‘rule of law’ we’re being asked to cheer.” Bottom line: “Erstwhile liberals” have become ­“defenders of the spy state” and are even mocking those who raise “serious civil-liberties issues” about the current lockdowns. Culture watch: Corona Dethrones ‘Density’ So much for the claim from “pundits, public-relations aces and speculators” that “our future lay in dense — and politically deep-blue — urban centers, largely on the coasts,” Joel Kotkin scoffs at The Hill: The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed overlooked dangers of “dense urbanity,” with “the death rate in large, urban counties . . . well over twice those of high-density suburbs.” Already, “more people are seeking out single houses with such things as yards and workspaces,” while telecommuting means workers no longer need to live in “woke, super-dense cities.” That “domestic migration” may create a “new center in American politics” and so end ­today’s “environment of ceaseless, and often pointless, political warfare.” Conservative: Failed Bureau of Investigation The Federal Bureau of Investigation has an “ignominious” history of finding civil liberties “optional,” political scientist William S. Smith thunders at The American Conservative — an attitude of which Michael Flynn’s prosecution was only the latest example. While the FBI has many “brave and patriotic” agents, “merely catching bad guys is too mundane” for agency honchos, who “see themselves as progressive guardians of the American Way” — a “savior complex” that led ex-section chief Peter Strzok to “frame junior aides in the Trump campaign.” The solution may be breaking up the FBI into “four or five” smaller agencies with “distinctive missions.” That reform wouldn’t “end every abuse of federal law enforcement,” but it would diminish the FBI’s “ostentatious pretension.” Iconoclast: A Way for Trump To Go Negative Republican strategist Karl Rove thinks President Trump has taken too long to attack presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden — but blogger Mickey Kaus has a better idea: “Go negative on Biden’s VP pick. Before that person has been chosen.” The gambit has “a number of virtues” for Trump: It would “highlight Biden’s weakness without otherwise attacking his integrity or character” and force “Democrats to rally around Biden, thereby ­assuring that he — and not a stronger candidate — will actually be Trump’s opponent.” It would also “put the focus” on “unpopular Democratic party positions” and let “Trump pick and choose” which “VP candidates to attack and on what grounds,” giving the president “a bit of control over who Biden’s choice is.” — Compiled by Mark Cunningham & Karl Salzmann

Harvey Weinstein won’t be headed to Los Angeles anytime soon to face a fresh slew of sex crimes charges — due to the coronavirus pandemic, officials said. “The virus has delayed the processing of the extradition paperwork,” said Greg Risling, a spokesman for the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office. “There is no time estimate on when he will appear in a Los Angeles courtroom.” LA prosecutors have charged Weinstein with two counts of sexual battery by restraint and one count each of forcible rape, forcible oral copulation and sexual penetration — all stemming from the allegations of three women. The LA complaint alleges that Weinstein attacked an Italian model on Feb. 18, 2013, at Mr. C Beverly Hills hotel and sexually assaulted Lauren Young the next day at the Montage Beverly Hills hotel. He allegedly sexually assaulted a third woman at an unnamed Beverly Hills hotel May 11, 2010. The LADA’s office said on March 11 that it had begun the extradition process, but the coronavirus outbreak has since caused courthouses on both coasts to suspend most of the office’s operations. A Manhattan jury convicted the former Hollywood kingmaker of forcibly performing oral sex on former “Project Runway” production assistant Miriam “Mimi” Haleyi in 2006 and raping hairstylist Jessica Mann in 2013. Weinstein was sentenced in March to 23 years in prison and is currently serving his time at Wende Correctional Facility in upstate New York. The disgraced producer’s spokesman Juda Engelmayer said his attorneys plan to appeal the verdict but have yet to file their motion. Weinstein has denied engaging in non-consensual sex acts.

Another casualty of the coronavirus: hugs. With abundant fear about coming into close contact with elderly loved ones, hugging has run afoul of proper social-distancing and common-sense precautions — especially at coronavirus-stricken nursing homes. But that’s not stopping some relatives from concocting creative ways to hug Nana safely. A daughter found a heartwarming way to safely hug her mom, a resident at Fox Trails Senior Living Home in Stephens City, Virginia — by wearing an inflatable hippo costume, complete with a pink tutu. Footage posted to Twitter May 13 shows the grandma at the entrance of the facility, receiving a hug from her daughter in the hippo costume. “This is wonderful!” the elder woman exclaims. The video’s narrator gushes, “My mother-in-law hugging my grandmother in an inflatable hippo suit wearing a tutu is the content you needed today. Her nursing home is letting family members hug each other in these sterilized suits.” Twitter swooned over the adorable get up — and tender moment between mother and daughter separated — at least physically — over COVID-19. “This is pretty great. And also something we will look at in ten years and be like ‘was this real life??’ ” “Very sweet,” wrote @replikate, while @bellastef gushed, “I love this …. bringing a little tear. How amazing is this nursing home to get creative! Thanks for sharing.” It’s far from the only creative alternative to skin-on-skin contact with a vulnerable loved one. UK grandson-of-the-year Antony Cauvin, 29 circumvented safety concerns for his beloved grandmother by fashioning a “cuddle curtain,” which allowed the two to embrace safely. “When you’ve known someone all your life, to be able to hug that person again … it brought a tear to everybody’s eye,” he said. Other families have taken to calling their protective barrier iterations “hug shields.”

More than a quarter of Americans “definitely would not” feel comfortable sending children back to school within the next few weeks, a new poll released Tuesday found. The survey, conducted in 16 countries by Ipsos over a four-day span earlier this month, found that 46 percent of Americans polled said they’re not comfortable with allowing their kids to return to the classroom in the coming weeks amid the coronavirus pandemic. Twenty-eight percent said they “definitely would not” send their youngsters back anytime soon. Meanwhile, just 26 percent of Americans feel comfortable about the prospect of sending their kids back to school. Across the globe, confidence in children returning to school was highest in Australia, where 59 percent of respondents said they’re comfortable with schools reopening soon. Australia was followed by South Korea at 49 percent and China at 43 percent, the poll found. In contrast, 44 percent of Brazilians said they definitely would not send their kids back to school in the next few weeks, the highest portion of respondents among the countries polled. Regarding their own return to the workplace, adults in South Korea and Australia were most comfortable about getting back in the office — at 82 percent and 71 percent, respectively. Fifty-five percent of Americans, meanwhile, said they felt safe returning to the office, compared to 38 percent who said they did not. The online poll conducted from May 7 to 10 surveyed 16,000 adults in the US, Canada, Australia, Brazil, China, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, India, Japan, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, South Korea and the United Kingdom. Roughly 1,000 people from each country took part. The poll has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points, Ipsos said.

A March 26 conversation between MLB and the union in which MLB portrays the union as acknowledging that a new negotiation was needed regarding how players would be paid this season could serve as an email version of a smoking gun. The league and the union have disagreed over how players will be paid if games are resumed. The union claims that within the agreement finalized on March 26, players are guaranteed their prorated salaries for games played, while MLB argues that the agreement says salaries must be reconsidered if there are no fans in attendance. The Post, however, has obtained a March 26 email from an MLB lawyer to top league officials that documents the substance of talks between two MLB officials and two MLBPA officials from earlier that morning. The email covers seven points, including that MLB explained to the union officials that MLB would need a second negotiation if games were not played in front of fans to determine pay and claims that union officials understood that concept. Thus, the email seemingly offers evidence that the union was aware that further talks were potentially necessary. The two sides had a formal negotiating session last Tuesday in which MLB laid out extensively its proposal for restarting the game focusing on safety and health guidelines. The sides also talked economics, but MLB did not make its expected proposal for a 50-50 split in revenues this year. The sides have not formally spoken since, with the clock ticking if MLB actually intends to begin a second spring training in mid-June and start the season the first week of July. The staredown and absence of talks is based on neither side wanting to flinch on economics. Players Association executive director Tony Clark and powerful agent Scott Boras have been publicly strong in stating the matter of salary already has been determined for a 2020 restart and no further negotiations need be held. But the email from MLB senior vice president of labor relations and deputy general counsel Patrick Houlihan suggests otherwise. He and MLB executive vice president of baseball economics Morgan Sword spoke on the morning of March 26 with Players Association deputy general counsel Matt Nussbaum and director of analytics and baseball operations Greg Dreyfuss. The union was seeking clarification on matters that include service time and the draft. In an email that Houlihan sent to deputy commissioner Dan Halem, MLB’s lead negotiator, that was cc-ed to several other prominent league officials, he wrote on Issue 1: “Matt asked what ‘economic feasibility’ meant in Section I. I told him it meant that we would only consider playing in neutral sites or without fans if it worked for us economically. I reminded him of Rob’s comments at the outset that playing in empty stadiums did not work for us economically. But I said, for example, that we might be willing to have a conversation about playing some limited number of games in empty stadiums if players agreed to reduce their daily salaries for those games, and if it was part of a larger plan that made economic sense. Matt confirmed that that is what he thought we meant, but appreciated the confirmation.”  In response, Players Association senior director of collective bargaining Bruce Meyer told The Post in a text message: “The contract itself is very clear that in the event of a partial season players will get paid pro rata salary — whether with fans or without. And it doesn’t require any further concessions on pay from players who have already agreed to give up billions of dollars in salary in the event of a partial season in which they would be taking on unprecedented risks and burdens. Having said that, both sides are free to make any additional proposals they want. If they have a proposal on economics they should make it as we’ve repeatedly invited them to do. We have the right to respond to it. Despite all their posturing they still haven’t done so. Rather than actually negotiating over these issues the league is focusing on leaking self-serving internal memos to the media. Public posturing is not going to help us have a season. “That the Commissioner’s office has claimed it needs additional salary concessions should not be surprising to anybody. But there’s a difference between what they are entitled to and what they want. The fact is that the league has conceded that they will be better off economically playing a season than not playing a season. And so far the league has not provided any underlying documents to support their economic claims. Meanwhile we continue to focus on the health and safety aspects of the league’s proposal.” Upon seeing Meyer’s statement, MLB countered with one of its own that emphasized a tense situation growing even more so. The statement to The Post read: “We are glad that Mr. Meyer finally has admitted that the March agreement contemplates a subsequent negotiation between the parties if the 2020 season is to be played without fans. While Mr. Meyer now says that the Union has repeatedly invited the league to make a proposal, that cannot be squared with the public comments by the Union and at least one agent that players are unwilling to agree to a reduction of player compensation in order to play a 2020 season without fans. The Union even publicly rejected a potential league proposal to share all revenues equally with players before such a proposal was made to it. While Mr. Meyer claims that Clubs will be better off financially playing without fans, the truth is we would lose hundreds of thousands of dollars per game.” The Players Association position has been that not only does the March 26 document support its pro-rata position, but that MLB has not made a clear case to the union that it is not economically feasible to pay the players in full even without fans. The union feels players will be taking health/safety risks, yet take a second pay cut so that owners will lose less money. In the March agreement, players agreed to waive claims for billions of dollars in salary in exchange, the union has stated, for the prorated pay when games return. And the Players Association still is waiting for a formal financial proposal from MLB. MLB believes the March 26 agreement language is clear and — just as vital — what was said between the sides reflects that. Yankees president Randy Levine, who was the lead negotiator for MLB in the labor dispute of 1994-95, was not part of the negotiation, but has subsequently read, among other items, the bargaining notes that led to the agreement. He told The Post that he believes all of it together provides a picture of what the intentions of the agreement were. “As I have said, our players are patriots and they are all wise enough and careful enough to make decisions that are in the best interests of them and their families and we all respect those decisions,” Levine said. “However, they need to make their decisions based on what the March agreement actually states and has been signed off on by both sides. I personally reviewed all of the documents and the bargaining notes from the dispute over the provision about renegotiating salaries and they are just clear that it does not state what Scott Boras and Tony Clark have said. “It clearly states in bold language that if there are any bans on mass gatherings — which there are to this day — that prevent fans in the stadium, and/or any travel restrictions exist — as they do today — for example, people have to quarantine for 14 days going in and out of Canada and/or the commissioner has to certify that it is safe to go to a ballpark, which has not happened because he is bargaining with the union about the health and safety protocols; since those three conditions have not been met, the agreement says that based on those facts and the economic feasibility of the moment there has to be a renegotiation on salaries. That is not my opinion, that is what the text of the agreement says. As long as the players and the clubs feel it is safe to return, I am hopeful we will get past arguing over language that is clear and unambiguous and quickly get to negotiating a deal that is satisfactory to all.”

PETA has demanded an investigation into whether a baby orangutan at a German zoo died from the coronavirus, according to a report. The German branch of the animal activist group said Leipzig Zoo should consider the possibility that the nine-month-old named Rima’s death was related to the virus, the Daily Mail reported. “The danger of apes being infected with [COVID-19] is thoroughly likely,” Yvonne Würz of PETA said in a statement. “As the closest relatives of humans, they are vulnerable to pathogens which cause respiratory illnesses in humans.” But zookeepers insisted that the orangutan baby died from a serious illness unrelated to COVID-19, saying no staff or animals suffered any symptoms of the virus, according to the German newspaper Bild. “She died at the start of April, and was already faint and in poor general health before that,” a zoo spokesperson said. “Neither staff nor animals have had coronavirus symptoms in our zoo. Therefore, we will not use up human screening capacity with unnecessary tests.” The orangutan’s death comes after several big cats at the Bronx Zoo tested positive for the virus after being exposed to an infected zookeeper.

