
The coronavirus pandemic has taken a toll on the American psyche, with a third of Americans now showing signs of clinical depression or anxiety, a rate twice as high as before the pandemic, according to Census Bureau data. Those grim statistics are likely even more dire for the health care workers on the front lines of the crisis, experts say.
 
While it's too early to truly quantify the effect that treating patients under combat-like conditions will have on doctors in the coming months or years, preliminary research out of China highlights the mental health risk that American health care workers potentially face.
 
Of more than 1,200 health care workers surveyed in China, roughly half showed symptoms of depression or anxiety, according to a JAMA Network Open article published in March. More than a third of those surveyed reported insomnia. Some 70% said they were distressed. Nurses, women, health workers who had direct contact with COVID-19 patients and those in Wuhan, the epicenter of China's outbreak, reported the most severe symptoms.
 
The consequences of ignoring doctors' mental health during the pandemic are grave. 
In April, Dr. Lorna Breen, medical director of a New York City emergency department, which had nearly been overwhelmed by COVID-19 patients, died by suicide at age 49. She had no prior history of mental illness.
 
"Make sure she’s praised as a hero, because she was," Breen's father told the New York Times. "She’s a casualty just as much as anyone else who has died."
 
"We have to see emotional and mental health support as being as important and vital as we see PPE [personal protective equipment]," said Dr. Samantha Meltzer-Brody, a psychiatry professor and director of the well-being program at University of North Carolina.
 
Every hospital and medical facility should be asking themselves, "what are we doing to prevent the emotional impact of being a health care provider in this environment?" she said.
 
"Health care workers are not starting with a baseline of zero. They had super elevated depression, suicide rates and burnout prior to COVID," explained Dr. Jessica Gold, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Washington University in St. Louis.
 
Depression, burnout and suicide plague the medical profession. While there hasn't been much recent research evaluating the incidence of physician suicide in the United States, studies from the 1990s found that the risk for suicide among male physicians was 40% higher than for men in the general population. For female physicians, that risk was 130% higher.
 
Newer research continues to indicate that suicide rates among physicians outpace rates in the general public.
 
Layered on top of an already stressful job is a public health emergency the likes of which our country hasn't seen in a century, compounding doctors' existing mental health risks.
 
The list of stressors for health care workers during COVID-19 is overwhelming even to read. They worried about not having enough PPE to protect themselves from the virus. They agonized over the prospect of running out of ventilators and having to withhold care from the dying. Many practiced outside of their field. They took on grueling shifts, with no sense of when the outbreak would crest. Burnout was brutal, they said. Colleagues fell ill and some died -- 63,000 and nearly 300 respectively according to the CDC. After finishing their COVID-19 duty, some were redeployed. They slept in hotels, isolated, to protect their families, or went home each night, and worried about putting their families at risk. Those far away from the front lines said they felt guilty and inadequate for not being there.
 
Then there was the helplessness inherent in being unable to save tens of thousands of patients. 
"Early on, the predominant emotion was anxiety," said Dr. Michael Devlin, a clinical psychiatry professor at Columbia University, who led group sessions on Zoom for health workers during the pandemic. Hospitalizations in New York City were surging and the doctors he counseled were worried about exposing their families.
 
"You're putting people in between the two things they care most about — their work and their family," he said. "It's excruciatingly difficult for many people."
 
Over time, that anxiety gave way to grief over seeing so much loss and death.
 
Patients' families were barred from the hospitals. In many cases, doctors and nurses were the ones holding the iPad as patients said goodbye to their loved ones through a screen.
 
"There was all the awfulness of people not being able to say goodbye to loved ones and having to witness that," he said.
 
Traditionally, medical professionals have relied on a culture of stoicism and self-sacrifice in order to do their jobs. In some ways, it's necessary. "Doctors are trained to try not to have their emotions interfere with their judgement," said Donald Parker, a licensed clinical social worker and president of Hackensack Meridian Health Carrier Clinic, New Jersey's largest nonprofit behavioral health system.
 
But that same culture also puts doctors at risk of not taking care of, or hurting themselves, experts say. 
"You want your doctor to be neutral in emotions and deep in their expertise. That creates an environment where they don't feel free sharing their emotions," said Parker, who has worked in behavioral health for more than four decades.
 
Without an outlet, even those who have been calm and reserved over the course of their careers can become overwhelmed.
 
"It spills over," Parker said. "You are left with an intensity in reaction that becomes dysfunctional."
 
Dr. Jo Shapiro's job is taking doctors' mental health and well-being seriously.
 
After three decades of practicing surgery, Shapiro spent 10 years at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Massachusetts, directing a program to train physicians to support one another when they experience trauma on the job. She's given peer support training at more than 50 organizations in the United States and around the world, and when the pandemic hit there was even more interest among organizations who wanted to launch new programs or adapt their existing framework to the COVID-19 crisis.
 
But when Shapiro herself developed COVID-19 early on, she refused to take her own advice about self-care and self-sacrifice.
 
"Although I didn’t have to end up in the hospital, I have never been that sick," she said. As her health worsened, Shapiro continued to work on starting peer support programs when organizations reached out to her.
 
"The level of hypocrisy that I demonstrated to myself as I was getting sicker and sicker shows you how deep the culture is. I was doing exactly what I tell people not to do," she said.
 
The stigma attached to asking for support can lead doctors to suffer in silence or use negative coping mechanisms, like alcohol or drugs to self-medicate, experts say.
 
"Nobody wants to look look like they are incompetent or like you can’t trust them in a battle," said David Pezenik, a licensed clinical social worker, who counseled first responders about grief and trauma after 9/11.
 
"It usually takes a little while for it to set in and manifest," he said of trauma.
 
"The patient might not even realize what they’re going through. The first part, before denial is shock. When you’re in shock you don’t even feel the pain." 
Not everyone who experiences trauma or burnout will develop conditions like anxiety or depression, but there are some early signs to watch out for, Meltzer-Brody explained.
 
First it's important for doctors to pay attention to their stress levels, their emotions and the effect their work is having on them. "There are people who are very aware — and those who are less so," Meltzer-Brody said.
 
Positive coping strategies, like exercise, connecting with family, friends and colleagues, eating well, and taking physical and mental breaks, can help.
 
If those positive coping strategies fail and a doctor still feels depressed, anxious or can't sleep, it's a sign they may need more formal mental health support.
 
"Just being able to name it is one thing, having tools to deal with it is a different thing," Meltzer-Brody said. 
While some people will bounce back from trauma, others will inevitably suffer long-term mental health consequences.
 
The worst concern, first and foremost is that someone will develop PTSD and clinical depression and have decreased functioning," Meltzer-Brody said.
 
Decreased functioning could mean not being able to interact with family members or being unable to go to work. Relationships with significant others or between parents and children could become strained. Developing addiction as a maladaptive coping strategy is another risk. Some may leave the workforce altogether, and others may feel increasingly hopeless and that life is not worth living.
 
When asked about the potential for doctors dying by suicide, Meltzer-Brody said, "People like me who run these programs think about it every day and worry about it every day."
 
COVID-19 has the potential to have a devastating impact on doctors' collective mental health in the U.S. But it could also be the catalyst needed to implement preventative mental health support programs in institutions that aren't investing in them.
 
Of the dozens of the programs Shapiro has helped launch, the majority began with an unsettling trigger point, such as a medical error in a hospital, the death of a colleague, or a mass casualty like the Boston marathon bombing.
 
"Things that a caring, compassionate person might be deeply affected by," Shapiro said.
 
Support programs vary, but the best ones are often multifaceted and involve proactively reaching out to doctors, rather than expecting them to ask for help when they need it, experts say.
 
UNC offers evidence-based stress first-aid training for front-line workers based on best practices from the military and first responders to lessen the effect acute stressors have on them in challenging situations. There are also virtual groups run by trained mental health providers and an anonymous helpline staffed by clinical social workers.
 
Doctors are encouraged to call in if, for example, they are increasingly scared to go to work, or if they've gotten in a fight with their spouse and are worried about how it's affecting them.
 
In her work, Shapiro has found that doctors feel most comfortable opening up with a physician colleague, rather than with a mental health professional, who might not be able to relate to their exact circumstances as intimately.
 
Her peer-to-peer programs train doctors to support one another during difficult circumstances. If there's any potential that an event could be emotionally traumatic, peer supporters reach out proactively to their colleagues. 
"We should think of peer support as preventative," Shapiro said. "Some people, some physicians, some health care providers over the course of doing their work are going to become burnt out, depressed, or will develop PTSD, or become suicidal," she said.
 
"We know it. We have the data. Let’s not wait. Let’s know that there are certain circumstances, emotions, events that are especially emotionally stressful. Let’s reach out at those times and offer peer support rather than waiting for suffering."
 
The need is evident. Thousands of health care professionals have utilized UNC's online mental health resources and attended virtual forums since the pandemic began. Shapiro is seeing an uptick in requests for her help starting peer-to-peer support programs. At Columbia, after Dr. Breen died by suicide, demand for one-on-one counseling sessions skyrocketed. 
But programs like the ones Meltzer-Brody and Shapiro run are the exception, not the rule.
 
"If we look at the United States broadly, a tiny handful of places are taking this as seriously as they should be. That’s grossly inadequate to take care of the huge number of health care providers who are facing this," Meltzer-Brody said.
 
There needs to be a call to arms that doctors' mental health needs are not being met, she stressed. 
That call needs to be more than "call your employee assistance program," she said, referring to such assistance programs a good start, but far short of the proactive mental health support health care workers need. Instead, programs like hers should be widespread and available to everyone, which may be a real possibility if newly loosened rules about mental health treatment using telemedicine are extended beyond the pandemic.
 
"With virtual care there is no reason that it can’t be scaled up," Meltzer-Brody said.
 
"I think we have to see this as being as important as we see PPE," she reiterated. "Do we have adequate PPE to prevent physical transmission? This is the equivalent of emotional PPE."
 
If you are struggling with thoughts of suicide or worried about a friend or loved one help is available. Call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-8255 [TALK] - for free confidential emotional support 24 hours a day 7 days a week. Even if it feels like it – you are not alone.
 
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.
Health officials in Missouri are alerting those who attended Memorial Day weekend parties at the Lake of the Ozarks that a partygoer there has tested positive for the novel coronavirus.
 
"Camden County Health Department has been notified of a Boone County resident who has tested positive for COVID-19 after being in the Lake area on May 23 and 24," according to a statement issued on Friday.
 
Over the holiday weekend, photographs and videos were posted on social media that showed dozens of people in public pools and inside businesses not practicing social distancing or wearing masks or gloves. 
The St. Louis County Department of Health issued an advisory on Tuesday urging anyone who did not practice COVID-19 safety guidelines to self-quarantine for 14 days or until they test negative for the virus. 
The patient arrived the area on May 23 around 1 p.m. and went to Backwater Jacks twice and to Shady Gators and Lazy Gators Pool until 10 p.m., officials said. The following day, the patient started his day around 1 p.m., where he went to Buffalo Wild Wings for an hour then Shady Gators until 7 p.m., from which he took a taxi to a private residence. 
"The public who may have been in these places is asked to please monitor for symptoms. ... If you develop symptoms, please contact your physician and isolate until test results are known," officials said.
 
As of Saturday, Missouri has recorded 12,795 confirmed case and at least 738 deaths, according to the state's health department. Worldwide positive cases, according to the Johns Hopkins University of Medicine's Coronavirus Resource Center, exceeded 6 million by Saturday evening.
 
No new coronavirus cases were reported among Camden County residents this week, officials said.
 
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.
Infectious disease experts from the Emory University School of Medicine are warning that given the current rate of deaths per day, it is possible the U.S. death toll from the novel coronavirus could double by September as restrictions are lifted throughout the summer, and Americans begin to congregate again.
 
"Yesterday we passed over 100,000 deaths in this country. We are currently at a rate of about 1,500 deaths per day in the U.S. That means that by Labor Day, there will be another hundred thousand deaths in our country. That is a very sobering number," said Dr. Carlos del Rio, a professor of medicine and global health at Emory, during a virtual video briefing conducted on Thursday, as he urged people to be careful and practice social distancing.
 
In May, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, there were between approximately 500 and 2,000 coronavirus-related deaths every day in the United States. However, coronavirus projection models vary widely.
 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention predict that although the rate of increase in cumulative COVID-19 deaths is continuing to decline, the total number of COVID-19 deaths is likely to exceed 115,000 by June 20.
 
However, a model created by Youyang Gu, an independent data scientist and Massachusetts Institute of Technology graduate who founded covid19-projections.com, forecasts the U.S. is likely to surpass 175,000 deaths by Aug. 8.
 
In another study, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, an independent global health research center at the University of Washington, has projected that the U.S. death toll will exceed 132,000 deaths by Aug. 4, but the upper limit of the organization's projection also suggests there is a possibility the U.S. could hit 173,000 by the same date.
 
"It is without a doubt that unfortunately more Americans will die through the Summer," Dr. Wafaa El-Sadr, professor of epidemiology and medicine at Columbia University, and director of the Global Health Initiative at the Mailman School of Public Health, told ABC News. "It is inevitable that we will continue to see new infections with deaths amongst the most vulnerable populations, the elderly, the poor, African Americans, Latinx, those with other serious conditions." 
However, she cautioned that she thinks it is still premature to estimate the number of Americans who will lose their lives to the virus by the fall.
 
"It is very difficult to make projections that far in advance, particularly as the U.S. is now going through a moment of high uncertainty in terms of the trajectory of the epidemic," El-Sadr told ABC News. "The next few weeks will be critical as more and more communities and states are easing mitigation measures and opening up businesses and activities. What happens next is dependent on what we are doing today in terms of easing of restrictions as well as our willingness to put back restrictions in the event that we see a blip in the number of cases. Right now is a critical time point. What we see in the next few weeks will be critical and how we act and react in the next few weeks will be equally critical."
 
During the Emory University briefing, del Rio, who was joined by his colleague, Dr. Colleen Kraft, an associate professor in the department of pathology and laboratory medicine and the director of the Clinical Virology Research Laboratory, discussed the current state of the coronavirus pandemic in Georgia, and across the country. 
Both specialists stressed that the pandemic is far from over, despite the fact that the rates of infections and deaths are not as high as they could have been if measures such as social distancing, lockdowns and the shutdown of the economy had not been instituted.
 
Del Rio said that it was a mistake to think of the pandemic in terms of a curve, with a peak and a gradual descent.
 
"I think what we're beginning to see in the U.S. is a certain stabilization and plateauing in the number of cases," as well as in the number of deaths, he said.
 
Given the severe economic consequences of the pandemic, for states to reopen safely, he said it's important to track the number of deaths, the rate of hospitalizations and intensive care unit capacity. 
Del Rio said it is essential, both at the state level and at the national level, to determine who is getting infected in order to isolate these individuals and stop the outbreak.
 
"I think we're going to see little outbreaks, but the idea is to make sure that those outbreaks don't become large outbreaks, and we can contain them so you can actually limit the spread of infection," del Rio said. "Because obviously as you're opening up the economy, you will have cases, there's no doubt."
 
All eyes have been on Georgia, one of the first states to aggressively move to resume economic operations.
 
There, Gov. Brian Kemp opted to lift many stay-at-home restrictions on businesses across the state on April 27. Gyms, barbers, hair and nail salons, theaters, bowling alleys and private social clubs were among the businesses allowed to reopen. 
Although Georgia is still seeing an increase in positive coronavirus cases, and has experienced a few single-day spikes, the number of new cases has remained relatively steady over the past month. There is, however, a slight uptick in the seven-day moving average of the number of new cases, hospitalizations and deaths.
 
Georgia has more than 45,000 confirmed coronavirus cases, and nearly 2,000 deaths statewide, according to data compiled by Johns Hopkins University.
 
Kraft said that even though the number of cases has decreased, with schools and colleges reopening in the fall, and people getting back together, it is imperative to trust "our sources of truths," like the CDC and the Georgia Department of Health.
 
The reopening process, Kraft said, has been "stuttering," because "most" residents remain apprehensive about a return to normal activities, but believes the country will begin to see the implications of reopening in the next month due to the busy Memorial Day weekend. 
"I think it's safe to say that we're going to have a continued increase in cases in the U.S., whether it's Memorial Day weekend, or just the fact that we are reopening. I think it's really going to be a matter of individual choices," del Rio said. "If you have a lot of people out, with a lot of contact, you're going to see a lot of cases, and if you have less people with less contact, you're going to have less number of cases, so I really think it's going to be a lot about individual behaviors and less about policies."
 
Further he said, "Science is going to be critical to get us out of this mess."
 
Kraft said despite many people's desire to move around with less restrictions, it is important to remember that there may be people around you who are asymptomatic.
 
"We're now moving into the stage where we're climbing our way out of it, but we're in a plateau, which could easily become a surge," Kraft added. 
People should also decide how large they want their "coronavirus circle" to be, that is, the number of family, friends and colleagues they associate with, Kraft said. She also stressed the importance of using protective measures to shield those who are medically vulnerable until there is a sure vaccine and very good therapeutics. "Keep yourself safe so you can keep your circle safe," she said.
 
Del Rio concluded with a warning to Americans to still take the pandemic seriously.
 
"This pandemic is not over," he said. "Just because a politician is saying it's safe to get out or we want to reactivate the economy. Take care of yourselves, practice social distance. Be careful. These are not normal times. I don't want to see you become a statistic."
A novel coronavirus pandemic has now killed more than 364,000 people worldwide.
 
Over 5.9 million across the globe have been diagnosed with COVID-19, the disease caused by the new respiratory virus, according to data compiled by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. The actual numbers are believed to be much higher due to testing shortages, unreported cases and suspicions that some governments are hiding the scope of their nations' outbreaks.
 
The United States is the world's most-affected country, with more than 1.7 million diagnosed cases and at least 102,809 deaths.
 
Today's biggest developments:
 
Here's how the news developed on Friday. All times Eastern. 
 
President Donald Trump plans to resume in-person fundraising next month with two events -- June 11, at a private home in Dallas, and June 13 at his golf club in Bedminster, New Jersey, multiple sources told ABC News.
 
News on the fundraisers first was reported by Politico. 
Both fundraising sites "will be professionally cleaned and sanitized" ahead of time, a Republican National Committee official told ABC News. The White House Medical Unit and U.S. Secret Service will evaluate all attendees. They must pass a temperature screening, complete a wellness questionnaire and test negative for COVID-19 on the day of the event.
 
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.
 
In New York City, at least 1,060 homeless individuals have tested positive for the coronavirus, including 86 who have died, according to the city's Department of Social Services. 
 
The homeless are among the most vulnerable, and among the 1,060 who tested positive, 55 were considered unsheltered New Yorkers. The vast majority were considered sheltered. 
HUD defines unsheltered as those whose primary nighttime location is not ordinarily used for sleeping, like the street or a park.
 
In the face of a global pandemic and protests across the country, President Trump announced at a Friday afternoon news conference that the U.S. is ending its partnership with the World Health Organization. 
"We will be, today, terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to worldwide, and deserving, urgent global public health needs," he said.
 
Trump also said that Hong Kong is no longer autonomous from China.
 
"We will take action to revoke Hong Kong's preferential treatment as a separate customs and travel territory from the rest of China," the president continued. "The United States will also take necessary steps to sanction ERC and Hong Kong officials directly or indirectly involved in eroding Hong Kong's autonomy."
 
The president did not take questions or comment on the events in Minnesota.
 
North Carolina sent a letter to the Republican National Committee on Friday, further pressing Republicans about their plans for the party's convention.
 
In a letter from Mandy Cohen, secretary of the state's Department of Health and Human Services, North Carolina included a number of asks for GOP leaders to "further elaborate on its plans to protect convention participants and the people of Charlotte in accordance with the CDC guidance." 
The letter included a list of questions: How many delegates, alternates, elected officials, guests and media are expected to attend and be inside the Spectrum Center? How will the RNC implement health screenings, social distancing, face coverings, hand hygiene and other cleaning protocols at all RNC-sanctioned events? Is the RNC is still following Trump's desire to host a convention with "a crowd-like setting" without social distancing and face coverings? How will people be isolated if they do not pass thermal or health screenings?
 
While the letter acknowledges that a large-scale event can occur during the pandemic, state health officials urge the GOP to plan for "several scenarios." 
"The state continues to support the hosting of the Republican National Convention in Charlotte if it can be done safely," Cohen wrote.
 
RNC officials replied to that letter though a statement Friday afternoon, saying they had hoped the governor's office would provide "concrete details on how to plan" for the convention.
 
"After all, if public schools can be opened early on August 17th we should know how to proceed with an event on August 24th," the RNC said. "Instead we do not have a commitment that provides clarity or guidance. Like the rest of the state, we will be ready and waiting for North Carolina leadership to offer clear guidance on how we should safely plan for the type of convention for which we originally contracted."
 
The RNC had initially sent a letter on Thursday to North Carolina Gov. Roy Cooper outlining some safety protocols, signaling the party's preference to keep the convention in Charlotte after President Donald Trump threatened to pull it. 
The letter, signed by RNC Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel and Marcia Lee Kelly, the president and chief executive officer of the Republican National Convention, comes as the national party and the Democratic governor found themselves in a stalemate, after Trump tweeted that he is considering moving the event outside of North Carolina.
 
Absent from the RNC's letter were mentions of social distancing and wearing masks.
 
Deaths in the U.S. likely will exceed 115,000 by June 20, even as the rate of increase in cumulative deaths declines, according to the latest update from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
The rate of new deaths is expected to vary from state to state, the CDC said, adding that "in some states, cumulative deaths will increase at roughly the same rate as they have in recent weeks, while other states are likely to experience only a small number of additional deaths from COVID-19." 
New York City is on track to begin its phase one of reopening on June 8, bringing back to work about 400,000 employees, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said Friday. 
"Remember that reopening does not mean we're going back ... we go forward," Cuomo stressed. "It is reopening to a new normal, a safer normal. People will be wearing masks, people will be socially distanced." 
Meanwhile, in upstate New York, five regions -- North Country, Finger Lakes, Central New York, Mohawk Valley and Southern Tier -- are now entering phase two of reopening.
 
That means retail curbside pickup will be open, and hair salons and barber shops can open with strict guidelines, he said.
 
While the first cases of non-travel-related COVID-19 in the U.S. were confirmed Feb. 26 and Feb. 28, four pieces of evidence suggest that community transition transmission of the virus in the U.S. likely started in mid to late January or early February, according to a weekly report from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
The CDC's findings included an RNA analysis that revealed a single lineage of the virus that was imported from China and began circulating in the U.S. between Jan. 18 and Feb. 9, followed by viruses of different lineages from Europe, and that three cases had been confirmed in California in early February. 
That means "community transmission began before the first two non-travel-related U.S. cases, most likely from a single importation from China in late January or early February, followed by several importations from Europe in February and March," the CDC said. 
Wisconsin has become the latest state to report cases of Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome in Children, aka MIS-C, a dangerous coronavirus-related illness that's been reported in many states and countries. 
The hospital Children's Wisconsin has identified an undisclosed number of cases and said most children have recovered, either in the hospital or at home, reported ABC Green Bay affiliate WBAY.
 
The suspected cases have been reported to Wisconsin's Department of Health Services, WBAY said. 
MIS-C, which has been reported in at least 28 states and Washington, D.C., has features similar to those of Kawasaki disease and Toxic-Shock Syndrome. Common symptoms include persistent fever, irritability or sluggishness, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, rash, conjunctivitis, enlarged lymph node on one side of the neck, red cracked lips or red tongue, swollen hands and feet.
 
Hard-hit New York City has reached a record-low of number of residents testing positive: Among those tested across the city, just 5% were positive for the coronavirus, Mayor Bill de Blasio said Friday. 
New York City has 16,673 confirmed COVID-19 deaths and another 4,742 probable COVID-19 deaths. 
The mayor on Friday promised more coronavirus testing for the city's nonprofit workers, from those with the Department of Social Services to the Administration of Children's Services. 
"We know that a lot of people who do this work" come from communities hit hardest by the coronavirus, de Blasio said. "They've been heroes throughout this crisis and we have to be there for them."
 
Beginning June 1, voluntary, weekly testing will be available for nearly 31,000 nonprofit workers. Officials will be able to conduct 4,000 tests per day, he said.
 
De Blasio also highlighted that the city is sending 100,000 internet-enabled tablets to isolated seniors at 100 different public housing sites. 
The tablets not only give seniors access to telemedicine, but also helps them fight isolation and stay in touch with loved ones.
 
San Francisco Mayor London Breed on Thursday unveiled a multi-step reopening plan for the Northern California city. 
Before June 15, residents can use curbside retail and go to real estate appoints if they social distance and wear face coverings. Professional sports can practice if they have approved plan and residents can use fenced dog parks and outdoor museums.
 
Beginning June 15, outdoor fitness can resume, like yoga, but with social distancing.
 
Outdoor dining, including restaurants and bars with food, can resume, as well as religious services and professional sports games without spectators. 
Further steps will include reopening indoor dining, hair salons and barber shops. The current target date for that is July 13.
 
The target date is mid-August to reopen gyms and bars without food.
 
At least 2,437 people in San Francisco have been diagnosed with the coronavirus. At least 30 people have died.
 
Sonoma County Sheriff Mark Essick penned a letter to residents saying he is directing his department to not enforce the public health order, saying the blanket mandate is crushing the community.
 
In this letter, Essick said the many residents and business owners have told him that the county's health orders are far more strict than neighboring communities' and California Gov. Gavin Newsom's statewide orders. He also said the county's coronavirus cases continue to decline.
 
"Over the last 10 weeks we have learned a lot and made significant progress. The curve has been flattened; hospitals were not overrun with patients; we have dramatically increased testing which verified the infection rate in Sonoma County is under control and decreasing. Yet we continue to see successive Public Health Orders that contain inconsistent restrictions on business and personal activities without explanation," Essick wrote. "Based on what we have learned, now is the time to move to a risk-based system and move beyond blanket orders that are crushing our community."
 
He says he's asked, and not heard from, public health officials about why the restrictive measures remain despite the community having favorable COVID-19 numbers. To continue to enforce these measures, he said, would be a disservice to the county's residents.
 
The Sonoma County Sheriff's Office, he said, will stop enforcing local coronavirus regulations as of June 1.
 
"As your elected Sheriff, I can no longer in good conscience continue to enforce Sonoma County Public Health Orders, without explanation, that criminalize otherwise lawful business and personal behavior," Essick's letter said.
 
California has more than 103,000 diagnosed cases and at least 3,993 deaths.
 
ABC News' Jamie Aranoff, Angela Baldwin, Katherine Faulders, Anne Flaherty, Marilyn Heck, Kendall Karson, Aaron Katersky, Bonnie Mclean, Will Steakin and Eric Strauss contributed to this report. 
President Donald Trump on Friday announced sanctions on China over its approach to Hong Kong and said he would end the United States' relationship with the World Health Organization over its handling of the novel coronavirus pandemic.
 
“We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization and redirecting those funds to worldwide and deserving, urgent global public health needs,” Trump said.
 
Trump had last week threatened that the U.S. would permanently stop funding the W.H.O. and withdraw from the United Nations agency unless it made "major substantive improvements within the next 30 days." 
Only 11 days has elapsed since he issued that threat. Trump's moves to pull U.S. funding for WHO have been widely criticized, particularly for ceding the global stage to China even as he criticizes the organization for being too deferential to Beijing. 
During his remarks in the White House Rose Garden on Friday afternoon, Trump focused entirely on China and took no questions from reporters, despite the White House's billing the event as a news conference.
 
He did not mention the death of George Floyd, a black man who was seen pinned down in a video by a white police officer in Minneapolis and later died, or the ensuing protests across the country. 
At the end of his remarks, Trump walked away as reporters shouted questions about Floyd and Minnesota. 
The president said he was directing his administration to “begin the process” of ending the special trade relationship with Hong Kong and impose sanctions on unspecified Chinese officials tied to China’s latest moves on Hong Kong, taking action "to revoke Hong Kong's preferential treatment as a separate customs and travel territory from the rest of China."
 
China’s rubber-stamp parliament on Thursday endorsed with thunderous applause a controversial new law to ban all “activities” in Hong Kong that endanger China’s national security.
 
The yet-to-be-drafted law would ultimately be enacted in Hong Kong by decree, bypassing the local lawmaking process. The Asian financial center is supposed to have a high degree of autonomy from Beijing under the "One Country, Two Systems" arrangement put in place when the former British colony was handed back to China.
 
"China's latest incursion, along with other recent developments that degraded the territory’s freedoms, makes clear that Hong Kong is no longer sufficiently autonomous to warrant the special treatment that we have afforded the territory since the handover" of the territory from Britain to China, Trump said. 
He said the announcement "will affect the full range of agreements we have with Hong Kong from our extradition treaty to our export controls on dual use technologies and more with a few exceptions,” he said. “We will be revising the State Department's travel advisory for Hong Kong to reflect the increased danger of surveillance and punishment by the Chinese state security apparatus.”
 
Trump said the United States would also move to sanction Chinese and Hong Kong officials who have been "directly or indirectly involved in eroding Hong Kong's autonomy" and "smothering, absolutely smothering Hong Kong's freedom."
 
Trump also announced restrictions on Chinese nationals coming to study at U.S. universities, and he said he would instruct a working group to look at the practices of Chinese companies listed on U.S. financial markets.
 
“Investment firms should not be subjecting their clients to the hidden and undue risks associated with financing Chinese companies that do not play by the same rules,” he said. “Americans are entitled to fairness and transparency.”
 
He later signed a proclamation barring the entry of Chinese students tied to the Chinese military from entering the U.S. to study or conduct research above the undergraduate level, arguing Chinese “authorities use some Chinese students, mostly post graduate students and post-doctorate researchers, to operate as non-traditional collectors of intellectual property.”
 
The proclamation, which goes into effect indefinitely starting Monday, provided exemptions for U.S. permanent residents and their spouses, the spouses of American citizens, people seeking asylum and a few other limited categories.
As state and local governments unveil plans to reopen restaurants amid the COVID-19 pandemic, the hard-hit industry is ready for a comeback, but dining will look different under new guidelines.
 
Before the coronavirus outbreak hit the U.S., the restaurant industry was projected to make $899 billion in sales in 2020, according to the National Restaurant Association. Now, the association anticipates losses totaling $240 billion by the end of 2020. 
Established eateries all over the country from major cities like New York and Los Angeles to smaller family-operated restaurants have tried to survive with limited service operations dwindled to delivery or takeout.
 
Sandra Bonaparte, the general manager of El Floridita in Hollywood, California, told ABC News that the former lively Cuban restaurant has been "completely closed" for six weeks. 
"We used to do live music and salsa dancing and it would get packed -- it was a lot of fun," she said, harkening back to the bustling crowds before coronavirus hit. "I think we’ll be okay, but it’s not sustainable for the long haul. We need to open up." 
Another restaurateur from Roswell, Georgia, Ryan Pernice, wondered if an industry based on warmth and hospitality, could thrive adhering to cold and sterile guidelines.
 
"You know, there’s a question of can we even make money if we reopen given the new social distancing guidelines," Pernice told ABC News. "We had three full-service restaurants and then as of March 16, 17, we were operating one sort of combined takeout menu out of one restaurant." 
Larry Lynch, SVP of Science and Industry for the National Restaurant Association, told ABC News that the staggering unemployment numbers in the country are largely made up of restaurant workers.
 
"The numbers I’ve seen are in the millions of people who are unemployed coming out of the restaurant industry. And I know that’s why a lot of restaurants are anxious to get their people back ... and get them working again," Lynch said. 
While some restaurants were "very creative" in modifications to takeout and delivery models, Lynch said "now what we’re seeing is an opportunity in some locations to reopen. So what we’ve focused on is providing them with the guidance on the way they can do it the safest both for their employees and as well as consumers."
 
The National Restaurant Association has released a set of guidelines in tandem with guidance from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration to help advise restaurants on how to safely reopen. 
Some of the new requirements include social distancing parameters, face coverings, additional cleaning and sanitation as well as frequent hand-washing.
 
"First and foremost is the face coverings," Lynch said. "And that’s both for the employees and potentially for guests as well. Obviously, you can’t eat while you’re wearing a face covering, but if you’re waiting outside or waiting in line we want to make sure that we’re protecting each other."
 
He added that they "want to emphasize the importance of hand-washing and the frequency of hand-washing."
 
"The next thing, obviously, is the cleaning and sanitation. So thinking about the tabletops, the chairs. If you’re not using disposable menus, make sure you’re wiping them down. Condiments that are on tables," Lynch explained.
 
As for social distancing, Lynch said restaurants will need to consider "how you separate your guests when they come in, separating the tables. You know, are there some kind of barriers that can be put in place?"
 
The challenge, he noted, is to figure out how those CDC and FDA guidelines will "play out in 50 different states."
 
In Georgia, Gov. Brian Kemp gave restaurants the green light to reopen but has limited them to allowing just 10 customers per 300-square feet of dining space. 
For restaurants like Table and Main, Pernice said the small space with limitations is quite restrictive.
 
"Our restaurant Table and Main is tiny. It’s 1,800-square-feet, it’s got only 52 seats inside. So a busy summer there would be around 200 covers. Now we’re looking at less than half that," he explained.
 
Lynch provided Florida as an example, "where they’ve been permitted to open at a 25% capacity."
 
"For a lot of restaurateurs they realize they can’t make money at 25% and it’s actually better for them to stay closed at this point in time," he said.
 
Pernice said that while some people will think "oh now you can open -- there's going to be a rush to get open," but said it's not that simple.  "To do that properly takes some time."
 
"Restaurateurs recognize that they have to figure out a way to make people feel comfortable," Lynch added. 
Bonaparte said her staff is thinking ahead about their most dedicated patrons who could face other difficulties.
 
"We have some regulars that have been with us for 30 years and some of them are in their 80s ... so we’re cautious of that," she said.
 
For Pernice, it means "training the staff on how to deal with guests at more of an arm's length when we’ve spent all our time for the last nine years trying to make guests feel like there’s just a big bear hug when you come into the restaurants. We can’t do that anymore."
 
Bonaparte said right now they are in survival mode and reopening is just the first step.
 
"We’re just trying to adapt, you know, to make sure that we’re still around. I mean, we’ve survived the LA riots, we survived 9/11, we survived 2008, so there’s been a lot, the earthquakes in California," she said. We’ve survived all of that."
 
Lynch reiterated that "over time we'll adjust -- it's going to take time."
 
"It's like anything we see when we have issues," he said, "we take a look at what we’re faced with and figure out, how can we get back to as close to normal as we possibly can?" 
Just days away from the June 4 opening of two iconic Las Vegas casinos, "Good Morning America" got an exclusive look inside, with all the details on what Vegas will look like, at least for the near future.
 
In a city known for crowded casinos and nightclubs, buffets and throngs of tourists -- 42.5 million people visited Sin City in 2019 -- how will social distancing work?
 
"We're in no hurry to fill this place up," John Flynn, vice president and chief of staff at MGM Resorts International, said. MGM owns the Bellagio, one of the resorts that will open its doors at 10 a.m. on June 4. The resort will open at 30 percent capacity. 
Blackjack tables will be less crowded. "At least at an MGM Resorts property, you will see that we have put Plexiglas in at each of our table games, especially with blackjack. And we've reduced the number of seats down from six to three," Flynn said. 
MGM unveiled a 7-point safety plan that includes a requirement for employees to wear masks. Guests will be "encouraged" to do so. Contactless check-in via phone is available. 
Additional cleaning and safety measures are in place for high-touch play pieces.
 
"We're going to be regularly cleaning the cards and the dice, for example, and craps. Every time a new shooter take the dice, that dice will be disinfected," said Tony Rodio, CEO of Caesars Entertainment, which owns the Flamingo, one of the other properties "GMA" toured that's opening next week.
 
Guests staying at hotels on the Strip will have a temperature check before check-in. Nightclubs remained closed. Many pools and restaurants across opening properties will be open.
 
The Las Vegas Convention and Visitors Bureau shared with "GMA" a complete list of properties opening on June 4:
 
Wynn and Encore
 
Sahara
 
The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas
 
MGM Resorts
 
Bellagio
 
New York-New York
 
MGM Grand
 
The Signature
 
Caesars Entertainment
 
Caesars Palace
 
Flamingo
 
The Venetian Resort
 
Downtown
 
The D
 
Golden Gate
 
El Cortez
 
Golden Nugget
 
The Plaza
 
M Resort
 
Silverton
 
South Point
 
The Strat
 
Boyd Gaming
 
The Orleans
 
Gold Coast
 
Suncoast
 
Aliante
 
Cannery
 
Sam’s Town
 
Fremont
 
California
 
Joker’s Wild
 
Station Casinos
 
Red Rock
 
Green Valley Ranch
 
Santa Fe Station
 
Boulder Station
 
Palace Station
 
Sunset
JOHANNESBURG -- 
South Africa says it has a backlog of nearly 100,000 unprocessed tests for the coronavirus, a striking example of the painful shortage of testing kits and reagents across Africa as cases steadily rise. 
“This challenge is caused by the limited availability of test kits globally,” the health ministry said in a statement overnight, putting the backlog at 96,480 as of Monday. Priority is given to processing tests from patients admitted to hospitals and health workers, it said.  
South Africa has conducted more tests for the virus than any other country in Africa — more than 655,000 — and has the most confirmed cases with 27,403. 
One of the latest to die of COVID-19 in South Africa was a National Health Laboratory Services employee. “We understand this tragedy will certainly test you,” the ministry said in a message to her colleagues, adding that the government is committed to providing proper protective gear.  
That, too, faces shortages across Africa. More than 3,400 health workers on the continent had been infected as of a week ago, according to the World Health Organization. 
The shortages, especially in testing materials, have jolted African authorities into facing uncomfortable truths: Richer countries are         elbowing them out in the race to obtain crucial supplies, and the continent relies almost entirely on imports for drugs and other medical items.  
“We have to have Made in Africa products,” the director of the Africa Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, John Nkengasong, told reporters Thursday. “We cannot keep importing basic things.” 
He and others, including the WHO’s Ethiopian director-general, have raised the cry for fair access, including for any vaccine or treatment that emerges.  
“Dozens of countries have imposed export controls on medical supplies and equipment,” scores of South African and other health and activist groups said in an open letter to Group of 20 leaders last month. 
Complicating matters are global powers like the United States and China promoting aid to African countries during the pandemic as part of efforts to win support on the continent. But that aid doesn't always show up. 
President Donald Trump on May 21 said “we just sent 1,000” ventilators to Nigeria, but the country's information minister, Lai Mohammed, told reporters Thursday that “to the best of my knowledge they have not arrived. When they do arrive, it will be made public.” 
But the testing shortages are especially frustrating for African health officials, who have been praised for swiftly expanding testing capability for the virus continent-wide, from just two countries in February.  
“Low levels of testing might be artificially lowering apparent infection rates,” The Lancet said in a new editorial noting Africa's quick response but also the challenges that lie ahead. 
Across Africa slightly under 2 million tests for the virus have been conducted, Nkengasong said, far below the target of testing 13 million people — or 1% of the continent’s population of 1.3 billion. 
Nigeria, Africa’s most populous country with some 200 million people, has one of the lowest coronavirus testing rates in the world with 286 tests per million people. More than 58,000 tests for the virus have been conducted, according to the country’s Center for Disease Control. Nearly 9,000 cases have been confirmed while worries grow about undetected spread of the virus in the north. 
In Ethiopia, Africa's second most populous country with some 110 million people, the health ministry says more than 96,000 tests have been conducted. More than 830 cases have been confirmed. 
As of mid-May, Chad had carried out 105 tests per million people and Mali had tested just 173 per million, compared to some 38,000 tests per million in the United States, the International Rescue Committee said last week.  
By the end of this week 2.5 million tests will have been distributed to Africa’s 54 countries, the Africa CDC's Nkengasong said.  
Despite the shortages, “I’m optimistic that in the next two to three weeks it will be very different,” he said, without giving details.  
So far African nations have relied on tests donated by the Jack Ma Foundation, sourced via partners including the WHO and procured via a newly created platform that pools African countries’ purchasing efforts on the international market. 
Meanwhile, efforts at domestic production of testing materials have begun in South Africa, Morocco, Senegal and Kenya, the Africa CDC has said, with plans to have those countries aid each other in evaluating the products. 
“Africa is a continent that needs its own internal capacity to produce diagnostic kits,” South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize told reporters on Thursday. “We need several millions of these kits.” 
——— 
Sam Olukoya in Lagos, Nigeria and Krista Larson in Dakar, Senegal contributed. 
——— 
Follow AP coverage of the pandemic at         https://apnews.com/VirusOutbreak and         https://apnews.com/UnderstandingtheOutbreak.PHOENIX -- 
Trying to stay safe during a global pandemic is hard enough, but people in Southwest desert cities like Phoenix and Las Vegas where temperatures can soar into the triple digits are also trying to protect themselves from the brutal heat.  
A 48,000-square-foot (4,459-square-meters) hall of the Phoenix Convention Center was being transformed Friday into a daytime heat relief center for homeless people, with city officials offering free transportation to get them there. 
But with most other government-run spaces like libraries and community centers still closed this week to prevent the spread of coronavirus, the Salvation Army and other nonprofit groups were shouldering a big load of the responsibility for ensuring people stay cool and hydrated amid extreme heat warnings for some parts of the southwestern U.S.  
At a dozen of their sites in metro Phoenix, Salvation Army staff and volunteers Thursday asked people to wear masks, clean their hands with the alcohol-based sanitizer gel provided and stay at least 6 feet (2 meters) away from others as a precaution amid the virus outbreak.  
”There are still few places where our homeless can go," Salvation Army Major David Yardley said at the group's downtown center. “Here, they can get some water, get out of the heat." 
Phoenix malls and some restaurants are just starting to reopen after being closed for more than two months for social distancing to stop the virus from spreading. Some of the city's most popular cooling center sites remain closed, including the large Burton Barr Public Library in central Phoenix. 
While homeless people comprise the bulk of those using the cooling stations, Yardley said they are open to everyone. He said he worried about elderly people who may turn off their air conditioning to save money or who don't have the cash to fix broken units. 
“Everyone needs to check on their seniors,” he said.  
Blistering temperatures can endanger health, and can lead to heat exhaustion, heat stroke and even death. The daily high temperatures in Phoenix were forecast to hit 110 degrees (43C) or very close to it during the extreme heat warning in effect through Sunday, National Weather Service forecasters said.  
The federal agency advised people to drink plenty of fluids, stay out of the sun and remain in air-conditioned areas to prevent heat-related illness.  
There were 197 heat-related illnesses last year in Maricopa County, where Phoenix is located, up from 183 in 2018, according to county statistics.  
The cooling stations in metro Phoenix open when the weather service declares extreme heat warnings. They were also open for a string of days during an extreme heat warning in late April.  
In metro Las Vegas, where an excessive heat warning is in effect until Friday evening, four heat relief stations were open. 
Nevada’s Clark County said precautionary protocols like screening, social distancing and mask wearing were in effect at the sites in Las Vegas, the Las Vegas suburb of Henderson and the Nevada city of Mesquite at the stateline with Arizona. 