

 
Bringing America Back is an ABC News feature that highlights the day's top stories in economic recovery and medical preparedness amid the coronavirus pandemic. These stories delve into the key steps America is taking -- or needs to take. Stay on top of the latest developments regarding states' social distancing measures, advancements in the treatment of COVID-19 and more.
 
Getting in the habit of taking your temperature daily is just one practice to adopt to protect yourself and others from the novel coronavirus as states continue to reopen. 
Nightlife is already a vulnerable industry. As we head into summer, many workers and businesses are wondering how they will survive continued closures and reduced capacities.
 
Cancer patients may face a higher risk of experiencing severe COVID-19 symptoms due to a weakened immune system or other underlying health conditions. "We kind of live in a pandemic daily," Bruce DeArk, a deputy fire chief in Jeffersonville, Indiana, battling stage 4 colon cancer, told ABC News. DeArk is one of 15 million Americans navigating life with cancer during the pandemic.
 
Domestic violence resource centers are "vital now more than ever" as hotline calls and reports are on the rise, one administrator told ABC News. During the pandemic, the centers have had to find creative ways to connect with victims.
 
One gym in Bellmawr, New Jersey, thinks gyms should be considered essential, and is suing the state for classifying them as nonessential.
 
Elaborate yard designs, virtual perfume parties, personalized trace boards to help children learn how to spell: "Good Morning America" looks at how small businesses are pivoting during the pandemic.
 
Tune into ABC at 1 p.m. ET and ABC News Live at 4 p.m. ET every weekday for special coverage of the novel coronavirus with the full ABC News team, including the latest news, context and analysis.
When Harlem renaissance poet Langston Hughes wrote "I, too," he was seemingly prescient in penning a poem for a pandemic.
 
I, too, sing America.
I am the darker brother.
They send me to eat in the kitchen.
When company comes,
But I laugh,
And eat well,
And grow strong.
(Excerpt from Langton Hughes'  poem "I, too")
 
The '20s-era lyrical exploration of marginalization declaring "I, too, sing America," of being "the darker brother" sent to the kitchen, growing strong there, waiting for a day when the nation recognizes his worth sums up the experiences of people of color who disproportionately make up the invisible army of workers -- all now deemed "essential" to help the nation reopen. 
When viewed through a prism of historic inequity, broken government promises and the perspective of what appears to be an apparent willingness to sacrifice black and brown lives all for the sake of patriotic progress -- communities of color worry that efforts to reopen come at a deadly price. 
"We’re opening too soon at the expense of poor and low-income working people, and at the expense of the American public. This false choice, that you have to either open up, or go to work and possibly die, is a choice, it didn’t have to be this way,” Reverend Dr. William Barber, co-chairman of The Poor People’s Campaign told ABC Nightline co-anchor Byron Pitts during the network’s recent series "Pandemic: A Nation Divided" speaking broadly of reopening's impact on low-income essential workers of all races.
 
Many poor and low income white essential workers are facing similar stark choices about risking their lives to work amid the pandemic.
 
But, for the phalanx of white protesters, some of them wielding guns, who stormed Michigan’s statehouse earlier this month demanding the state’s stay-at-home order be lifted --their actions signaled a nation ready to move on from a months-long lockdown, a return to broader "civil liberties" and an “American way of life,” political and cultural analysts say.
 
Some saw the protests as a modern-day embodiment of Patrick Henry’s rallying cry, "Give me liberty or give me death."
 
The protesters' cause célèbre is lauded from the Oval Office by a president who last month tweeted "LIBERATE" as part of a series of missives directed at Democratic-led states and aimed at underscoring the belief that the shutdown’s economic impact is more perilous to the Republic than the disease itself. 
To be sure, nearly two-thirds of Americans said they more closely align with the view that opening the county now is not advantageous since it will result in a higher death toll. Meanwhile, slightly more than one-third agree with the belief that an immediate reopening is beneficial to minimize the negative impact on the economy, according to an ABC News/Ipsos released earlier this month and ahead of the recent and broader swath of state reopenings.
 
However, those quintessentially American freedoms --the idea of being able to move unfettered by government regulations, to purchase whatever one can afford, whenever one wishes and the idea that, if one just works hard enough, the American dream is there for the taking -- are all being upended by a global pandemic, political and cultural experts point out. Those views are set to directly collide with the experience of people who’ve long felt their lives expendable for the nation.
 
Whether its the hard-hit Navajo Nation in the country's southwest region or similarly devastated communities in the Bronx or frustrated protesters in Michigan longing for a return to pre-pandemic freedoms, the reactions to reopening are widely different depending on one's racial and cultural history in this country. 
"For a minute there, it looked like we were all in this together. And then we weren't," Derrick Johnson president and CEO of the NAACP wrote in a recent op-ed for CNN. "Data emerged that, for the first time, specified infection and death rates by race -- and the face of the pandemic changed," Johnson wrote. "It became black. And the fragile sense of social solidarity that was keeping millions of Americans at home to protect themselves and each other began to crumble. Call it 'white flight.'"
 
Amid the push to reopen, attitudes about contracting the coronavirus, track along stark racial and party lines, according to a new ABC News/Ipsos poll released last week. Some 87% of black Americans and 85% of Latinos polled said they are more concerned about getting the virus compared to 73% of whites.
 
And slightly more than half of blacks, 51%, and Latinos, 52%, said they are very concerned about the threat compared to 27% of whites.
 
Black and Latino Americans are also nearly three times as likely to personally know someone who has died from the virus than white Americans, according to the poll. 
“We can't pretend race isn't correlating with this when people show up in Michigan with Confederate flags,” said Andra Gillespie, an associate professor of political science and the director of the James Weldon Institute for the Study of Race and Difference at Emory University.
 
At the core of this schism on reopening are widely divergent views on how wealth is produced and who is doing the producing, experts say.
 
"The way wealth was accumulated in this country involved the exploitation of people. Slavery. Low wage jobs by immigrants," said Ed Morales, an adjunct professor at Columbia University’s Center for the Study of Ethnicity and Race and author of "Fantasy Island: Colonialism, Exploitation, and the Betrayal of Puerto Rico." "The bargain that was made during Reconstruction, of not having to do that work was folded into the idea of American freedom."
 
There is and has always been "a lot of displacement of social responsibility that allows us to indulge in the idea of American freedom," Morales said adding that, in this country, whiteness has long been seen as a guarantee, an assurance of not being "on the wrong end of the productivity cycle," Morales said.
 
Experts point to research that has shown that historically, even during economic downturns and financial upheaval, white Americans tend to fare better than blacks, Latinos, Asian Americans and Native Americans. 
Recent figures on the virus' impact further highlight the divide and, by extension, some of the reasons why communities of color are especially concerned.
 
Overall, the American economy lost 20.5 million jobs, skyrocketing the unemployment rate to 14.7%.
 
Broken down by racial groups, the U.S. unemployment rate in April climbed to 14.2% for whites, 16.7% for blacks, 14.5% for Asians and 18.9% for Hispanics, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 
While white Americans make up the majority of essential workers nationally, people of color are heavily overrepresented, according to data from the Economic Policy Institute.
 
Overall, people of color --blacks, Latinos, Asian Americans and others who identify as non-white -- make up 43% of all essential workers in the nation during the COVID-19 pandemic, according to an analysis of data released last week by the Economic Policy Institute.
 
Black Americans represent just over 13% of the population according to the Census, and they encompass 15% of all essential workers in the pandemic.  Latinos represent just over 18% of the population and make up 21% of the essential workforce.
 
The question of who will pay the price amid patriotic calls to rally to action on America’s behalf has long been the dark economic thread woven into the nation’s narrative.
 
At this nation’s founding, European settlers seeking economic and religious freedoms from England killed, displaced and stole valuable land and resources from the indigenous people who called the Americas home.
 
The enslavement of African peoples fueled the U.S. economy for centuries, built its infrastructure and even its Capitol and White House. Even after their descendants were freed, racist labor policies further ensured that American industries benefitted from their work.
 
“Go West, young man” and “Manifest Destiny” defined 19th-century American expansion across the continent, which came often at the expense of the treatment of Chinese immigrants who helped build the nation’s railroads. Mexican Americans had their land stolen in what would later become the American Southwest and West Coast. Both groups were relegated to low wage work during that period of the nation’s growth.
 
Today, both groups are being heavily impacted amid the pandemic in places like California and the southwest. 
The through-line is similarly stark for Native Americans, who, after their forced removal centuries ago, were relegated to lands that today do not have the adequate infrastructure needed to help fight the pandemic, said Ethel Branch, a community activist who served as attorney general of the Navajo Nation during President Obama's administration. 
Currently, there are more COVID-19 cases per capita in Navajo Nation than in New York or New Jersey, and the peak is nearly a month away. According to Branch, roughly one-third of the Navajo Nation has no access to running water, which is exacerbating the community’s ability to adhere to guidance on hand-washing to help minimize the virus’ impact.
 
"It’s pretty obvious in terms of the dispossession of our national lands and territories and relocation of our people to areas we did not choose for ourselves,” Branch said. “That legacy has continued, exploiting tribal resources for the good of the ‘community.’”
 
For all of those reasons and many, many more, some people of color are extremely mistrustful of any government-backed calls for “sacrifice” amid the pandemic, said Mark Anthony Neal, a professor of African and African American Studies at Duke University.
 
“Black and brown folks have always been the canary in the coal mine.”
 
ABC News' Bill Hutchinson, Kendall Karson, Tenzin Skakya, Terrance Smith and Catherine Thorbecke  contributed to this report.
With the unofficial start of summer behind us and months before the kids go back to school -- or not -- many would-be-travelers with canceled plans are looking for ideas to travel safely.
 
"Safe" does not mean the same thing to all people: While one person might be comfortable in a campground because they have personal accommodations, another might find the campground itself too crowded for personal comfort.
 
RV travel is appealing to a larger audience than before the pandemic shut down hotels and limited many travel options.
 
Harvest Hosts, a company that connects road trippers with unique overnight accommodations in the U.S. and Canada, said membership sign-ups are up 400% compared to this time last year. 
"This is the fastest growth in the history of the company and it is directly because of COVID. RVing is uniquely situated as a way to safely travel this year," Joel Holland, the company's CEO, told "Good Morning America." 
The company counts more than 1,000 options for overnights at museums, vineyards, farms and breweries. There's no charge to stay with the hosts but guests are encouraged to purchase their host's for-sale goods. Holland sees it as a way to support small businesses.
 
"Many of our wineries, for example, will drop purchases right outside of the RV," he said.
 
Treehouses are another option that's growing in popularity for travelers looking to distance themselves from others. Bolt Farm Treehouse is a collection of four luxury treehouses on 30 acres on Wadmalaw Island outside Charleston, South Carolina. The company switched from a nightly rate to month-long stay requirements since interest is so high. 
Other treehouse options: Edisto River Treehouses are a collection of three treehouses in the Lowcountry accessible only by a 13-mile canoe ride that departs once daily. It, too, has seen more interest this year than in the past. 
In Maine, the Hidden Pond resort will debut 10 treehouse accommodations in June. The resort restaurant offers private dining sheds to maximize social distance from other resort guests. 
Vacations within driving distance are a popular option, according to online travel agent Travelocity, which said most accommodations are being booked within 100 miles of people's homes. For those in major metro areas like New York City, something like the A Tiny House Resort, which features nine tiny houses on 26 acres in the Catskills, might fit the bill. 
Each features a kitchen, full bathroom, heat/air conditioning, TV, dedicated Wi-Fi and a private patio with a Weber barbecue grill and fire pit. The property has an onsite waterfall, kayaking, tubing as well as a pick your own garden, baby goats, ducks and chickens. Guests enjoy a daily goat walk, perfect for social distancing, with the resident turkey "Lucky" joining in. 
The Cedar Lakes Estate, located 90 miles from NYC, typically operates as a venue for weddings and corporate events. But given the pandemic, the property has pivoted to individual stays. The hotel’s 500 acres are made up of 18 individual cottages and there are no common lobbies, hallways or enclosed spaces. Contactless meals and drinks are included with each stay: breakfast delivered to your room each morning, a lunch box for a picnic anywhere on the grounds each afternoon and a special dinner each night.
OLYMPIA, Wash. -- 
Washington state has recovered $300 million paid to criminals who used stolen personal information to file fraudulent unemployment benefit claims amid the COVID-19 crisis, officials said Thursday. 
Employment Security Department Commissioner Suzi LeVine said that she could not yet reveal the precise amount that was paid in fraudulent claims, but said that the initial recovery — including $50 million set to be returned Thursday — was a result of the state's collaboration with federal law enforcement and financial institutions across the country.  
“This is a national attack by sophisticated criminals and isn’t just happening to Washington state,” LeVine said. 
LeVine first detailed the scope of the fraud last week, saying that the information of tens of thousands of people in the state was used to fraudulently pay hundreds of millions of dollars in unemployment benefits. 
Much of it apparently went to a West African fraud ring using identities stolen in prior data breaches, such as the massive 2017 Equifax breach. Washington is one of several states where attacks have been detected, including New Mexico, Michigan and Montana, according to California cyber security firm Agari, which has monitored the Nigerian fraud group, dubbed Scattered Canary.  
The fraudsters had money sent to prepaid debit cards associated with bank accounts, from which they have it transferred internationally or quickly exchanged for bitcoin or gift cards, according to Patrick Peterson, chief executive of Agari. 
LeVine said that the state is recovering additional money from some of the victims of the identity theft who contacted officials after they received debit cards with unemployment benefits they didn’t apply for because the the impostor forgot to change the address on the account. 
The state saw a significant decrease in initial claims for unemployment benefits last week, something LeVine said is likely due to the extra anti-fraud efforts taken in recent weeks, including delaying payments by up to two days in order to further verify claims. 
Nearly 1.5 million claims for benefits — with some of that number reflecting people who filed multiple claims — were filed for the week of May 17-23, and more than $494.5 million was paid last week to 424,995 individual claims.  
To date, the state has paid nearly $4.7 billion in benefits to more than 807,000 people, including federal money that is providing the unemployed with an additional $600 a week on top of the state’s weekly maximum benefit of up to $790 per week. 
Of the more than 323,000 still awaiting payment, LeVine said that a majority of them are cases where someone has filed an initial application but not a weekly claim, or those who haven’t applied since the federal program made them eligible. About 44,000 people are currently in adjudication, as one or more issues with their application is being investigated. 
“We will pay people all the benefits that they are owed,” she said. “At the same time, we need to take these additional precautions to ensure that we’re not sending taxpayer dollars out to the criminals.” 
Since March, more than 40 million people nationwide have filed for unemployment aid due to the economic impacts of the coronavirus. 
Washington’s stay-at-home order has been in place since March 23 and the state’s unemployment rate jumped to a record 15.4% last month. 
Democratic Gov. Jay Inslee announced a four-stage reopening plan earlier this month. He has allowed counties with fewer new cases to apply to move to the second stage, which allows some businesses to reopen, including dine-in restaurants at half capacity. As of Thursday, 26 of the state's 39 counties have been approved to move into Phase 2. 
More than 20,400 people in Washington have tested positive for the coronavirus, and at least 1,095 have died. The virus causes mild to moderate symptoms in most patients, and the vast majority recover. But it is highly contagious and can cause severe illness and death in some patients, particularly the elderly and those with underlying health conditions. 
——— 
AP writer Gene Johnson contributed from Seattle.BOSTON -- 
Organizers canceled the Boston Marathon on Thursday for the first time in its history, bowing to the social distancing requirements of the coronavirus outbreak and ending a 124-year run that had persisted through two World Wars, a volcanic eruption and even another pandemic. 
The race, which draws a field of 30,000 and already had been postponed from April 20 to Sept. 14, will be replaced by a virtual event in which participants who verify that they ran 26.2 miles (42.2 km) on their own will receive their finisher's medal. 
“It became clear as this crisis developed that Sept. 14 was less and less plausible," Mayor Marty Walsh said at a news conference outside City Hall, where runners traditionally gather for a pre-race pasta dinner. 
“This is a challenge, but meeting tough challenges is what the Boston Marathon is all about," Walsh said, invoking the response to the finish line bombings seven years ago. "It’s a symbol of our city’s and our commonwealth’s resilience. So it’s incumbent upon all of us to dig deep, like a marathon runner, like we did in 2013, and keep that spirit alive.” 
Although the title of Boston Marathon champion is contested by a few dozen elite athletes, the field includes more than 30,000 recreational and charity runners, with as many as 1 million people lined up along the course trek from Hopkinton to Boston’s Back Bay. That presented organizers with a social distancing problem that won't be solved by the fall. 
“There’s no way to hold this usual race format without bringing large numbers of people into close proximity,” Walsh said. "While our goal and our hope was to make progress in containing the virus and recovering our economy, this kind of event would not be responsible or realistic on Sept. 14 or any time this year.” 
The longest-running annual marathon in the world, the Boston Marathon began in 1897 when 15 men drew a starting line in the dirt in Ashland and headed for the city to commemorate the first modern Olympic Games the previous year. In 1918, the format was modified to a relay due to World War I; the 2013 race was stopped when two bombs exploded at the finish line, several hours after the winners had finished but while many recreational runners were still on the course. 
Boston Athletic Association CEO Tom Grilk said the race also had to adjust when temperatures along the course approached 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32 Celsius) in 2012; ten years ago, ash from a volcanic eruption in Iceland grounded air travel and prevented many European runners from coming to Boston. 
“There is a pretty rich history of accommodation and addressing reality. This is this year’s reality,” Grilk said. 
“The spirit of Boston and the spirit of the Boston Marathon is to be strong and to be smart. When necessity drives you in a direction you might not have liked, you need to have the strength, the wisdom and the guidance from public officials to do what’s right.” 
The race was scheduled in April on the state holiday to commemorate the battles in Lexington and Concord that marked the start of the Revolutionary War. Traditionally, the Red Sox have scheduled their first pitch for that morning so baseball fans could wander over to Kenmore Square after the game to see the runners pass by with one mile to go. 
In announcing postponement in March, Walsh cited the desire to salvage the estimated $211 million pumped into the city’s economy each year. The B.A.A. and marathon runners also raise about $40 million for charity. 
The B.A.A. said those who paid the entry fee for this year's race can get their money back. They will also have a chance to participate in the virtual marathon, which they can run between Sept. 7-14. A downloadable “virtual toolkit” will include a printable finish line and winner’s tape. 
Those who provide proof of a finish in less than 6 hours will receive a program, T-shirt, medal and runner's bib. 
The Sept. 12 B.A.A. 5K also was canceled. 
Qualifying times for this year's race will be eligible for the 2021 Boston Marathon, which is scheduled for April 19. The 125th anniversary edition is scheduled for April 18, 2022.WASHINGTON -- 
House Democrats are calling on the Trump administration to provide records related to the purchase of         ventilators from Russia, asserting that the machines were not only unsafe for use but also were made by a subsidiary of a Russian company under U.S. sanctions. 
The lawmakers, who lead five House committees and subcommittees, sent the request to Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. 
They are protesting that the U.S.         donated hundreds of ventilators to Russia after buying machines from Moscow in the early weeks of the pandemic that were not immediately usable. The same model, Aventa-M, reportedly caused fires in Moscow and St. Petersburg.  
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has confirmed that no Aventa-M ventilators purchased from Russia have been used in the U.S., but lawmakers still have concerns. 
“These misguided decisions waste millions of U.S. taxpayer dollars, undermine our foreign policy and national security interests, and impair our nation's ability to combat the coronavirus,” the lawmakers wrote. 
The lawmakers said the State Department received a final invoice from Russia for $659,283. They are seeking all records and communications between the State Department and the White House related to the shipments and a summary of a March 30 call between President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin, as well as other records. 
The White House referred questions to the State Department, which did not immediately reply to a request for comment. 
After earlier concerns about a shortage of ventilators, the Trump administation now says the U.S. has a surplus and has begun to sell or donate ventilators to other nations dealing with an influx of patients with COVID-19. The president has been describing the U.S. as the “king of ventilators."
Another 2.1 million more Americans filed for unemployment insurance last week, the Labor Department said Thursday.
 
This pushes the total number of U.S. workers who have filed jobless claims to 40 million over the last 10 weeks as the coronavirus pandemic brought much of the U.S. economy to a standstill. 
While new filings have eased slightly after peaking at nearly 7 million in the last week of March, jobless claims have remained in the millions each week for over two months. 
"Although initial claims are declining, the pace may only be plateauing," Glassdoor senior economist Daniel Zhao said in a commentary Thursday morning. "If UI claims remain in the millions for the next few weeks, it may signal that relaxed state-mandated restrictions alone aren’t enough to staunch the flow of unemployed Americans."
 
"The sustained level of elevated UI claims seen this month is a likely indicator that next week’s May jobs report will show a jump in the unemployment rate into the high teens or beyond," he added. "The May jobs report is unlikely to show as stark a change as April’s historically grim report; however, it will show a labor market still deep in the grips of the pandemic." 
The current unemployment rate in the U.S. is nearly 15%, according to the April jobs report, marking the highest point since the Great Depression. Many economists expect that number to climb in the coming weeks as new unemployment filings continue to roll in.
 
Prior to the pandemic, the unemployment rate in the U.S. was 3.5%.
 
Some of the hardest hit industries include hospitality, food and drink services and retail. 

As states and businesses start to reopen, people across the country are trying to figure out how to be safe in this new normal.
 
The good news is that the we all now have another tool in our toolbox – an appreciation and understanding of public health and prevention. People have made tried and true public health interventions a part of their daily lives. They watch and share disease models with interest, are wearing masks in public to protect themselves and others, and thousands have taken contact tracing courses so they can help identify people who may have come into contact with an infected person. We are all ready to leave the house and restart our social lives in the real world. And we can do that safely, if we follow a few tips:
 
Make (flexible) plans
 
Many tasks will take longer to accomplish and every public space will have to accommodate social distancing standards, including parks, grocery store aisles and restaurants. Assume the bulk of your socializing will need to be intentional. We can no longer decide at the last minute to go see a movie or to show up at a favorite restaurant on a Friday night and squeeze into a seat at the bar. For the foreseeable future, nearly every activity outside our homes will need to be planned in advance and you’ll need to maintain a flexible mindset. Plans may need to change depending on emerging guidance from public health officials in our communities. The activities we could do last week may not be wise or allowed next week based on local transmission rates. 
Take a temperature check
 
A wise habit to adopt – along with frequent handwashing and wearing masks in public – is to take your temperature on a daily basis and be open to changing your plans based on the result. An elevated temperature may be the only sign of an asymptomatic COVID-19 infection, so staying home if you have a fever is an important way to potentially limit transmission to friends and loved ones in your personal life.
 
For the public at large, quick temperature checks – either with non-contact readers or thermal imaging devices – are another line of defense that you should expect to see.  As workplaces reopen, office buildings will begin to require a temperature reading before entering in order to prevent transmission among employees. The faster these technologies are deployed, the sooner we can feel safe returning to some of our normal activities. 
Embrace contact tracing
 
Until a COVID-19 vaccine is created and mass produced, public health professionals will be drawing on decades of experience identifying people who were in contact with newly diagnosed cases – a process known as contact tracing. But they need our help, understanding and cooperation. Without experience, some folks may be hesitant to embrace contact tracing and have questions about how the process will protect their privacy and support their autonomy. 
It will be the responsibility of public health officials to gain the public’s trust in the process and to educate them about safe ways to comply with contact tracing efforts in order to reduce the spread of COVID-19. We can do this without stigmatizing anyone who participates — remember that we are working to suppress and contain the virus, not each other.
 
Protect every generation
 
It’s been touching — but difficult – to see the images of families “visiting” through windows or at a distance. This is a key way to prevent social isolation, to which older adults are particularly susceptible, while also safeguarding them against COVID-19. As a society we have become more aware of the ways older adults are uniquely vulnerable to COVID-19, and in turn we are also more thoughtful about how to keep them safe. Neighbors and loved ones have stepped up to run errands and do necessary shopping for seniors, and this practice should continue going forward. 
The reopening of retail stores doesn’t mean seniors should patronize them as they did pre-pandemic. The advent of early store hours dedicated to those over 65 may be with us for the near future and should likely be spread beyond the grocery industry to other types of retail.
 
Stay the course
 
Any new habit feels strange at first, but we know what works, and we have been making a difference. Wearing a mask in public, washing our hands frequently and wiping down our high-touch surfaces on a regular basis are critical habits that are here to stay. These are proven ways to dramatically reduce the transmission of the novel coronavirus between individuals, and we need to stick with them particularly as we begin to return to public life. Keep faith that the inconveniences and disruptions we are experiencing are in service of limiting the staggering toll COVID-19 has already taken on our communities. It may not be what we’re used to, but it will be part of our foreseeable future if we want to stay safe.
 
Jay Bhatt, a practicing internist and Aspen Health Innovators fellow, is an ABC News contributor. Bechara Choucair is a physician and chief health officer at Kaiser Permanente. His book, "Precision Community Health: Four Innovations for Well-being," was published this month.
BARCELONA, Spain -- 
Angry workers burned tires at the gates of the Nissan carmaking plant in northeastern Spain and prepared for more protests after the Japanese company said it would shut all its manufacturing in the region as it reshuffles its global business. 
The decision will lead to 3,000 direct job cuts, which unions say will cause economic ripple effects and impact some 20,000 families in the Catalonia region. They see it as a sign of more widespread job losses to come and the growing pressure on governments struggling to contain the economic fallout of the coronavirus pandemic. 
Although Nissan had been mulling for months to scale down its production in Europe and other parts of the world, the company is suffering like many other automakers from a plunge in demand for vehicles. Reporting a $6.2 billion loss for the fiscal year ending in March, the Japanese giant         marked on Thursday its first annual loss in 11 years. 
Politicians around the world are debating whether and how to bail out an auto industry that already won billions in government support a decade ago after the 2008 financial crisis. Even before the pandemic, the industry was facing major new costs and disruption as companies rushed to develop cleaner cars and raced to roll out innovations like autonomous vehicles. 
The Spanish government on Thursday criticized Nissan's move, arguing it would be cheaper for the carmaker to invest in improving its productivity in the region rather than take on the 1 billion-euro ($1.2 billion) cost of the closure. 
“We lament this news,” Economy Minister Nadia Calviño told Spain’s public broadcaster, TVE, adding that the government was seeking more negotiations to “see how to channel this process of find alternative solutions." 
“We think this is a plant that has a strategic value for Nissan," said Calviño. 
Nissan plans to phase out some 3,000 direct jobs by the end of the year, said Juan Carlos Vicente, head of the workers' committee in Nissan's main factory in the region after a meeting with company executives. 
“They are letting us die,” Vicente told hundreds of colleagues who gathered outside the factory. He said Nissan had argued that the business was not competitive even if it added a vehicle to its production line, which currently churns out an electric van and a pick-up truck. 
The plant has been operating well under its maximum capacity for months and workers have been striking since the first rumors of the closure emerged on May 4. 
“We are going to keep our fight, putting in check governments and asking them to support us in reverting this decision,” Vicente told to a crowd that quickly moved to put fire to a pile of tires.  
Reeling from a scandal involving its former chairman, Carlos Ghosn, Yokohama-based Nissan is undergoing a deep restructuring, focusing on China, North America and Japan. The company is leaving the European market, Russia, South America and North Africa to its French partner Renault; and Southeast Asia and Oceania to Mitsubishi. 
Management at Renault was also meeting Thursday with unions about its 2 billion-euro cost-cutting plan. The plan had been under discussion since before the virus crisis, but the lockdown and looming recession are darkening the company’s outlook. 
Unions fear it could lead to thousands of job cuts and factory closures. Renault is expected to announce the plan Friday. 
In Spain, a key question is whether Nissan will need to pay back the subsidies it has received from the government for furloughing workers during the pandemic. The temporary lay-offs were granted under the condition that companies would re-hire the staff after the outbreak, and keep them for at least six months. 
José Luis Hernández, who has spent 31 of his 54 years working at the Barcelona plant, said he felt frustrated and helpless: “It's been a whole life here, only to see the company pay us back in this way. It's been a very hard blow.” 
Miriam Alameda, a 39 year-old worker, said that the timing made it worse. “We are in the midst of a pandemic and now this," she said. "It's one less salary for the family and a threat to our economic stability.” 
—— 
AP writer Aritz Parra reported from Madrid. Angela Charlton in Paris and Yuri Kageyama in Tokyo contributed to this report.The multitrillion-dollar patchwork of federal and state relief programs has not kept bills from piling up or prevented long lines at food banks. But it has mitigated the damage. Now the expiration of those programs represents a cliff that many Americans and the economy are hurtling toward. The $1,200 checks are long gone, at least for those who needed them most, with little imminent prospect for a second round. The lending program that helped millions of small businesses keep workers on the payroll will wind down if Congress does not extend it. Eviction moratoriums that are keeping people in their homes are expiring in many cities. And the $600 per week in extra unemployment benefits that have allowed tens of millions of laid-off workers to pay rent and buy groceries will expire at the end of July. President Trump and other Republicans have played down the need for more spending, saying the solution is for states to reopen businesses and allow companies to bring people back to work. So despite pleas from economists across the political spectrum — including Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair — any federal action is likely to be limited. To some Republican lawmakers, extra unemployment benefits and other assistance made sense when businesses were shut down and the government was discouraging people from leaving home. But as the economy reopens, they say, the benefits could impede the recovery by providing an incentive not to return to work. Many economists feel those fears are overblown. Generous benefits might be a deterrent to work in normal times, they argue, but these are hardly normal times. Even the most optimistic forecasters expect the unemployment rate to be well above 10 percent when the extra benefits expire, meaning there will be far more jobless workers than available jobs. President Trump on Thursday signed an executive order to curtail the legal protections that shield social media companies from liability for the content posted on their platforms. The move came just hours after Twitter added new fact-checking labels to hundreds of tweets, Kate Conger and Mike Isaac reported, escalating the social media network’s confrontation with Mr. Trump. Twitter on Tuesday had appended fact-checking labels for the first time to two of Mr. Trump’s tweets about mail-in ballots, rebutting their accuracy. In response, Mr. Trump accused his favorite social media network of stifling speech and declared that he would put a stop to the interference. White House officials drafted an executive order that would make it easier for federal regulators to argue that companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter are suppressing free speech when they move to suspend users or delete posts. “They’ve had unchecked power to censure, restrict, edit, shape, hide, alter virtually any form of communication between private citizens or large public audiences,” Mr. Trump said as he signed the order on Thursday. American Airlines and Delta Air Lines are offering buyouts to employees as they prepare for a rebound in demand for air travel that most industry expect will take years to materialize. “Delta will have to be a smaller airline as we adjust to reduced demand and the need for distancing and safety during travel,” Delta’s chief executive, Ed Bastian, told employees in a memo on Wednesday. “A smaller Delta unfortunately means fewer people will be required.” Delta is offering two programs — an early retirement option and a general buyout package — to most employees except for pilots, whose union is still in talks with management, Mr. Bastian said. The email did not say how much of its work force the airline was seeking to pare. The American program, also announced on Wednesday, applies to management and support staff, which the airline hopes to cut by about 30 percent, or about 5,000 workers. Going into the crisis, American had 130,000 employees and Delta had 90,000; about 40,000 workers at each have taken voluntary leave or early retirement. Most airline jobs are protected into the fall as a condition of the CARES Act, which provided $50 billion to passenger airlines, half of it earmarked to pay employees through September. An early rally in the stock market Thursday faded late in the day after President Trump said he would hold a news conference about China amid rising tensions between the world’s two largest economies. The S&P 500 turned negative after earlier rising as much as 1 percent. Before the reversal, stocks had been set for a third day of gains this week, a rally that reflected optimism about prospects for an economic rebound. Mr. Trump’s announcement of a Friday news conference came as the United States intensified pressure on China over Hong Kong. China’s legislature on Thursday approved a plan that would broaden many of the mainland’s security practices to the semiautonomous city. The Trump administration signaled Wednesday that it was likely to end some or all of the U.S. government’s special trade and economic relations with Hong Kong because of the move. Tension between Washington and Beijing, which are currently negotiating a trade deal, has been one of the few factors that has managed to deter bullish investors who have looked past the coronavirus pandemic’s immense human and economic toll, and instead have focused on signs of a recovery as they bid stocks higher. Earlier Thursday, investors were undeterred by the U.S. Labor Department’s weekly report on unemployment claims, which showed that the surge of layoffs, though lessening, had not abated. More than 2 million U.S. workers filed jobless claims last week, bringing the tally since mid-March, when the coronavirus pandemic took hold, to over 40 million. Nordstrom, the top-performing department store in the United States, said on Thursday that its net sales fell 40 percent to $2 billion in the first quarter, and that it posted a net loss of $521 million. The retailer closed stores on March 17 and started reopening in early May. It said it now has about 40 percent of its locations open. Nordstrom has been working to preserve cash and said this month that it planned to permanently close 16 of its 116 full-line stores and its three Jeffrey boutiques, and to conduct a corporate restructuring that would result in savings of $150 million. On Thursday, it said it ended the quarter with about $1.4 billion in cash.The Seattle-based company operates nearly 250 off-price Nordstrom Rack stores, which compete with chains like with T.J. Maxx. The company said that digital sales accounted for more than half of its total net sales during the quarter. Last year, online sales made up about one-third of the company’s business. Nordstrom said it plans to hold its annual “Anniversary Sale” in August rather than July. Before the coronavirus pandemic, the TV networks were expecting a strong 2020. The presidential election and Tokyo Olympics would keep people watching, and companies would spend more than usual on commercial time. But with the Summer Games postponed and campaign rallies on lockdown, television advertising revenue is likely to drop 12 percent this year, according to a projection by the research firm MoffettNathanson. Networks will lose out on $25.5 billion in spending, according to a report released on Thursday by the WARC research group. Viewership is not the problem now that millions of homebound people have limited entertainment options. But the economic fallout of the pandemic has caused companies to slash TV ad budgets by more than 40 percent, according to the research firm Kantar. In response, networks have offered commercial time at double-digit discounts. Many companies have cut back on the big-budget commercial productions out of necessity, with filming largely shut down. In the first weeks of lockdown, new commercials were cobbled together out of old footage. More recently, the tone has shifted, with commercials focused on a return to normalcy and praise for essential workers. The Treasury Department said on Thursday that it is setting aside $10 billion in funds from a $660 billion small business lending program to be used only by a group of lenders that focus specifically on disadvantaged communities. The money, which Congress allocated for a coronavirus response effort known as the Paycheck Protection Program, will go to loans made by community development financial institutions. These special lenders, many of which are nonprofits, work in poor communities and often provide capital to minority-owned businesses that otherwise could not get loans. The announcement follows weeks of pressure from lawmakers, including Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, who have been worried that minority-owned business owners were being shut out of the lending program. A spokesman for Mr. Schumer said that the senator had held numerous one-on-one phone calls with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to discuss the matter. “I want to thank Secretary Mnuchin for heeding our calls to set aside a pool of funding specifically designated for lending by CDFIs,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement. He said he and other lawmakers are now pushing for a separate pool of money to be reserved only for use in the program by minority-run banks. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Another 2.1 million unemployment claims were filed last week, the Labor Department reported Thursday, pushing the total past 40 million — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March. The report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless filings dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million, but the level is still far above historic highs. The latest claims may be not only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through a backlog. And overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to measure the layoffs precisely. Under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, Congress approved an expanded palette of jobless benefits that included freelancers, self-employed and gig workers and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But many states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the program into effect, and those eligible may not yet be fully reflected. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the Labor Department’s weekly report. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. Even now, three states have not put pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. The Trump administration will not issue a midyear update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition amid the uncertainty of a pandemic recession, officials confirmed on Thursday. The decision, first reported by The Washington Post, will spare the administration from having to reveal its internal projections for how deeply the recession will damage economic growth and how long the pain of high unemployment will persist. When the administration last published official projections in February, it forecast economic growth of 3.1 percent from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth quarter of 2020, and growth rates at or around 3 percent for the ensuing decade. It forecast an unemployment rate of 3.5 percent for the year. The virus has rendered those projections obsolete. Unemployment could hit 20 percent in June, White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett told CNN this week. The Congressional Budget Office said in April that it expects the economy will contract by 5.6 percent this year and end with unemployment above 11 percent. The White House is required by law to issue both an annual budget and a midyear update to it, called a “mid-session review.” Updating economic projections in the mid-session review is optional, but it is a practice that administrations — including President Trump’s — have widely followed since the review was mandated by Congress in 1970. A senior administration official defended the decision not to publish updated forecasts, saying the economic uncertainty caused by the virus “would produce a less instructive forecast.” The official, who declined to be identified, also said the White House was under no legal obligation to release the revised forecast. The staggering unemployment figures — devastating as they are — do not fully capture the degree to which the coronavirus has disrupted professional life across the country. Since March, when the crisis began to shut businesses en masse, a generation of professionals has seen careers enter a state of suspended animation. Hiring has dried up, advancement has ceased, job searches have been put on hold and new ventures are in jeopardy. As a result, even well-connected high earners are suddenly in unfamiliar territory. “There is deep uncertainty,” said Alisa Cohn, an executive coach who works with companies including Google and Pfizer. “We’re not just in a holding pattern. We’re on our way somewhere new, but we don’t know what it looks like.” In March, Hasti Nazem, 35, left a start-up she helped found. Two months later, the job market has imploded, promising leads have dried up and she is stuck in limbo. She is mining her network for introductions, but is still without a full-time job. “I’m mostly having Zoom calls with strangers,” she said. Costco Wholesale said on Thursday that its net sales rose 7.3 percent to $36.5 billion in its quarter ending May 10 and that it posted a net profit of $838 million, as the pandemic prompted customers to stock up on goods. The warehouse chain, which has more than 500 U.S. locations, said its income took a hit from a $283 million pretax charge “from incremental wage and sanitation costs related to Covid-19.” J.C. Penney, the 118-year-old retailer that filed for bankruptcy this month, said on Thursday that it has reopened 304 of its stores, roughly one-third, and plans to have almost 500 stores open by June 3. The chain said that it was offering curbside pickup at its opened stores and special shopping hours for “at-risk customers” on Wednesdays and Fridays. The British low-price airline easyJet said on Thursday that it planned to reduce staff by up to 30 percent and that it expected to fly in the July-September period at nearly 30 percent of the capacity a year earlier. When flights restart, staff and passengers will be required to wear masks and, at least initially, no onboard food service will be offered, the company said. It wasn’t a total blackout, but for one minute on Wednesday night, a cluster of billboards in the northern section of Times Square went dark. The shut-off was designed to pressure insurance companies to cover pandemic-related losses incurred by businesses. The effort was coordinated by the Business Interruption Group, which was founded by celebrity chefs including Wolfgang Puck and Thomas Keller along with a Louisiana lawyer who has helped sue several insurers over the scope of their policies during the coronavirus crisis. The activist investor Carl Icahn sold his 55 million-share stake in the car rental giant Hertz, in what he described in a securities filing on Wednesday as a “significant loss.” The Hertz stock had traded at $15 per share for months before spiking in February and then crashing, resulting in a bankruptcy filing last week. Mr. Icahn sold the shares at $0.72 each. Nissan said on Thursday that it would close plants in Spain and Indonesia and cut global production by 20 percent as it seeks to remake itself into a smaller, more efficient automaker, an announcement that comes as it reported its first annual loss in 11 years. Reporting was contributed by Ben Casselman, Patricia Cohen, Kate Conger, Maggie Haberman, Niraj Chokshi, Ben Dooley, Sapna Maheshwari, Geneva Abdul, Mohammed Hadi, Emily Flitter, Jim Tankersley, David Gelles, David Yaffe-Bellany, Tiffany Hsu, Carlos Tejada, Katie Robertson and Gregory Schmidt.It was the end of March, and Josh Fiske, a urologist from Livingston, N.J., was in the hospital fighting an uphill battle against the coronavirus. Just a week earlier, he had easily jogged a five-mile route around his neighborhood. But his body was failing him now. His oxygen levels dipped dangerously low, and his fever rocketed to a worrying 104 degrees. Shifting his body in bed exhausted him. Walking a few steps felt like “hiking in thin air.” Opening a bottle of iced tea was “a huge task.” Fiske kept fighting, though, and eventually, with the help of his doctors, he turned a corner. Yet even as he did, even as he seemed assured of avoiding the worst outcomes of the virus, a different sort of anxiety consumed him. “I started to think, ‘Am I going to be able to run again? Am I going to be able to walk the golf course?’” said Fiske, 46, who does a marathon or half-marathon every year. “These are things I love to do.” The coronavirus has infected millions of people around the world. Athletes tend to view themselves as perhaps better equipped than the general population to avoid the worst consequences of the disease the virus causes, Covid-19. Yet interviews with athletes who have contracted the virus — from professionals to college athletes to weekend hobbyists — revealed their surprise at the potency of its symptoms, struggles to reestablish workout regimens, lingering battles with lung issues and muscle weakness, and unsettling bouts of anxiety about whether they would be able to match their physical peaks. And with sports leagues around the world scrambling to restart play, more athletes could soon be taking on a significant amount of risk. “It definitely shook me up a bit — it was very surreal, you know?” Von Miller, a linebacker for the Denver Broncos who contracted the virus, said in an interview. “My biggest takeaway from this experience is that no matter how great of shape you are in physically, no matter what your age is, that you’re not immune from things like this.” Miller, who has had asthma his whole life, said he was left shaken up by shortness of breath and coughing when he tried to sleep. He said he felt himself “fatiguing faster” when he first tried working out again in his home gym, but that now he was training “full-on” again. Experts warn that the virus does not discriminate. That was the lesson Andrew Boselli, an offensive lineman at Florida State, learned as members of his family — including his father, Tony, 47, a former N.F.L. lineman — began showing symptoms in March. “I knew I was young and healthy,” said Boselli, 22, who moved home to Jacksonville, Fla., after the university closed its doors. “I play Division 1 football, and I’ve been training my butt off all winter and spring. I thought I had no worries. I wasn’t going to get it.” That bullish attitude faded days later, when he awoke feeling sluggish and short of breath. That night, his body temperature climbed to 104. “It was the sickest I’ve ever felt,” said Boselli, who continued to feel shortness of breath and fatigue for about week and a half. In Italy, Paulo Dybala, an Argentine player with Juventus, described his own unnerving experience dealing with respiratory symptoms. “I would try to train and was short of breath after five or 10 minutes,” Dybala said in an interview with the Argentine Football Association, “and we realized something was not right.” Panagis Galiatsatos, a pulmonary physician and assistant professor at Johns Hopkins, said that, like much about the disease, the long-term consequences for athletes who contract it are not fully understood. Athletes, though, represent interesting case studies for doctors, given their generally good baseline health and nuanced awareness of their own bodies. “Patients who are athletes, I love them, because they will pick up subtle changes sometimes way before even the tests identify a disease,” Galiatsatos said. Galiatsatos singled out three complications from Covid-19 that could be of particular concern to athletes. First, coronavirus patients, like anyone with a serious respiratory infection, were at risk for long-term lung issues. He often saw patients “who three months ago had a bad virus and still can’t get their breathing back to normal.” “Sometimes a bad virus creates an airway disease similar to an asthma,” he said. “They can ravage the lungs, where the lungs were rebuilt, but not well, and patients are stuck with an asthmalike reactive airway disease situation.” Another complication that Galiatsatos considered particularly concerning to athletes, and one that experts were still trying to wrap their heads around, was the high incidence of blood clots that doctors were seeing in coronavirus patients. People diagnosed with blood clots, and prescribed blood thinners, are typically discouraged from participating in contact sports. Finally, Galiatsatos said people unfortunate enough to be placed in intensive care could deal with “I.C.U. acquired weakness.” Patients placed on ventilators and confined to a bed often lost between 2 and 10 percent of their muscle mass per day, he said. Ben O’Donnell, a triathlete who lives in Onoka County, Minn., lost 45 pounds during a four-week hospital stay during which he was placed on a ventilator and a short-term  life support machine. O’Donnell, 38, a former college football player who completed an Ironman race a couple of years ago and was planning on doing another this fall, said he was pulled back from the brink of death after struggling with dangerously low levels of oxygen and kidney and liver failure in the intensive care unit. In mid-February, in anticipation of ramping up his training, O’Donnell had completed a two-day, comprehensive physical exam and received a clean bill of health. Doctors believe he contracted the virus five days later. Back at home after his harrowing month in the hospital, O’Donnell has set his sights on competing in an Ironman race in Arizona this fall. He acknowledged it was a lofty goal. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “They’re not sure if I’ll ever get full lung capacity back,” he said. “I may or may not.” Had he not contracted the virus, O’Donnell, an executive at a chemical company, would be doing three runs, three swims and three bicycle workouts per week at this point in his training cycle. But the virus derailed his life plans. After returning home, he needed a walker just to go out to the mailbox at the end of the driveway. In his first attempt to exercise, two days after he left the hospital, he walked for seven minutes at a speed of 1.2 miles per hour using supplemental oxygen. He has been trying to add a minute of time, and a bit of speed, each day. O’Donnell said he was struggling with “a fair amount of doubt” about his ability to get back in shape for the race. But he has motivated himself with the secondary goal of raising money for coronavirus relief, and he has been repeating the same mantra ever since he was struggling in his hospital bed: “Don’t stop. Don’t quit. Keep moving forward.” This mentality has helped other athletes who have been hit with serious symptoms. The 29 days Tsang Yee-ting spent in the hospital were the most she had been away from a karate mat since being introduced to the sport at age 6. A member of the Hong Kong national team, Tsang, 27, contracted the coronavirus in March while preparing to qualify for the Summer Olympics. For the next month, she battled a range of symptoms, the worst a searing pain that engulfed the lower half of her body. Walking was a struggle. Lying down offered no relief. Fighting a virus that doctors were still only learning about, “all sorts of thoughts” about her body and about her future spiraled through her mind, she said. “Of course I was worried,” Tsang said. “Karate is my life.” But even as the virus and isolation from her family levied an “emotional toll” on her, Tsang resolved to stay as active as possible to keep herself sane. She acquired elastic bands and, on days when her body felt strong enough, completed mini-workouts in the tight confines of her hospital room. “Battling the virus was like training for a competition,” said Tsang, who said she now felt normal again and has been training with her teammates over video. Fiske, the urologist, has been working, very slowly, to get back into shape after his weeklong I.C.U. stay in March. Fiske said he found himself relying on the same mental calisthenics he might have used to get through a punishing long-distance run — “when you’re having a tough time, and you decide to do another mile or two to see if you can break through it” — to stave off negative thoughts about his recovery. Since returning home, his focus has been on regaining lung strength. He could not walk up the stairs without becoming “totally gassed.” He could not hold a conversation. But it pained him to think that he might not be able to run, to golf or to exercise with his two teenage sons. So he has persisted with breathing exercises and laboring jogs through his neighborhood. Recently, he was able to finish his old five-mile route — albeit at a different pace. “They’re slow,” he said of the miles. “But they’re there.”TOKYO — As the world tries to get a handle on the coronavirus and emerge from paralyzing lockdowns, public health officials have repeated a mantra: “test, test, test.” But Japan went its own way, limiting tests to only the most severe cases as other countries raced to screen as many people as possible. Medical experts worried that the approach would blind the country to the spread of infection, allowing cases to explode and swamping hospitals. It hasn’t happened. Japan — the grayest country in the world and a popular tourist destination with large, crowded cities — has one of the lowest mortality rates from Covid-19 among major nations. The medical system has not been overwhelmed. And the government never forced businesses to close, although many chose to. This week, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared Japan’s battle against the outbreak a resounding success, taking the country off an emergency footing — a sort of “lockdown lite” that lasted only a month and a half. “By doing things in a uniquely Japanese way, we were able to almost completely end this wave of infection,” Mr. Abe said, adding that what he called the “Japan model” offered a path out of the global pandemic. It’s still unclear, though, exactly what accounts for Japan’s achievement and whether other countries can take lessons from its approach. Critics say Japan undercounted coronavirus deaths. And some warn that further waves of infection could undermine the government’s self-congratulatory pronouncements. Instead of testing widely to understand and limit the virus’s spread through the general population, Japan has focused on quickly containing small outbreaks through contact tracing. Instead of dictating strict constraints on daily life, it has focused on educating people about measures like social distancing and gently prodding them to follow along. Theories for the country’s relatively low mortality rate run the gamut from cultural attributes — widespread mask wearing, a practice of regular hand washing, a near absence of physical greetings like hugs and handshakes — to just plain luck. A combination of many other factors, including government measures and changes in behavior among a public that feels strong pressure to follow the rules, could also be at work. Individual actions “may seem small or mundane,” said Keiji Fukuda, an epidemiologist who directs the School of Public Health at the University of Hong Kong. But, he added, “the cumulative impact of all of those efforts across the entire country to really implement some kind of distancing” may have been substantial. Whatever the formula, Japan has so far succeeded in keeping deaths low. The country has recorded fewer than 900 deaths even as the United States and European countries have reported tens of thousands. Epidemiologists say widespread testing for the virus is important because it allows officials to isolate those who test positive, and to track trends in infection rates to help determine when it is safe to reopen schools, businesses and other places where people congregate. Researchers at Harvard have said the goal should be to test nearly everyone who has at least mild flulike symptoms, as well as an average of 10 contacts for each person who tests positive. Countries like South Korea and China that faced fast-growing outbreaks early in the pandemic quickly ramped up testing.  China performed more than three times as many tests in Wuhan in a single day than those Japan has conducted nationwide since Feb. 18 — about 455,000 tests on around 278,000 people. Japan initially told people who suspected they were infected with the virus not to seek help unless they had experienced a fever for four days, or two days if they were over 65. Even some people with seemingly severe symptoms were refused, provoking theories that the government was trying to hide the true extent of the problem. Medical experts said the guideline was intended to conserve hospital resources. A national law on infectious diseases mandated that anyone who tested positive, even those who were asymptomatic, had to be placed in one of the country’s few isolation wards, creating a strong disincentive for doctors to test patients with milder symptoms. The Japanese government also said early on that test kits must be rationed because they were in short supply. That argument has since faded, however, as Japan has never used even half of its testing capacity on any given day, and it has increased its testing capacity to just over 24,000 a day. Japan has since eased its rules to allow those who test positive but are asymptomatic to stay in hotels. It is preparing to begin limited testing for antibodies, hoping to get a better grasp of the number of people who have been infected. It also plans to introduce a smartphone app to help with contact tracing. Despite the constrained testing for the virus, the rate of positive results has dropped below 1 percent, a fact that the government’s expert panel on the virus says demonstrates that current testing levels are sufficient. But a group of prominent Japanese academics, businesspeople and other figures has called on the government to take a much bolder step: build a capacity of 10 million tests a day and offer testing to anyone who wants it. Consecutive negative results, the group argues, could allow people to fully resume social and economic activities. As the country has seemingly defied the odds, many public health experts, including some in the government, have warned against drawing any definite conclusions from Japan’s experience. They caution that Japan is not in the clear yet, and that a second or third wave of infections could strike at any time. As more data on deaths from this year becomes available — there are indications that Tokyo has undercounted dozens of coronavirus deaths — the picture may not look quite as good. Some say Japan may have a large hidden population of asymptomatic cases. Shigeru Omi, the deputy head of the government’s expert panel on the coronavirus, told lawmakers that the real number of infections could be as much as 10 or 20 times as high as currently believed. Japan has reported fewer than 17,000 cases, versus more than 1.7 million in the United States. Norio Sugaya, an infectious diseases expert at Keiyu Hospital in Yokohama, noted that Japan’s mortality rate, while vastly lower than those in hard-hit countries like Spain or Britain, is one of the worst in Asia. In February, an outbreak of the virus aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess left officials scrambling. The response was widely seen as a disaster, but health experts turned it into a learning opportunity. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Epidemiologists and public health experts used the data from the ship to help develop a framework for stopping the virus’s spread in Japan. The approach emphasized reducing people’s exposure to the conditions that led the pathogen to spread on the ship. A public education campaign urged people to avoid the “Three C’s” — closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places and close contact. On TV talk shows, hosts took a “no question is too stupid” approach to talking about the virus, assuaging viewers’ anxiety and stressing the basic science of prevention: wash your hands, wear a mask, keep your distance from others. At the same time, community health centers raced to investigate clusters using a monitoring system that had been developed to trace cases of influenza and tuberculosis.  Another key factor may have been Mr. Abe’s decision to close schools in late February, well before almost any other country. The decision was hugely unpopular, but it appears to have provoked an almost instantaneous change in behavior, according to polling conducted by researchers at Hiroshima University. The day after the announcement, the percentage of people who were avoiding crowded places nearly doubled, rising to almost 60 percent. By mid-March, it was over 75, the study found. In April, as cases began to spike, Mr. Abe declared a state of emergency. Businesses were requested to close or reduce their hours. People were asked to make only necessary trips. There were no penalties, but many complied anyway. Makoto Sasho, 50, decided to close his grilled eel restaurant in the Meguro neighborhood of Tokyo and focus on delivery and carryout, despite assurances from the government that businesses like his could continue table service. “We conformed to society’s expectations of us,” he said, adding that “when I thought about the future, I knew we absolutely could not be responsible for a cluster.” As Japan now begins to reopen, some experts fear that people will begin to let down their guard. In a speech on Monday night, Mr. Abe emphasized that the end of the state of emergency did not mean a return to normal life. “What we need to aim for,” he said, “is establishing a new normal.” Mr. Sasho said that his customers were clamoring for him to reopen, but that he was not sure he was ready. “It’s a new way of life,” he said. “Maybe I’ll just stick with delivery and takeout.” Motoko Rich contributed reporting.WASHINGTON — There is widespread agreement that the United States economy will soon begin to recover from coronavirus lockdowns. The big debate is whether that rebound will resemble a V, a W, an L or a Nike Swoosh. Increasingly, economists and analysts are penciling in another glyph: a question mark. Forecasters often label their expectations for a post-recession rebound with letters — a “V” suggests a rapid recovery, a “W” a double-dip, and so on — but that’s hard to do this time around. As all 50 states begin to open up and consumers trickle out of their homes, the path ahead is wildly uncertain, making prognostication dicey. Second-wave virus outbreaks, changes in consumer behavior or a wave of unexpected business closures could reshape the future. That has left economists unsure how quick or smooth a rebound the U.S. economy will undergo, prompting many to offer a range of scenarios instead of declarative forecasts. It isn’t just Wall Street forecasters eschewing the alphabet in favor of a range of what-if’s. From the Federal Reserve to the White House, analysts have suggested that posing confident prognostications is probably more misleading than helpful. John C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said during an appearance last week that it is important for policymakers to prepare for every eventuality, rather than focus on one type of recovery. “We’ve had discussions all my career about V-shaped recoveries, L-shaped, U-shaped,” Mr. Williams said “One thing I’ve learned is, don’t get into that letter game.” Larry Kudlow, director of the White House National Economic Council, said at an event sponsored by The Washington Post that he shares President Trump’s expectation for a rapid bounceback, but suggested that there are wide ranges around those estimates. “It’s really hard to model a virus, or a pandemic, the likes of which we haven’t seen in 100 years,” Mr. Kudlow said. “You can have your own Vs; there’s Vs, there are lesser Vs,” Mr. Kudlow said. “There are combos of Us and Vs.” Cognizant of that uncertainty, the White House confirmed it will not even issue an update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition. Here are the possible shapes that economists are discussing and the caveats that have forecasters writing their predictions in pencil. Since economists know that economic activity slowed sharply during the first half of 2020, the best possible outcome is a swift recovery, making for a “V” shape in which the economy is back to its 2019 output level within a few quarters. Unfortunately, economists say that projection is probably a pipe dream. In a note entitled “V Is for Very Unlikely,” Michael Feroli, J.P. Morgan’s chief U.S. economist, described the trajectory as one in which the economy “is turned off and then on, like a light switch.” Because economic variables like unemployment and output often face a lingering drag after a one-time shock, that sort of outcome is pretty dubious, he said. Lower business capital spending and state and local budget cuts are likely to weigh on growth for some time, alongside other factors, making it hard for the economy to get right back on track. It is also worth noting that a sharp rebound in growth rate is distinct from a return to the previous level of economic output. For example, the economy is broadly expected to show a fast rate of growth in the third quarter, given the record contraction in the second quarter. But overall output will remain lower than it was pre-coronavirus for some time, most economists think. “The initial bounce may feel pretty robust,” said Michelle Meyer, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Her team recently revised up its third quarter growth forecast; they see a 7 percent output gain following a 40 percent plunge in the second quarter. While stimulus checks may help spending, that is not going to make up for corporate insolvency and lost jobs. Full recovery could take until the end of 2022, she said. “There’s quite a lot of residual damage,” she said. Just as only strident optimists expect a perfect “V,” only outright pessimists are projecting an L, in which growth remains at or near the very-low levels it almost certainly hit during the second quarter. The economy is already showing a partial rebound, suggesting that such a formation is unlikely. Mortgage applications have stabilized after sharp declines, consumer confidence is recovering slightly and while initial jobless claims remain elevated, they are slowing. The car industry is hopeful that auto sales are in for a rebound in June. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Real-time trackers show a muted bounce, with a daily J.P. Morgan credit card series showing a slow but fairly steady uptick starting from mid-April. Google mobility data suggest that people are moving around more and visiting parks, TD Securities said in a research note. The pickup in areas that drive growth — retail, restaurants, and move theaters — has been more restrained. “None of the states show a sudden snapback,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief U.S. macro strategist at TD Securities, noting that some places are further along the path to official reopening. While the nascent recovery seems to preclude an “L,” he said, the limited data so far jibe with the idea that the recovery will be more gradual than the collapse. That brings us to a scenario that is still on the table: a W-shaped recovery. It could be that the economy will partly bounce back before plunging again amid a second wave of infections as states reopen and people face renewed exposure to the coronavirus, or if the disease stages a comeback this autumn. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. While economists generally say that a “W” remains entirely possible, they aren’t willing to make it their most-likely forecast because it hinges on two total unknowns: whether there is another spike in infections, and whether states will shut down again if that happens. Analysts who venture a guess increasingly favor a nonletter shape as their base-case: the checkmark. The Congressional Budget Office’s baseline expectation suggests that growth will contract slightly in the first quarter and sharply in the second quarter before making a gradual rebound starting in the quarter that stretches from the start of July to the end of September. The budget office doesn’t label the shape, because the climb back will be slower than the drop. The trajectory looks like a checkmark on a graph. There are big uncertainties around that forecast. Additional waves of infection, variations in consumer behavior, and the timeline for a vaccine are all wild cards that could change the path ahead. A host of risks could lead to worse outcomes while a vaccine breakthrough or unexpected government support for the economy could improve the trajectory. If a quicker recovery takes hold, the rebound could look more like a “swoosh” as growth improves slowly before accelerating. But if more infections occur and a vaccine remains elusive, the economy could also face a “wave” recovery of repeating peaks and troughs as states continually reopen and then pull back. “We’re all prefacing what we say with: We’re not epidemiologists,” said Mr. O’Sullivan, explaining that the range of possible economic outcomes is unusually wide because it turns so much on what happens with public health. Because it’s a new coronavirus, and a totally unusual shock to the economy, nobody’s guess for what comes next is especially reliable. Even the Fed’s economists, never shy to to set out a forecast, have sounded uncertain. Minutes from the central bank’s late-April meeting show that staff offered a baseline forecast in which shutdowns gradually ease and growth resumes into the second half of the year, but warned that “a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast.” Fed policymakers, for their part, “discussed several alternative scenarios with regard to the behavior of economic activity in the medium term that all seemed about equally likely,” according to the minutes. Among them were predictions that the country experienced additional outbreaks and shutdowns (a “W” or a wave), and more optimistic situations in which social distancing measures were successfully relaxed (a check or a swoosh). Richard Clarida, the Fed’s vice chairman, said last week that it could take until early autumn to get more clarity on where the economy is headed. To put it bluntly, as Ian Shepherdson at Pantheon Macroeconomics did in a recent research note, “the timing of a full recovery is unknowable.” Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.Longer-term analyses of the coronavirus pandemic emphasize that there is a good chance that it will fade within a year or two, especially if a vaccine or effective treatment appears. I hope that’s true. But even if it is, I’m worried that the economy may not return to normal within that time frame. Big events like a pandemic have the potential to leave behind a trail of disruption. They can create social discord, reduce people’s willingness to spend and take risks, destroy business momentum and shake confidence in the value of investments. But episodes as far-reaching as this one are scarce, widely spaced in time, and so different in circumstances that statisticians cannot easily compare them systematically. The best we can do is examine some case studies. The so-called Spanish flu, the influenza epidemic that started in 1918, which ultimately cost 675,000 American lives and millions around the world, is a reasonable place to start. While we know a great deal about that era, we don’t know enough to shed much light on current circumstances. There was a recession in the United States from August 1918 to March 1919, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, but not a deep one. Searching the newspapers of the time, one finds surprisingly little concern about the possible ill effects of the influenza on the economy, perhaps because the more-dominant narrative concerned the impact of World War I, which ended on November 11, 1918. Yet a recent study by Robert Barro of Harvard University and his associates suggests that the epidemic along with the decline in production associated with the war led to a protracted decline in G.D.P. growth in affected countries from 1918 through 1920. In short, that period provides little comfort. Perhaps more relevant to the current crisis is the Great Depression of 1929 to 1940, the biggest economic slowdown of modern history. From 1931 to 1940, the annual unemployment rate in the United States never fell below 12 percent. (In April this year, unemployment shot up to 14.7 percent.) The conventional story is that the 1929 crash was the result of a stock market bubble in the 1920s. The Cyclically Adjusted Price Earnings Ratio, a stock valuation measure that I helped develop, reached 32.6 in 1929 (compared with 31.0 in January 2020). The Depression started in 1929 after a 23 percent crash in the Dow Jones industrial average over two days, Oct. 28 and 29. It created global social unrest around the world and the downturn only ended with World War II. In 1929 many people expected the stock market to bounce right back and that decline was short-lived, in one sense: The market rose almost half the way back to its 1929 peak by April 1930. But it fell sharply again, and the crash set in motion a train of powerful narratives that resemble some of the popular notions that are circulating today. Much as President Trump dismissed the seriousness of the Covid-19 pandemic in its early days, President Herbert Hoover made optimistic forecasts that proved to be wrong. Much as people fret these days about extreme polarization between Democrats and Republicans, so too were people of that era concerned about extreme political divisiveness. After losing the 1932 election to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, for example, President Hoover, by then a lame duck, called F.D.R.’s plans a “march to Moscow.” Much as people today have experienced long lines and empty shelves at supermarkets, in the Great Depression people fretted about long lines and empty cash registers at banks. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. There are other troubling parallels: Fear of long-term unemployment and a never-ending depression was rampant back then, leading people to restrain spending, thus prolonging the downturn. This may not happen now, but it is a danger. Much as now, in the Great Depression people were very focused on maintaining a “fair wage” in the face of economic distress. But this led to nationwide resistance to nominal wage cuts for anyone, even when retail prices were falling rapidly. This appears to have had the unintended result of inducing employers, who could not afford to keep everyone working at their former wages, to lay off many people. The economists Harold L. Cole of the University of Pennsylvania and Lee E. Ohanian, of U.C.L.A., have shown that this may explain some of the extreme duration of Great Depression unemployment. Another development back then may have resonance today. Faced with widespread poverty, even people with money voluntarily embraced austerity, saying they no longer needed to “keep up with the Joneses.” Their reduction in consumption helps to explain the severity and duration of the Depression. If contemporary culture shifts in a similar way, it could limit the economy’s ability to bounce back. A series of concerns like these — some with echoes of the Great Depression, some newly forming and associated directly with worries about disease and infection — will be on millions of people’s minds long after the economy reopens. Such social narratives will affect their thinking on how to spend and invest, whether to go out to eat or attend sporting events, on whom to vote for, and whether to travel: multitudes of decisions, big and small, that determine the course of the economy. It is too early to tell which narratives will prevail and what path the economy will take after this pandemic subsides. Limited case studies will take us only so far. But we shouldn’t be surprised if we see post-pandemic economic weakness over the next decade. Robert J. Shiller is Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “ is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.The stock market has been erratic, real estate is hurting, bond yields are painfully low and dividends are shrinking. In the coronavirus recession, most financial assets have been disturbingly volatile. But one widely held financial asset, perhaps the most important one for the vast majority of Americans, has performed splendidly: their stake in Social Security. It hasn’t merely been a solid support for millions of people in a difficult time. While the income-producing power of so many other assets has been sapped by economic weakness and low interest rates, Social Security payments have held steady. And thanks to those rock-bottom interest rates, the market value of the Social Security income stream has soared in a measurable way. You may not think of Social Security as a personal asset, like a bank account, a portfolio of stocks and bonds or a house. But Social Security retirement benefits are a kind of annuity, as I’ll explain, and annuities have a definite market value. Considered this way, Social Security’s value has been rising. Even if you aren’t receiving payments now, you have a stake in the asset, and it is in your interest to protect it. “The most important financial asset for most Americans by far is Social Security,” said William J. Bernstein, a financial adviser and author on financial subjects. “We are in a retirement crisis, and the only foreseeable answer is Social Security.” Perhaps if more people understood the impressive, countercyclical performance of their share in Social Security, there would be more clamor to protect it. But critical as the benefits are proving to be in this crisis, as in so many others, the entire Social Security system faces a cash shortfall down the road, and it needs help from Congress. The pandemic has complicated these long-term issues, which can be resolved only in Washington. First, consider the good news. In the coronavirus crisis, Social Security has succeeded in doing just what it was designed to do: keeping old people, disabled people and their dependents out of dire poverty, and providing a retirement cushion for nearly everyone else. About 178 million working people of all ages are covered by Social Security, government statistics show. Even if those people are not eligible for benefits now, they will be entitled to them later. Plenty of people are already getting them, however: About 65 million Americans will receive more than $1 trillion this year. That includes nine out of 10 of those 65 and older, as well as millions of disabled people, dependents and survivors. With more than 100,000 Covid-19 deaths in America and millions of people financially desperate, a program that supplies regular income to so many can surely be said to be more valuable than ever. But I concede that is a subjective judgment. The program has also risen in value in a measurable way that may not be intuitively obvious. This is a little wonky, so bear with me. Financial markets put a price on almost everything, and they can provide an approximate cash value for Social Security, too. Your benefits, now or in the future, accrue gradually, over years of work and paying taxes into the Social Security system. But as I pointed out recently, low interest rates have reduced bond yields and made commercial annuities extremely expensive. With the help of Dale Kintzel, a former Social Security economist who studied its pricing in a 2017 paper, I’ve checked the market values of annuities and compared them with Social Security. Those federal retirement benefits are essentially annuities: bonds wrapped in insurance. So-called single-premium immediate annuities — in which an insurance company will provide you with income,  in exchange for a sum of cash — can’t do everything Social Security does, but they come close. Mr. Kintzel has used annuities to approximate the cash value of Social Security benefits. Those values are startlingly high. Mr. Kintzel found that for the average 65-year-old man, who last year received a retirement benefit of $1,375 a month, an annuity supplying that lifetime cash flow would cost at least $459,866 — 13 percent more than a comparable annuity in 2014. For a 65-year-old woman, the average monthly benefit was $1,102 last year. A comparable commercial annuity, Mr. Kintzel said, would cost $368,562. These figures are based on data from immediateannuities.com, which tracks annuity prices. These are just average amounts and would be much bigger — perhaps as much as $1 million — for high-income people who delay claiming benefits until they are 70, my own calculations suggest. Note that all of these estimates understate the value of Social Security, which provides disability benefits and supplemental income in addition to basic retirement benefits. And these estimates don’t take into account the effects of the further decline in interest rates since the beginning of this year, which have reduced income streams from many assets, but not for Social Security. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Perhaps the best thing about Social Security is that unlike a stock portfolio, it can be counted on, Mr. Kintzel said. “It is backed by the government, and so it’s virtually risk-free, or it should be. I’ve always thought that Social Security is one thing that everybody can agree on. It’s a good thing.” Yet Social Security continues to have an odd problem. Although its stability has been among its greatest virtues, it remains underfunded. I pointed out a year ago that Social Security benefit payouts were greater than the system’s revenues. That is still true. To receive all of the benefits you have been promised, a reluctant Congress will need to fix Social Security, which is likely to dip into the principal of its trust funds for the first time this year. Interest payments from the trust funds have made up the gap, allowing full benefits until now. Without help from Congress, these trust funds, are likely to be exhausted within 15 years — and perhaps sooner. If that were to happen, benefits would be cut, perhaps to 79 percent of the promised levels, Social Security estimates. In an online conference in late April, Stephen C. Goss, Social Security’s chief actuary, said that the current recession would almost certainly reduce the system’s payroll tax receipts and could lead to trust fund depletion by 2033 or even sooner. Precise estimates are impossible now, with the economy shrinking so rapidly, he said. “All bets are off, and we will just have to see what happens, because we really don’t know whether we’ll be back to normal,” Mr. Goss said. As a matter of basic math, Social Security needs more revenue or lower expenses. But I think this recession suggests that increasing revenue is the way to go, because Social Security benefits have been so crucial. If they were to be cut, even bigger rescue programs would be needed from other sources. Far better to maintain and improve Social Security, which works automatically and well. Last year, I said that the most important thing you could probably do to improve your personal finances was to make sure that Congress took action to bolster the program’s funding. That’s even truer today, when its benefits are more valuable, and more badly needed.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “ is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.More than 40 million people — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March, the government reported on Thursday, an astounding tally that rivals the bleakest years of the Great Depression. The latest additions — the 2.1 million people who filed state unemployment claims last week — may not be only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through some of the choking backlog. “We’re still catching up,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said of the newest claims. “The lags have been long.” The Labor Department report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless claims, on a seasonally adjusted basis, dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million — but the level is still far above any other historical highs. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times At the same time, overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to precisely measure the number of layoffs caused by the pandemic — and in devising a policy response. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Shelter-in-place orders and business restrictions have been lifting across the country, and there is evidence in the report that some workers are being called back: The number of people receiving state jobless benefits dropped by roughly 3.8 million to 21.1 million for the week ended May 16. But as Ms. Swonk noted, “it’s not enough to offset the extraordinary economic devastation and job losses associated with Covid-19.” And while rehiring certainly accounts for a chunk of that decline, workers who had exhausted their weekly state benefits would also be reflected. Reopenings remain bumpy and incomplete, and flare-ups of the coronavirus continue to disrupt business. On Tuesday, Ford Motor temporarily halted production at the Kansas City assembly plant in Missouri to deep clean after an employee tested positive for the virus. Two other Ford plants — in Chicago and Dearborn, Mich. — were also temporarily closed. In Thursday’s report, the department offered two sets of figures. One includes the more than 40 million people who have applied for state benefits and is seasonally adjusted. The other includes those who applied under the new federal emergency program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and is not seasonally adjusted. So far, more than 10 million have applied. Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, part of an expanded palette of jobless benefits passed by Congress two months ago, is meant to help freelancers, gig workers, the self-employed and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But several economists suspect that there is a lot of double counting and warn against simply adding figures from the two programs together. Some states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the pandemic program into effect. Initially, many people were mistakenly told they were ineligible. Others were instructed to apply for state benefits first and be rejected before applying for the federal benefits. That confused application process has caused potentially millions of laid-off workers to be counted twice. States are also weeding out duplicate applications from frustrated filers who had trouble getting through or did not receive any response after weeks of waiting. Then there are the mistakes. A data entry slip-up caused Massachusetts to pump up the number of federal claims by nearly a million last week. The previous week, a similar flub in Connecticut mistakenly inflated its total by a quarter of a million. “It’s unclear if states are including duplicate claims due to error, fraud or the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program,” said Ernie Tedeschi, a policy economist at Evercore ISI in Washington. But that is not all. That system is also probably missing millions of other laid-off workers. As of Tuesday, three states had not put the pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the claims numbers. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. As for regular unemployment benefits, states draw up their own rules and administer benefits. The result is that in some places, like Florida, Texas and Arizona, only a small fraction of jobless workers are receiving benefits, while other states offer much broader coverage. The way “initial claims” are counted may also vary by state, with some excluding claims that have not been processed. Laurie Yadoff, a lawyer at Coast to Coast Legal Aid of South Florida, said she had about 100 clients who qualify for regular state benefits but have had trouble filing. Many are poor and older, with limited or no access to the internet. “A lot of them fall into the regular state benefit program, and a lot of them are straightforward, and a lot of them are still not getting money,” she said. Even when Ms. Yadoff has been able to get someone on the phone, the person at the other end often doesn’t know the answer. “People are desperate and frustrated,” she said. “They don’t know what to do.” Monitoring withdrawals from the Treasury Department, Mr. Tedeschi of Evercore estimated that by early May, roughly three-quarters of those eligible for benefits had started to receive them. Allison Hester, who is 50 and lives in Little Rock, Ark., applied for unemployment after being laid off from her job in content marketing at a window cleaning supply company in March, but was never able to get through. “I tried on and off for a month, but our system was so overwhelmed.” She returned to her job this month. “It feels good, but I don’t feel secure anymore,” Ms. Hester said. “I don’t take anything for granted.” Nelson D. Schwartz and Tiffany Hsu contributed reporting.This article was reported and written in collaboration with The Markup, a nonprofit newsroom investigating technology’s effects on society. Burglary and domestic assault in Minnesota. Selling meth and jumping bail in Kentucky. Driving without insurance in Arkansas. Disorderly conduct. Theft. Lying to a police officer. Unspecified “crimes.” Too many narcotics charges to count. That’s what the landlord for an apartment in St. Helens, Ore., saw when he ran a background check for Samantha Johnson, a prospective tenant, in 2018. But none of the charges were hers. The growing data economy and the rise of American rentership since the 2008 financial crisis have fueled a rapid expansion of the tenant screening industry, now valued at $1 billion. The companies produce cheap and fast — but not necessarily accurate — reports for an estimated nine out of 10 landlords across the country. The automated background check for Ms. Johnson cast a wide net, looking for negative information from criminal databases even in states where she had never lived and pulling in records for women whose middle names, races and dates of birth didn’t match her own. It combined criminal records from five other women: four Samantha Johnsons and a woman who had used the name as an alias, even though the screening report said she was an “active inmate” in a Kentucky jail at the time. “You can totally tell we’re not the same person at all,” said Ms. Johnson, who eventually got the apartment after she convinced the landlord she wasn’t a criminal. It was not the first time she had been the victim of incorrect automated screening reports. It wouldn’t be the last, either. The reports can be created in a few seconds, using searches based on partial names or incomplete dates of birth. Tenants generally have no choice but to submit to the screenings and typically pay an application fee for the privilege. Automated reports are usually delivered to landlords without a human ever glancing at the results to see if they contain obvious mistakes, according to court records and interviews. A review of hundreds of federal lawsuits filed against screening companies over the past 10 years shows how hasty, sloppy matches can lead to reports that wrongly label people deadbeats, criminals or sex offenders. Among those who say they were wrongly maligned: Davone Jackson, who was denied low-income housing in Tennessee after the screening company RealPage reported that he had twice been convicted of trafficking in heroin in Kentucky and was on Wisconsin’s sex offender registry. In fact, those records belonged to an Eric Jackson and a James Jackson. After the denial, Davone Jackson said, he and his 9-year-old daughter were forced to live in a small motel room for nearly a year. Glenn Patrick Thompson Sr. and Glenn Patrick Thompson Jr., who said they had been left homeless near Seattle after a tenant screening company called On-Site, which is now part of RealPage, told two different landlords that the father and son had been previously evicted. In fact, the eviction was for a Patricia Thompson, who was not related to them. William Hall Jr., who lost out on a duplex in his small town in Georgia after TransUnion Rental Screening Solutions said he had sexually abused a minor. The criminal record belonged to a William Hall who was 30 years older and possibly dead. Mr. Hall said the landlord had stopped returning his telephone calls after receiving the incorrect report. Mr. Hall’s suit is pending; the others were settled for undisclosed sums. The screening process happens so quickly and the competition for apartments can be so fierce that prospective renters don’t always know why they were turned down, much less whether an incorrect background report was the cause. Some screening companies don’t even provide the underlying records to landlords, instead producing a color-coded “risk” score or a thumbs-up or thumbs-down lease recommendation. Screening company employees have stated in lawsuits that they err on the side of including any possible match, rather than excluding possible errors. The owner of one screening company criticized his industry, saying his peers can do better. “We can figure out how to match a record,” said Matt Visser, chief executive of Victig Screening Solutions, whose Utah company sells 10,000 to 20,000 tenant and employment screening reports a month. He said his company verified negative findings. “It requires a human element,” he said. “When we are performing any of these reports, it is a fairly monumental moment in someone’s life,” he added. “You just have to give a crap.” Large background firms, including RealPage, CoreLogic and TransUnion, declined interview requests for this article. They referred specific questions to a trade group, the Consumer Data Industry Association. Noting the millions of tenant background reports produced each year, the group denied that any systemic problems existed and accused consumer lawyers of being myopic. “If I sat in a cardiologist’s office all day, all I would see is people with heart problems,” said Eric Ellman, the association’s senior vice president for public policy and legal affairs. He acknowledged that it hadn’t developed any standards for screening accuracy but said the companies had their own policies. In responses to lawsuits, tenant screening companies say renters dispute fewer than 1 percent of reports. But it’s impossible to know the actual error rate because tenants may not always know to complain. With about half of the nation’s 43 million rentals turning over every year, even an error rate of 1 percent could upend the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Regulators have taken action against a few companies for slipshod tenant screenings; the Fair Credit Reporting Act requires background screeners to “follow reasonable procedures to assure maximum possible accuracy.” But rejected tenants continue to complain about the same careless practices by companies that regulators had called out, interviews and federal lawsuits show. Ms. Johnson has lost count of the times she has been turned down for housing or work because of incorrect background reports. Since 2016, she has sued six tenant screening companies for incorrect reports. All of them have settled. When she moved out of the apartment in St. Helens and applied to rent a house, the background report was 112 pages long. By then Ms. Johnson knew the drill: Find out where the report came from, call the screening company, fax in a copy of her ID and start the dispute process. “I’ve tried to figure out if there’s something I can do, to stop that from happening,” she said. “But I don’t think that there really is, because there’s just so many background companies out there — and they’re not doing their jobs.” Tenant screening was once confined to a simple credit check with the three major credit bureaus and a few phone calls to references, but it was revolutionized by the advent of cheap or even free, easily available electronic court records. These include criminal records from across the country, sex-offender registries, terrorism watch lists and housing court records. Easy access to the troves of data has also made it possible for anyone with a computer to become a background screener: About 2,000 companies offer the service, but that’s only an estimate. Tenant screeners don’t have to register with any government agency. People can complain about faulty background reports to the Federal Trade Commission or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau — or sue. But regulators have not limited tenant screening as much as other kinds of background checks. Regulators forced credit bureaus to follow standards for matching records to a person, and the kinds of records the bureaus can legally report are limited. Rules for employment screening, which some of the tenant-screening firms provide, require employers to share the negative report with a rejected applicant. None of those restrictions applies to tenant screening. Federal law requires landlords only to tell tenants if they were turned down because of a negative report and who produced it. Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, screening companies have 30 days to respond to tenants’ requests for corrections. By then, a landlord may have given the apartment away. “It’s just crazy that you can’t get immediate results,” said Andrew Guzzo, a consumer lawyer who has filed more than 100 federal lawsuits against background screeners and other consumer reporting agencies. “There’s not many worse imaginable consumer financial services related impacts that you could have, more than an inaccurate tenant screening that costs you the ability to rent an apartment.” Tenants can’t get ahead of the problem by checking their background reports in advance because too many companies provide the service. “You can’t just go to one place and request your free annual report,” said Ariel Nelson, author of a 52-page National Consumer Law Center report on screening errors. A handful of cities have begun to regulate tenant screening by limiting a landlord’s ability to reject an applicant for old criminal convictions or evictions. Courts have also begun to take notice; a panel of federal judges recently consolidated seven lawsuits about errors in TransUnion’s tenant screening reports. Screening companies put the onus for accuracy on landlords, telling them right in the reports that they should double-check them. Steven Schachtman, a longtime Minneapolis landlord and property manager who oversees about 10,000 rentals and uses screening firms, said it was difficult for a landlord to check the reports to ensure they matched their applicants. “That is why we are hiring them,” he said. “I assume they have matched everything up.” One CoreLogic employee said during a deposition for a federal lawsuit that she considered a background report “accurate” if it correctly reported what was in public records. A common method that screening companies use to increase hits, court records show, is a so-called wild-card search, which gathers different names that start with the same few letters. Terrence Enright’s experience, described in his federal lawsuit against National Tenant Network, shows how it works. When he applied for an apartment in Chicago in 2014, the company searched for “Enright, Ter*” and “Terrence, Enr*.” But the company also searched for misspelled versions, including “Enwright, Ter*” and found a match: an eviction for a Teri Enwright in California, one of what Mr. Enright said were three evictions mistakenly attributed to him, which resulted in his being denied the apartment. His lawsuit was settled out of court. Screening companies could use more careful methods to reduce incorrect reports, such as excluding eviction records for addresses that don’t appear on a person’s credit report. Or reporting only records that match full names and other data, such as complete dates of birth. But they often don’t, tenants and consumer attorneys say, and the errors can have an outsize effect on people with common names — particularly members of minority groups, which tend to have fewer unique last names. For example, more than 12 million Latinos nationwide share just 26 surnames, according to the census. Marco Fernandez is suing RentGrow, another screening firm, after it included information in his report about another person named Mario Fernandez Santana. Mr. Fernandez lives in Maryland works for an elite military cybercommand strike force and has a top-secret security clearance. The other man is on a federal watch list for suspected terrorists or drug traffickers, lives in Mexico and has a different date of birth, according to the lawsuit. “These matching algorithms treat Hispanic names just like a mix-and-match,” said Mr. Fernandez’s attorney, E. Michelle Drake. RentGrow declined to explain why the company included the other man’s record in Mr. Fernandez’s report, but said in a statement that it had “promptly resolved all concerns in his favor.” Mr. Fernandez was able to get into the apartment he wanted. While disputing the report, however, Mr. Fernandez said he discovered that RentGrow had incorrectly reported the same federal watch list information to a landlord four years earlier, according to the lawsuit. He said he was not informed at the time. Hector Hernandez took CoreLogic to court after the company mixed him up with an accused drug smuggler, Hector Hernandez-Garcia, causing him, his wife and their newborn son to be temporarily homeless in the Washington, D.C., suburbs. “I kept telling them: ‘You got the wrong guy. I’m telling you, that’s not me,’” Mr. Hernandez, who works for a pest control company, said in an interview. CoreLogic settled the lawsuit. In a deposition for another federal lawsuit, a CoreLogic employee said independently verifying reports like these before sending them out “would be an overwhelming task.” It’s certainly more expensive: Court filings in a federal lawsuit show that RealPage pays one data broker 22 cents for each criminal record by buying data in bulk. The company typically charges landlords $12 per report. If there’s a dispute, the data broker would charge RealPage $7 to hand-check a record, according to the contract, shrinking RealPage’s profits — but not eliminating them. That lawsuit claims RealPage produced 11,000 inaccurate renter background reports between 2014 and 2019 using “abbreviated” criminal records, which are cheaper than a full record check, bought from an affiliate of Backgroundchecks.com. The records don’t include details of the resolution or complete dates of birth, so are more likely to lead to incorrect reports. In a statement, RealPage said that “the screening that gave rise to this case occurred years ago” and that the company “has long since made changes to its criminal matching logic that would prevent this record from returning for the plaintiff in that case.” It would not elaborate on those changes. Federal regulators have fined both RealPage and Backgroundchecks.com. Backgroundchecks.com and an affiliated company were fined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2015 over employment screenings. Among other things, the agency said the company had failed to look for patterns in customer disputes that would identify root causes of inaccuracies, such as court jurisdictions with unreliable data, error-prone procedures or employees who are particularly sloppy. In 2018, the Federal Trade Commission fined RealPage $3 million for using wild-card searches; the company did not have to admit wrongdoing. The company brings in about $48 million annually from tenant background screenings, according to court filings. Despite the federal action, RealPage continues to employ a name-matching program that tolerates a significant amount of imprecision, according to federal lawsuits. For instance, according to a lawsuit by Leon Howard, RealPage included criminal records for a Lonnie Howard and eviction records for a Linnea Howard in his background report when he applied for a rental in Georgia in 2019. Lonnie Howard’s date of birth was different than Leon Howard’s, and the report included a photo of the offender, according to the lawsuit, which RealPage settled for an undisclosed sum. Most hurt are people living on the edge, especially those who made it to the top of long wait lists for a housing voucher or a public housing unit only to lose out because of faulty background checks. Sandra Smith waited more than a year for a spot in public housing in her hometown, Jacksonville, Fla. After a divorce, she had been staying with friends and her mother. Unemployed while recovering from health problems, Ms. Smith was relieved she’d finally be able to move back out of her teenage bedroom. “I’m 55,” she said. “Having my own space is something I haven’t had in a long time, and I felt like I was ready for that.” But the housing authority turned her down after a background check reported a 2013 eviction for a different Sandra Smith. “Everything was a runaround,” she said. “No one had any more anything to show me — why they were so convinced that this was me.” Agency officials said she had been denied because of the screening, which is their policy. “It would’ve taken them two to three minutes to investigate this,” said Adam Thoresen, a Jacksonville Area Legal Aid lawyer whom Ms. Smith turned to for help. The signature on the lease agreement, which was attached to the online eviction records, wasn’t the same as his client’s, he said. The lease listed multiple children — but his client has only one child, an adult in his 30s, and the names didn’t match. “This is really simple stuff,” Mr. Thoresen said. It took Ms. Smith a year and a half to get her denial overturned. She is still dealing with the paperwork and hasn’t gotten an apartment. Maddy Varner and Surya Mattu contributed reporting.Hoping to take advantage of wreckage in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, investors are preparing to snap up commercial real estate at rock-bottom prices. Long before states and cities closed businesses and issued stay-at-home orders, many real estate funds were stockpiling cash and waiting for a buyer’s market. Some have raised billions of dollars in the last several weeks. As a result, Blackstone Group, Kayne Anderson Capital Advisors, Starwood Capital Group and other investment firms are sitting on roughly $300 billion of equity ready for deployment, said Douglas M. Weill, a founder of Hodes Weill & Associates, a global real estate capital advisory firm in New York. By comparison, property sales totaled $570.6 billion in 2019, according to Real Capital Analytics, a commercial real estate researcher that tracks deals of $2.5 million and up. “It’s a staggering amount of dry powder,” Mr. Weill said. “Institutional investors are defensively looking after their own portfolios, but they’re beginning to look around for opportunities.” This is the second time in the last dozen years that investors have anticipated an onslaught of big property discounts; the 2008 financial crisis also fueled a surge of distressed funds. Yet many that ramped up during the Great Recession fizzled because the expected depth and breadth of distress never materialized. Will this time be different? Just like the last crisis, when government intervention, loan modifications and other measures “kicked the can down the road” until real estate values rebounded, lenders and regulators hope to buy time using similar measures, including injecting trillions of dollars into the financial system. In many cases, lenders are trying to accommodate borrower requests to suspend loan payments for 60 to 90 days with an eye toward making long-term modifications later, said Jay M. Sakalo, a lawyer in Miami who specializes in financial restructuring. As of April, more than 5,000 borrowers, representing 17 percent of $583.8 billion in commercial mortgage-backed securities, had asked to explore forbearance or other relief, according to credit rating firm Fitch Ratings. Unlike loans held by banks and insurance companies, commercial mortgage-backed securities are pools of real estate loans that are carved up by risk and sold to investors. “The idea is that if we can press pause, we’ll do less damage than telling borrowers, ‘You have to pay, no matter what,’” said Joe McBride, head of commercial real estate finance for Trepp, a research firm in New York. “There’s not a lot of upside to mass foreclosures.” States and cities did not shut down economic activity during the financial crisis, however, and most tenants still paid rent. But that’s not the case this time. Some 38.6 million people have filed unemployment claims, according to a Labor Department report released Thursday, and millions of small businesses and restaurants are expected to permanently close. The retail and hospitality industries are suffering the most. For example, Macerich, a shopping center owner based in Santa Monica, Calif., collected 26 percent of its April rent, it said in its latest financial report. Early rent collections for May dropped to 18 percent. And although hotel occupancy has rebounded in recent weeks, it was still roughly 56 percent lower in mid-May than a year earlier, according to STR, a hospitality research organization in Hendersonville, Tenn. The situation is one that tenants and landlords likely never anticipated, and for many businesses, the ability to survive remains a question. Barton Perreira, a high-end eyewear brand based in Irvine, Calif., whose products will be featured in the next Bond movie, recently reopened its stores in Aspen, Colo.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Nashville on a limited basis, but its New York location remains closed, said Bill Barton, a founder. He acknowledged that landlords were in a tough spot, and anticipated a reduction in foot traffic for the next six to eight months, compounding financial challenges caused by the closings. “I think tenants need to decide whether they want to tough it out, and landlords need to decide whether they want to keep a particular store,” Mr. Barton said. “But at the end of the day, if we can’t get help from landlords, it’s difficult to say that we’ll keep going.” As of mid-May, loan servicers representing 70 percent of the commercial mortgage-backed securities reported that 19.3 percent of hotel loans and 10 percent of retail loans were more than 30 days late, according to Trepp. The end of grace periods could significantly increase those percentages, Trepp noted. On average, the value of lodging properties slid 16 percent over the last three months, while the value of malls dropped 25 percent and strip retail fell 15 percent, according to Green Street Advisors, a commercial real estate research and advisory firm in Newport Beach, Calif. Commercial real estate values over all fell an average of 10 percent in that period, Green Street found. 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 Source: Green Street Advisors By Karl Russell Some property owners that do not have the ability to withstand a downturn are already looking to sell. But given the widespread anticipation of continued erosion in property values, few willing buyers are in the market, experts say. Every commercial property owner has its specific problems, but mom-and-pop landlords that own a handful of apartment buildings, retail centers or other assets are in a much more compromised position, said Sanford D. Sigal, president and chief executive of NewMark Merrill, a shopping center owner and manager in Woodland Hills, Calif. “Very few small owners are equipped for this type of market,” said Mr. Sigal, who expected to collect about 57 percent of his May rent from tenants across some 70 properties in California, Colorado and Illinois. “I’ve seen more deals in the past week that were worth looking at than I did in the entire prior year.” Some borrowers seeking relief from lenders are seeing mixed results. Legacy Development, which owns shopping centers primarily in the Midwest and Southeast, has not received rent from any of its 432 tenants since the beginning of April, said Dan Lowe, managing partner for the firm, which is based in Kansas City, Mo. Legacy Development’s bank and life insurance company lenders have displayed a willingness to work with the company, he said. A loan servicer of commercial mortgage-backed securities has been less accommodating. “I’m guessing that a lot of opportunities for distress will result from C.M.B.S. borrowers who couldn’t get relief,” Mr. Lowe said. Mr. Sigal said that he, too, had found bank and life insurance lenders accommodative. He stopped borrowing from lenders in the commercial mortgage-backed securities market because of difficulty working with servicers during the last downturn, he added. Still, no amount of temporary relief or permanent loan restructuring will save all properties, particularly those just scraping by before the pandemic. Plus, because of virus fears, even retail and entertainment properties that performed well before the crisis are likely to experience less traffic for weeks, if not months, after reopening, said Brian Stoffers, global president of debt and structured finance for CBRE, a real estate services firm. “It’s going to take a while for real estate’s problems to completely manifest themselves,” he said. “This has been caused by a health crisis that could have life-changing impacts on some properties.” Indeed, how the virus is shaping consumer and business attitudes toward commercial real estate should be a question uppermost in the minds of distressed buyers, said Carlos A.G. Vigon, a commercial real estate investor in Los Angeles. Coming out of the last downturn, investors that found deeply discounted properties profited by simply riding the recovery, said Mr. Vigon, who last year started PaxCap Investors to focus on opportunistic deals. Buyers in this new real estate cycle must calculate potential costs to redesign or upgrade properties to fit new societal and health norms. “This is not a problem that will be fixed only by highly available, low-cost capital,” said Mr. Vigon, who has $300 million in equity to spend. “This is a different kind of dislocation. It’s greater, and it’s deeper.”Getting infected with Covid-19 is a frightening, isolating experience. But as more people endure it, the community of survivors is growing — and with them comes better guidance. My husband and I got sick from the coronavirus in late March. We had so-called mild cases, meaning only that we weren’t hospitalized: In fact, we were sicker than we had ever been. Because we could breathe fine, we knew we weren’t supposed to go to the hospital. But what were we supposed to do? The standard advice — rest, fluids and fever reducers — was and is essential, but at times it felt inadequate to the severity of the illness. As we recovered, I spoke with many friends, colleagues and internet strangers going through similar ordeals. Here is some collective wisdom on how to manage noncritical cases of Covid-19. First, of course, you need to be confident that your illness can be managed at home. Most cases of Covid-19 can be. But if you develop any symptoms on this list, including trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, an inability to wake or stay awake and/or bluish lips or face, seek emergency care. Some people will have relatively mild symptoms at first and then become more seriously ill. These patients are likely to develop shortness of breath four to eight days after their first symptoms, and “that’s really where people should start paying attention,” said Dr. Pieter Cohen, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School and an internist at the Cambridge Health Alliance who was co-author of an article about the progression of Covid-19 symptoms. If the shortness of breath worsens from day to day, Dr. Cohen said, that’s a sign to call your doctor. Less commonly, patients with low oxygen levels may experience dizziness or lightheadedness instead of shortness of breath, so keep an eye out for that too. Otherwise, read on. If you’re reading this while healthy, buy basic supplies now, including a thermometer, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, and rehydration drinks like Pedialyte. A pulse oximeter can sometimes be helpful, both in flagging severe illness and in reassuring you of the opposite, my colleague Dana Goldstein says: If you feel short of breath but your oxygen level is normal, you may be able to avoid the hospital. (You should still contact your doctor.) If you’re sick and don’t have supplies, see if a friend can pick them up for you, or if a grocery store or bodega will deliver. (Tip well!) Either way, avoid contact: Whether it’s a friend or a delivery person, have the bag left outside your door, and don’t open the door until the delivery person is gone. Over-the-counter drugs may not be enough. In particular, the coughing and nausea caused by Covid-19 can be severe enough to warrant prescription medication. For my husband and me, benzonatate (for the cough) and promethazine (for the nausea) were lifesavers. Some colleagues were prescribed codeine-based cough medicine or Zofran. If you feel you might need them, ask your doctor about medications sooner rather than later. Don’t wait until you’re doubled over coughing or can’t keep anything down. If you don’t have a primary care doctor, some urgent care clinics offer virtual appointments, and some pharmacies offer prescription delivery. Dry air can exacerbate some symptoms such as coughing and chest tightness. If you have a humidifier, use it. If not, a hot shower works. Several readers reported that they felt better when they lay on their stomach. A woman in Britain whose partner was sick for several weeks told me that a particular breathing exercise helped him: You take a deep breath, hold it for 5 seconds and release. Do that 5 times, then on the 6th time on the release, cough hard. Do that cycle twice, then lie on your front and take slightly deeper breaths for 10 minutes. Try to do it a couple of times a day. In some cases, your doctor may also prescribe an albuterol inhaler to reduce your cough and ease your breathing. As soon as you get sick, start a detailed log. Every time you take your temperature — do it several times a day, at consistent times — log it. Every time you take a pill, log it. Every time you eat or drink, log it. If one symptom resolves or a new one develops, log it. As my colleague Eliza Shapiro noted in a Twitter thread worth reading in full, this creates a detailed record to take along if you end up needing medical attention. It also helps you stay on top of your care. Can I take more cough medicine yet? How long have I had this fever? Is it a little lower than it was yesterday? You won’t be able to keep these things straight while shivering in bed, but a spreadsheet can. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Having Covid-19 is intensely stressful. It’s not unusual to feel depressed or anxious, or to have panic attacks. Don’t be embarrassed to talk to your doctor about your mental health — it’s just as important as your physical health. Derek Norman, a news assistant at The Times, says that in the worst moments of his illness, when he felt short of breath and panicky, he would sit upright, focus on breathing steadily and picture a vivid memory. I’d close my eyes and picture the exact details of a scene I had once experienced, and I’d completely immerse myself in that memory. Something like sitting at an outdoor cafe in Morocco. I’d try to recall the sounds of street life and the dry desert air on my skin, or the smell of the spices, hookah and exhaust swirling in the air. Very, very specific details that I look back fondly on. I’d continue to slowly breathe through it. Tim Herrera, our Smarter Living editor, emphasized fresh air. That can be hard to come by safely when you’re contagious, but even if you live in a crowded area with no private outdoor space, it can help to open a window. It’s also OK to not be OK. You don’t have to handle this “well,” whatever that means. You just have to get through each day. So go ahead and cry, binge Netflix, do a jigsaw puzzle, reread the entire “Animorphs” series — whatever gets you through the day. Some people have mild symptoms for the first few days and then suddenly get sicker. Some have fevers that go up and down repeatedly. Some are sick for two weeks straight, then have a few symptom-free days, then relapse. Some have lingering symptoms for months. This is both maddening and very common. Give yourself as much time to rest as your job and financial situation will allow. For me and for several colleagues, that meant nearly three weeks of sick time. Since tweeting about my experience last month, I’ve received many emails from people in the “this will never end” phase. I share the same screenshot with all of them: a text I sent to a friend on April 5. “Why do I even bother giving good news when it’s only going to last a few hours?” I wrote. “I’m just so tired of this. I don’t know how to keep dealing with it.” Every day, more people will hit that wall — and every day, more people will find their way past it. They will feel alone, but they won’t be. Sarah Maslin Nir contributed reporting.Did you get a new dog during the coronavirus lockdown? Or has your long-time four-legged companion gotten used to having you home? “Dogs are highly social, which is why we get along with them so well,” said Patricia B. McConnell, certified applied animal behaviorist and author of “The Other End of the Leash: Why We Do What We Do Around Dogs.” “If all the sudden, they go from ‘everybody home all the time’ to ‘nobody home all day long,’ it can lead to some serious behavioral problems.” This can mean accidents in the house, chewing on the furniture when you are away, or worse. Want to avoid that? Here’s how to transition to a new normal, for both of you. The members of your household probably haven’t left the house for an extended period of time for what, weeks? Months? The 17 years this quarantine has felt like? So, start transitioning as cities and states reopen by leaving a little bit at a time. But not for too long. Start “unbelievably slow,” said Dr. McConnell. Leave a handful of treats on the ground and, while the dog is eating them, “everybody walks out the door,” she said. Come back in five seconds. Next time, leave for 10 seconds, then walk to the mailbox and back, then take a longer walk or a long drive. Make sure you are mimicking the routine you’ll have when you go back to work: Get your wallet and keys, leave through the door you’ll go through. This way, the dog gets used to the cues that mean you are leaving — and coming back in through the same spot. Make sure your dog is left in a safe space that it knows — and don’t lock it in a room that’s unfamiliar. That safe space might be a crate, though not all dogs like being in a crate. (My first dog, a Jack Russell terrier, loved her crate; the dog I have now, a cattle dog mix, couldn’t be bothered.) Other dogs are just fine being left to lie wherever in the house they want. The best space for your dog may not be one with a view either, said Sarah Wilson, dog trainer and author of “My Smart Puppy: Fun, Effective and Easy Puppy Training,” especially if your dog barks a lot. “When they’re screaming out the window at everyone who’s going by, their brains are flooded with all of this confusing and upsetting brain chemistry, which doesn’t go away on its own instantly,” she said. “It’s not a game for them when they’re barking hysterically out the window.” If a crate doesn’t work for that dog, it may work to use a baby gate to keep it in a room it likes, but without access to a window. If your dog has gotten used to walks every four or five hours, what’s going to happen when that’s not an easy option? Can you come home to walk the dog? Will you hire a dog walker, or take your dog to a doggie daycare? Dr. McConnell suggests you figure out how you’re going to engage your dogs’ brain if the level of physical exercise you are currently providing it is not an option. You can teach them new tricks, or try new walking routes, which engages their brains because dogs will work to analyze new smells. “Even if it’s just once or twice a week, pop your dog in the car and go somewhere different,” said Dr. McConnell. Dogs with separation anxiety may go to the bathroom in the house, or chew or rip up things that are not their toys. But don’t punish the dog when you come home, said Katherine A. Houpt, professor emeritus of behavior medicine at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, because dogs will forget what they did and by then they will “no longer associate punishment with the action.” Your dog may also get clingy and follow you around the house, pace when it thinks you’re leaving or drool. That also means the dog is experiencing separation anxiety and you need to work a little bit more to help it. If you are frustrated or feel like nothing is working, reach out for help. Call your veterinarian to make sure that nothing is physically wrong with your dog. If it is behavioral, then your veterinarian may recommend calling a dog trainer or animal behaviorist. Dr. McConnell said to look for a certified applied animal behaviorist or a certified professional dog trainer. Trainers should use positive reinforcement instead of force and coercion. Your veterinarian may also recommend anti-anxiety medication for your dog, if the anxiety persists despite making the recommended changes. You may also consider anti-anxiety medications if your dog’s behavior is causing harm even if it’s not destructive — such as if your dog’s barking is annoying your neighbors to an extreme degree.As climbing temperatures herald summer’s return, cities and states around the United States are beginning the stilted process of reopening. In many places, that means a chance to return to the beach. Texas state beaches were ordered to reopen on May 1; now state beaches in Florida, Oregon and California are also starting to reopen. On the East Coast, New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Connecticut reopened state beaches over the Memorial Day weekend, though with limits on capacity and other measures. (Cities, counties and other municipalities may have different restrictions; New York City’s 14 miles of public beaches, for example, remain closed.) For those concerned about their safety during the coronavirus pandemic, the current consensus is that socially distant outdoor activities are some of the safer ways to re-engage with the world. “Outdoor settings, like beaches, are less likely to spread the virus than indoor settings,” said Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security. Professor Linsey Marr, an engineering professor at Virginia Tech who specializes in the airborne transmission of infectious diseases, agrees that a beach visit should be fine — as long as you are able to maintain social distancing. “The good news is that the virus dies off relatively quickly in direct sunlight,” she said. “There’s often some wind at the beach, which really helps disperse the virus particles in the air.” But no activity is going to be completely risk-free. “The steps you take are not going to be one-size-fits-all; it depends on your individual risk tolerance,” said Dr. Adalja. Here are five things to keep in mind when planning a beach day. Getting there Like most things in the time of Covid-19, rules governing beach access, use and safety change frequently and likely differ depending on your state, city and even your beach. “We’re in a very dynamic place right now in terms of beach access,” said Dr. Chad Nelsen, chief executive officer of Surfrider Foundation, a nonprofit organization that has been compiling resources and providing recommendations regarding water quality and beach safety with regards to Covid-19. The group also works with coastal communities on opening beaches safely. Start by learning the regulations of your area and your beach by accessing government websites for your city or county. And consider how far along your local area is in terms of reopening. “If your community is still in active mitigation mode, plan on being extra cautious,” said Kristine Stratton, president and chief executive officer of the National Recreation and Park Association, a nonprofit organization that recently published guidelines for phased re-openings of public spaces, including beaches. You should expect new rules this season. Picnicking might be allowed, or beach access may be for recreation only. Masks might be required and entries may be timed. Parking lots, public bathrooms and concession stands may or may not be open, or offer only limited access. Other resources to tap include websites for your local parks and recreation or public health department, the local beach manager or your local lifeguard department. The varied regulations are because of the diversity of beaches across the United States and the likelihood of crowds. “Local context matters,” Dr. Nelsen said. “The U.S. coastline is hugely varied in terms of its geography and population. You could go up to Oregon, or Northern California, and be at a beach all day alone. Urban beaches in Southern California or Miami are a different story.” Densely crowded beaches make maintaining six feet of distance more difficult, and increase the likelihood of more sustained exposure to the virus. You may need to navigate a crowded parking lot, or take a narrow path or stairway to access the sand. “Make an informed judgment: ‘Does it seem like the beach is on the busy side?’” Ms. Stratton said. “If you’re pulling up to a beach and the parking lot is full, our recommendation is that you find a less-populated spot.” Professor Marr suggests vetting beaches beforehand via a webcam, if possible, to assess the crowd. Safety at the shore Keeping your hands clean, avoiding touching your face and, of course, maintaining at least six feet of social distance are as paramount at the beach as they are anywhere else. “If it’s a crowded beach with people playing games, or parties mixing with other parties, there is always a risk of transmission,” said Dr. Adalja. “There will be people who think that risk is acceptable, others who don’t, especially at at-risk populations.” Surfrider’s current recommendations encourage beachgoers to “keep it moving.” The N.R.P.A. similarly recommends that, in these early days of reopening, it’s safer to plan on shorter, recreation-driven visits. “If you’re out swimming or paddling, walking or running, it’s going to be easier to avoid the packed towel-to-towel beach crowd,” Dr. Nelsen said. A recreation-only policy is currently in place in Los Angeles County; similar policies tend to prohibit beachgoers from bringing chairs, umbrellas, coolers, barbecues and other gear (again, check on the latest status at your local beach before going). Dr. Adalja agrees that being on the move is, over all, a safer proposition: “If people are running by each other, the virus can’t magically transport from one person to another,” he said, noting that the highest risk for exposure comes from spending anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes within six feet of another person. When you are in and near the water, there may be fewer lifeguards than usual, or none at all. “Many of our parks and rec agencies are already affecting budget cuts, there’s a real risk of not being able to staff beaches with required lifeguards,” Ms. Stratton said. “There may be continued beach closings, both out of concerns for public health, and because of limitations of staffing, recruiting and training.” Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. When lifeguards are present, keep in mind that you are not only exercising caution for your sake, but for theirs, too — fewer lifesaving situations means less exposure for them. “We’re trying to keep the lifeguards up in the stands as much as possible, and in a safe, socially distant place,” said Tom Gill, vice president of the United States Lifesaving Association. “The less they have to interact with the public, especially in an emergency situation, the safer everyone’s going to be.” While much about transmissibility of the coronavirus remains unclear, waterborne transmission appears to be less likely. As for other surfaces you might encounter at the beach, such as rental beach chairs and kayaks, or even beach toys, Ms. Stratton urges caution in all regards. “We strongly discourage sharing equipment outside of your household — throwing a Frisbee, or tossing a ball around,” she said. “Before you rent equipment, ask the question: was this item cleaned and disinfected in between uses? If not, the recommendation would be to not use equipment.” Your own chairs should not be an immediate risk factor — assuming six feet of social distancing can be maintained — as there is no evidence pointing to easy transmission in the sand. To be safe, clean your beach equipment with household disinfectants when you return home. And take your garbage home too. Single-use plastics have been on the rise, and beaches are taking the hit — after some in Florida reopened, nearly 12,000 pounds of trash were left behind according to news reports. But pandemics don’t render environmental concerns irrelevant. If there is no trash collection or it appears to be overwhelmed, take your trash home with you to dispose of accordingly. “Our municipalities are going to be incredibly challenged from a budget perspective,” Ms. Stratton said. “Rather than leave trash in receptacles that are overflowing, do your part and carry it out.” Public restrooms are a tough topic these days. They have high-touch, frequently shared surfaces, and some reports also cite a possibility of transmission via an aerosolized “toilet plume.” Recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for public restrooms include guidelines for regular cleaning and disinfection, operational toilets and well-stocked handwashing supplies. But beachgoers should check out facilities when they first arrive, to see if restrooms are clean and can allow for social distancing. “We, of course, are recommending that municipalities and parks and recreation maintain facilities, but beachgoers should not assume that that’s the case,” Ms. Stratton of the N.R.P.A. said. It’s always wise to bring hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes, wear a mask, close the lid of the toilet when you flush, if possible, and thoroughly wash your hands. The safest course: Keep your beach visit short enough that using public restrooms won’t be necessary — use the bathroom, and change into your swimsuit, before you leave home. Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.Every morning, Isaac Calpito sets the stage in the East Hampton living room of his friend Stephanie DiTullio. Mr. Calpito, 39, is dressed, often, in sparkling yoga tights and a tank top that show his muscles to good advantage. His main prop is an iPhone. At 11 a.m. sharp, accompanied by a new playlist chosen by Ms. DiTullio (a.k.a D.J. Steph), he turns on Instagram Live and welcomes thousands of housebound fitness buffs and at least one Real Housewife, all of whom tune in to take part in (or at least watch) Mr. Calpito’s Torch’d workout. For 45 minutes, the music pumps as he cycles through push-ups and squats, giving cheeky tough-love directions. At a time when it’s difficult to introduce a new product or a business, Torch’d has become, rather organically, the breakthrough workout of the stay-at-home era. Mr. Calpito has been leading the classes virtually since March 17. Last week, about 2,500 people tuned in every day. The video of each class remains accessible on Instagram for 24 hours, and he said an additional 17,500 people typically tune in during that time. (On three occasions, Mr. Calpito has broadcast on a split screen that showed the actress Vanessa Hudgens and Lisa Rinna, a star of “The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills,” doing their Torch’d workout. Each of those classes attracted about 8,000 live viewers. The last time Mr. Calpito featured Ms. Hudgens, more than 250,000 people watched during the 24-hour period.) The class is free, but Mr. Calpito asks that people taking it consider making a donation to No Kid Hungry, a charity that helps provide meals to children in need. So far, he has raised more than $200,000. After getting Torch’d, you're likely to wake up sore the next day. But Mr. Calpito’s constant monologue keeps exercisers coming back. “A lot of you are so preoccupied with whether to point or flex your toes,” he said during one session earlier this month. “Just move your damn leg, OK? Like, you’re not auditioning for American Ballet Theater. Those days are gone. Just torch that” rear end, he said. Alas, it’s difficult to quote Mr. Calpito’s mid-class soliloquy without running into a word that rhymes with “sass.” “This one’s for you, Taylor, and every boy who ever broke my heart,” he said recently, while doing tush-toning leg circles as a Taylor Swift song played. He cursed his exes, then continued his instruction: “Now carve out that real estate, baby!” There will also be the occasional wry, off-topic cultural observation (“When did all the gays get married? It’s so confusing to me”). The trainer coos over his poodle, named Davis after Bette, who prances into the frame from time to time, often wearing a red Gucci cardigan. “He’s a bit fancy. I try to keep him humble and remind him that his father grew up on food stamps,” said Mr. Calpito, who was raised by a family of humble means in Waimānalo, Hawaii, a small town on the island of Oahu. Davis preens as Mr. Calpito keeps his own legs suspended an inch off the ground for an excruciating amount of time and tells you that you should be doing the same. This is unlikely but the chaos keeps the eye on the screen and the cruncher or jumping-jacker from quitting altogether. Then there are the emojis and comments from bold-faced Instagram handles, cascading down the screen as Mr. Calpito calls out names. “Hey Vanessa Hudgens!” “What’s up, Michael Rapaport?” “Hey Christy Turlington!” “Hey Jessica Chastain, how’s your grandma?”(It’s a mystery how the constantly mentioned Lizzie Tisch is able to text so much while she’s purportedly in plank position.) Thus he manages to approximate the feel of sweating in a packed room alongside friends and strangers, some of whom might be rich and famous. Mr. Calpito’s success has been a long time coming, according to his friends and fans. “Isaac is one of the most entertaining people you will ever meet,” said Kelly Ripa, who has known him for 18 years and who last month gave him the “Live with Kelly and Ryan” bump when she told viewers that she’s been taking his Torch’d classes on Instagram. “I just think he’s tapped into the moment,” Ms. Ripa said in an interview. “He’s put the fun into working out and the community back into the lives of people. He’s made a great big alienated, desolate world feel very small, and all you need is your phone.” Ms. Rinna, so much a regular that Mr. Calpito has named an on-your-side-Rockette-leg-kick “the Rinna,” says she plans her mornings around Torch’d. “It gives me something to look forward to,” she said, adding that after 10 weeks, her derrière has never looked better. “I don’t like to work out by myself, I’m a class girl and at the end, I feel like I’ve just been to a boutique fitness class.” As a boy who loved dance and theater, Mr. Calpito was bullied, but kept at it, encouraged by his grandmother and mother. In 1998, just after graduating from high school, he booked a one-way flight for New York. He slept on the floors of friends’ dorm rooms, hit audition after audition and got his first big gig within six months, as part of the touring cast for “Mamma Mia.” In 2003, he joined the ensemble of the Broadway production. “Six years of eight shows a week,” he said. “It’s a tight-knit family on Broadway. I learned discipline, compassion and the importance of community.” He next was cast in the 2009 Broadway revival of “West Side Story.” The production was directed by Arthur Laurents, who wrote the book for the original musical back in the 1950s. “Arthur became a very important mentor for me,” Mr. Calpito said. “He kept me on track for bigger goals. He was a father figure.” It was during the production that Mr. Calpito created a floor-exercise circuit to give himself a full-body workout when he had no time to go to the gym. “I created this flow and this method that I knew would work for me, and I did it alone every day on the stage of the Palace Theater with my boom box with Madonna playing before performances,” he said. “Before long, other castmates started doing it with me.” After the show closed in 2011, Mr. Calpito moved to Los Angeles to work as a choreographer for pop stars like Ariana Grande and a fitness trainer for celebrities including Faye Dunaway. In 2015 he began working as a SoulCycle instructor in New York. He left the company in 2019 and has focused on private sessions and Torch’d since, leading classes at Art Basel. In mid-March, Ms. DiTullio contacted him and suggested he pack up his two dogs (the other has since died of old age) and shelter with her. “Days into the quar, I was wondering how I was going to connect with my clients so I offered the Torch’d workout as something as a one-off,” Mr. Calpito said. A few hundred people from all over the world tuned in. “It surpassed any of my expectations,” he said. So he kept going. Caryn Wall, 54 and sheltering at home in Virginia Beach with her husband and two teenage children, started doing Torch’d after hearing Ms. Ripa talk about it on TV. “Isaac’s doing every single move with you, he’s sweating just like you are, he has wonderful energy and the whole time you hear him calling names like Lisa Rinna and Aerin Lauder,” said Ms. Wall. “You feel like you’re in the class with them.” Mr. Calpito is working on an app that will offer his workouts, but through the summer he will continue to broadcast to Ms. Wall, Ms. Chastain, “my best friend’s Aunt Jan who lives in Jersey” and all the rest. “So many people have committed to coming to Torch’d every day,” he said. “And I am committed to them.”When you finally return to work after the lockdown, coronavirus might not be the only illness you need to worry about contracting at the office. Office buildings once filled with employees emptied out in many cities and states as shelter-in-place orders were issued. These structures, normally in constant use, have been closed off and shut down, and health risks might be accumulating in unseen ways. “The buildings aren’t designed to be left alone for months,” said Andrew Whelton, an associate professor of civil, environmental and ecological engineering at Purdue University. Dr. Whelton, other researchers and public health authorities have issued warnings about the plumbing in these buildings, where water may have gone stagnant in the pipes or even in individual taps and toilets. As lockdowns are lifted, bacteria that build up internally may cause health problems for returning workers if the problem is not properly addressed by facilities managers. Employees and guests at hotels, gyms and other kinds of buildings may also be at risk. The biggest worry is Legionella pneumophila. The bacteria can cause Legionnaires’ disease, a respiratory condition. It leads to death in about one in 10 cases, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine estimates that over 52,000 Americans suffer from the disease each year. A single small outbreak can sicken many people. During the water crisis that started in Flint, Mich., in 2014 after the city changed its water source and officials failed to inform the public of water quality problems, many people became sick. The crisis was linked to the deaths of 12 people from Legionnaires’ disease. After an outbreak at the North Carolina Mountain State Fair last September, 135 people contracted the disease and four died, according to the state’s department of health and human services. Investigators blamed a hot tub exhibit that sent Legionella through the air and was inhaled by passers-by. Most worrying, Legionnaires’ disease tends to affect people with compromised immune systems. “Covid patients and survivors could be more vulnerable to this, so when they go back to work we might be concerned about another infection,” said Caitlin Proctor, a postdoctoral fellow at Purdue who, along with Dr. Whelton conducted a study that has been accepted for publication in the journal AWWA Water Science examining risks from water stagnation during the coronavirus lockdown. Once forming in a building’s plumbing, Legionella can be dispersed through the air when toilets are flushed. Even turning on taps, as employees wash their hands to limit the spread of the coronavirus, can send water droplets into the air that carry Legionella. Typically, facilities managers reduce the risk of Legionella and other bacteria by pouring small amounts of disinfectant into a building’s water systems. But when the water is left stagnant for too long, the disinfectant disappears. “Even just after a weekend, disinfectant can be gone in some buildings and the water is vulnerable to contamination,” Dr. Whelton said. Facilities staff can also flush out old water and bring in a new and fresh supply. Or they can send a high dose of disinfectant through the building and raise temperatures to kill the microbes. Shutdowns in the U.S. began in mid-March, meaning some buildings have now been closed for two months. And the researchers say that the consequences of long-term water stagnation are relatively unknown. “We haven’t really done studies on monthslong stagnation,” said Dr. Proctor. “The ecological system may change. So while we’re looking at these organisms, maybe other organisms pop up.” William Rudin, C.E.O. and co-chairman of Rudin Management Company which manages 16 commercial office buildings in New York, said his staff is being careful and cautious in their approach to reopening. “Our engineers go through the building testing systems all the time,” he said. “That’s standard procedure.” [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] One problem for some property managers may be inconsistent and incomplete guidance from regulators and health authorities. Dr. Proctor and Dr. Whelton’s study assessed 21 sets of guidelines developed around the world since the pandemic began, including the C.D.C.’s and 11 from states and counties. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “Not all of the guidelines are created equal,” said Dr. Proctor. “The original C.D.C. guidelines only covered certain systems.” Because the effects of long-term water stagnation are so little understood, most of the guidelines are based on preventive measures and may not directly address reopening after long-term shutdowns. “They all go different ways,” said Michèle Prévost, a co-author of the study and the industrial chair of drinking water on the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. “It’s not ill-intended, there’s not that much evidence to guide our choices.” Unfortunately many of the public health officials who would normally be tackling these issues and getting information out are currently focused on responding to the spread of the coronavirus. “Health officials are overstretched and have conflicting information,” said David Dyjack, executive director of the National Environmental Health Association. “Health officials simply cannot keep up. Public health is being asked to do things it’s never had to do before.” Even if only a small portion of buildings have problems, with so many reopening at once, the researchers fear there will be more outbreaks than usual. “Not every building will have issues but based on what we know, enough of them probably will,” Dr. Proctor said.There is a lot going on right now, to say the least — a global pandemic, an economic recession, millions of people without jobs, riots over police murdering a black man in Minnesota. And yet, the president is in a tizzy over a label Twitter put on two of his tweets. President Donald Trump, who has spent recent days online pushing a conspiracy theory about a former staffer of a television host he doesn’t like, has spun into a rage after Twitter for the first time added a fact-check label to two of his tweets that shared misleading information.  In the tweets in question, which Trump posted on Tuesday, he claimed without evidence that there is “no way” that mail-in ballots “will be anything less than substantially fraudulent,” and particularly pinpointed California’s vote-by-mail plans. Twitter added a label to Trump’s tweets, encouraging users to “get the facts” about mail-in ballots and pointing them to more information. (Recode’s Shirin Ghaffary has the full breakdown on the fact-check drama.) And then, all hell broke loose. The president accused Twitter of interfering in the 2020 presidential election and of stifling free speech. He’s continued to rail against the company since and is now threatening to “strongly regulate” or close down social media companies. He signed an executive order on Thursday that will attempt to allow regulators to go after Facebook, Google, and Twitter for how they handle content posted on their platforms. He and other Republicans are specifically targeting Section 230, a part of the 1996 Communications Decency Act that acts as a shield and a sword for internet platforms. They’re generally not liable for the content posted on their platforms (the shield), and they can police their platforms however they like (the sword). Now Mark Zuckerberg is weighing in. So is Sen. Josh Hawley. And a bunch of other people. Here’s the thing: Republicans have been complaining about supposed social media bias against conservatives for a long time. Last year, Trump hosted a sham social media summit at the White House during which he declined to invite the big social media companies. And Hawley — sometimes seriously, sometimes not — has had an eye on taking on Big Tech for quite some time. There are legitimate questions to explore about the power and scope of tech giants, and there are debates to have about Section 230, too. Democrats have raised concerns about it as well. But is now really the time, given, you know, everything? On Wednesday evening, the official coronavirus death count in the United States surpassed 100,000 people. And yet on Wednesday and Thursday, Trump fired off multiple tweets about his feud with Twitter and his upcoming executive order before acknowledging the deaths. When asked about the timing of Trump’s tweets at a press conference on Thursday afternoon, White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany said the president had lowered flags to half-staff the day before. It appears as though the president’s attention right now is trained very much on Twitter, a label put on a tweet, and whether or not he can lie on social media with absolute impunity, which he’s done freely until Twitter’s action this week. It’s also important to note that Twitter’s move was a small one. It didn’t take down his tweets. It didn’t take down his account. And it’s hard to imagine Twitter ever would make such a move, since its policies specifically grant exceptions to posts from world leaders, which are considered “newsworthy.”  Trump lies a lot, so you can see why, for him, it would be annoying that a platform might start to flag when he does it — especially months ahead of an election. This fits into a clearly established narrative and campaign plan he’s pursued for a while to distract the press and the public from more urgent issues, and to create a political boogeyman in tech companies. And the president seeks to politicize everything, including a public health emergency, which will ultimately impact how social media companies approach the matter.  But of all the things for him to be focusing on right now, it’s hard to justify why a Twitter fact-check would be the top priority. As Vox’s German Lopez has laid out, the Trump administration wasted weeks and even months of valuable time at the onset of the coronavirus crisis, as it spread abroad and to the US. It lagged behind other countries in terms of testing, contact tracing, and health care capacity in vital moments. And the delays, not only at the federal level but across the country, led to an estimated 36,000 more lives lost than if the government had acted sooner, according to Columbia University. The president, staying true to form, has often congratulated himself for his coronavirus response. Earlier this week, he estimated that if he hadn’t “done his job well,” more than a million people would have died. And for any shortcomings, he tends to blame others — China, the states, etc. While the situation has improved modestly in the US, the coronavirus crisis is not over. Scientists are still searching for treatments and vaccines, and it’s unclear whether reopenings will bring about a resurgence in the disease or if we’ll see cases start to crop up again in the fall. And there is also the economic aspect of the crisis: Millions of people have lost their jobs; businesses have been shuttered, some permanently; and there’s an enormous amount of uncertainty about what’s ahead. It’s been difficult to parse the White House’s logic on what counts as urgent in all of this and what does not. Twitter label? Code red. State economies going under? Their own fault, especially if they’re blue states. Another stimulus? Eh, maybe let’s wait and see. Trump seems eager to take the victory lap on coronavirus, even though testing is only just now getting up to speed and a vaccine is months and even years away. The Defense Department on Thursday announced it has signed a contract to increase domestic production of N-95 ventilator filters and respirators — but not until August. There’s no way to get into the president’s head and clearly identify his motivations on this, but it’s fair to make some informed judgments, given his patterns of action and personality. Sure, he’s probably bothered by Twitter. He also knows this is a way to distract from more serious issues and is well aware this is a way to gin up his base and generate anger to help propel his campaign forward. This is an easy button to push for Trump, and one he’s pushed before — there was a similar dustup over a social media bias draft out of the White House in August 2019.  But this isn’t just a distraction for the media or for the public — it’s also a distraction for Trump. And the president has already admitted that earlier distractions hindered his coronavirus response. In March, he said that he was “probably” sidetracked by impeachment earlier this year as the virus spread. Now worried about the Twitter fact-check, the president is sidetracked again. It’s a vital moment for the country, and he’s focusing his right to lie on one specific online platform. After all, as Mark Zuckerberg’s made clear, Facebook has no problem with it. Trump wants to win reelection in November, and that’s his focus right now. Bashing Twitter is a means to that end. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Pennsylvania state Rep. Brian Sims, a Democrat, posted an explosive Twitter thread Wednesday evening warning that he may have been exposed to the coronavirus by his Republican colleagues — and that those colleagues kept him in the dark. RESIGN: Today we learned that House Speaker @MikeTurzai has known that Republican Members have either tested positive, or been quarantined, and withheld this information from Democrats including those of us who serve on the committees with those members! Shortly before Sims’s tweets, a Republican representative, Andrew Lewis, released a statement admitting that he “was tested for COVID-19 and on Wednesday, May 20, I was notified that my test came back positive.” Lewis said that he self-isolated, and that he “contacted the House of Representatives, and our caucus Human Resources department.” Lewis also claims that he worked to determine “exactly who I may have been in contact with, and who I may have possibly exposed to the virus.” The Pennsylvania House of Representatives conducted in-person sessions while Democrats say they were unaware of Lewis’s diagnosis. In this picture, one state rep was tested positive and the other is in self quarantine. I’m in the middle with my eyes “closed” or kept in the dark. The Democratic caucus should have been notified. https://t.co/dV8dOVKJXZ pic.twitter.com/cOROHa1Sl8 And yet, while Lewis tested positive on May 20, Democrats say they did not learn that one of their colleagues may have exposed them to the virus until Wednesday, May 27. According to Rep. Dan Frankel, the top Democrat on the House Health Committee, members of the Democratic caucus learned on Wednesday “that four members of the Republican Caucus have been in self quarantine after one of those four tested positive for COVID-19 a week ago.” One of those four members, Republican Rep. Russ Diamond, posted a lengthy statement on Facebook Wednesday evening attacking the very idea that public health officials should engage in contact tracing to determine who may have been exposed to the virus. Diamond says he made the decision to self-isolate “because I wanted to provide an example of how responsible adults can conduct their lives without the need for heavy-handed government mandates,” before claiming the real problem is that someone might erroneously be advised to quarantine: There’s a lot to object to about contact tracing of this sort. I was offered no proof the person I was in “contact” with had already contracted, and was an asymptomatic carrier, of COVID-19 on May 14. And what if this notice had been sent to me in error? I happen to know someone else who received a similar notice in error. That person was fortunate enough to be able to clarify and get the record corrected and avoid self-quarantine. However, if a government agency with enforcement authority would be sending out these notices, would one be able to obtain such a correction? I highly doubt it. As the Washington Post notes, Diamond is a “vocal opponent of wearing masks.” On the same day that Diamond began his self-quarantine, he spoke before a Pennsylvania House committee without wearing a mask. Yet despite his behavior, Diamond is right about one thing. Contact tracing is not a perfect system. Contact tracers are a kind of public health detective; they interview people diagnosed with the virus and try to uncover who they may have exposed to the disease. But respiratory viruses such as the novel coronavirus are difficult to track because many people infected with the virus won’t remember everyone they may have been in contact with, and they might not even be aware of individuals that could have entered a room shortly after the infected person left. That is why Republicans should have notified their Democratic counterparts of Lewis’s infection. Even if Lewis and his Republican colleagues did make every reasonable effort to uncover who Lewis might have exposed to the virus, such efforts are not 100 percent reliable. And if Lewis did unknowingly infect someone before he went into isolation, that person could also spread the disease throughout the state legislature and beyond. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As the rate of new coronavirus cases and deaths in the US slows down, many states and cities are encouraging businesses to open again, easing the lockdowns that have been in place since March. But some of those places might be doing so prematurely, according to an important metric that public health experts say signals when a place has tested enough, and in the right way: the test-positivity rate.  The test-positivity rate is the percentage of Covid-19 tests that come back positive relative to the total number of tests performed. Public health experts say it can be understood as a measure of how well a place has tested its population and to what degree it has identified a significant number of asymptomatic cases. A place with a high test-positivity rate has most likely focused its testing diagnostically, prioritizing the testing of people showing up to hospitals with severe symptoms. That’s what happened in the first several weeks of the coronavirus outbreak in the US, because of testing shortages and CDC guidelines advising health care workers to focus on testing the symptomatic.  As of May 25, the US’s cumulative test-positivity rate was at 11 percent, one percentage point higher than the 10 percent adequate-testing benchmark the World Health Organization proposed in March. That’s the lowest it has ever been, and it’s a sign that the US is ramping up testing. (This video uses cumulative data as of May 16, which had the US at 13 percent.) But the fact that it remains high is a sign of past shortcomings.  Contrast that with South Korea, which as of May 25 had a cumulative test-positivity rate of only 1 percent. That low rate is a sign that the country ramped up testing early, and that it tested not only the severely symptomatic but those who had mild symptoms or no symptoms at all: people found through contact tracing and through random testing efforts. The US’s test-positivity rate as a whole also obscures a significant degree of variation among the testing efforts of different US states. (This video uses May 6 data from the Harvard Global Health Institute, and many states have improved their testing rates since then.) One big disclaimer for drawing conclusions from testing data in the US is that there is evidence that the CDC-reported testing numbers may be artificially inflated due to mixing data from diagnostic (who is sick right now) and serology (who has coronavirus antibodies) tests. But because the reported testing numbers are almost certainly not lower than the actual numbers, we can still use the test-positivity rate to infer that the US has a long way to go before it has tested enough of the right people to be able to contain its outbreak effectively. You can find this video and all of Vox’s videos on YouTube. And if you’re interested in supporting our video journalism, you can become a member of the Vox Video Lab on YouTube. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Many parents have one thing on their minds: Will schools be open in the fall? States and cities across the country are eager to get restaurants and salons reopened this month, but they’re equivocal as to whether full-time public education will be ready to resume in September. That’s a shame. The long-term prospects for the United States are more compromised by keeping children out of school for an extended period than they are by making people continue to delay getting their hair and nails done professionally. There are no zero-risk activities people can undertake during this pandemic, no public health measures that don’t come with trade-offs. And when you look at the budgetary pressures that state and local officials are facing, the decision to prioritize small business over education is an understandable reaction. They need tax revenue. But that simply reflects misguided national policy priorities. The federal government has the financial resources to take care of small-business owners’ very real economic problems. But checks from Uncle Sam can’t teach first-graders the reading fundamentals that will be the bedrock for the rest of their scholarly careers. Distance learning can work well for older kids, but it’s basically a nonstarter for little ones. And while parents working from home can try to keep children on track, the very kids who need school the most — particularly low-income kids and English-language learners — are the least likely to have adults around who can help them. Preventing new highly lethal coronavirus outbreaks should be priority No. 1. But getting schools up and running again in the fall should be a strong No. 2.  A wide range of education policy experts I’ve consulted with agree that prolonged school closures are bad for kids, especially younger and lower-income students. That consensus includes researchers on the left and right, as well as fans and foes of “education reform.” Some of the concern is based on the belief that summer vacation is a major driver of achievement gaps between low-income and affluent kids. But even skeptics of summer learning loss, like Paul von Hippel, tell me they’re worried about Covid-related school closures. His view is that summer vacation is overhyped as an issue, since even rich kids’ “enriching” activities are, in practice, not that academically oriented. He notes that we do have evidence from other kinds of school-year disruptions that point to similar problems in educational attainment: A two-month teachers strike in New York in 1968 left students two months behind where prior cohorts had been when they returned to school. In 1990, French schools in Belgium closed for a strike while the Flemish-speaking ones did not. Compared with Belgian kids who stayed in school during the strike, French speakers were more likely to repeat a grade and made less progress into higher education later in life. Test scores suffered when Hurricane Katrina closed schools in and around New Orleans. Serving as dual-hatted homeschoolers and workers is extremely challenging for the parents (evidence suggests that moms are bearing the brunt of the responsibility) who’ve been pressed into doing so. But by and large, college-educated professionals with white-collar jobs that can be done remotely are going to be in a better position to make sure their kids don’t fall too far behind. The real problems arise when the parents themselves don’t have the skills to teach their kids or have to go to work, or both. To the extent that public health absolutely requires school closures, we as a society need to make the best of it. But the trade-off here is extremely sharp. And the pressure to rely on school closures as a policy tool fundamentally represents bad policy decisions at the federal level rather than a rational calculus. Several local government officials I’ve spoken to are aware that they are moving forward on a bad policy trajectory but insist, with some good reason, that they fundamentally have no choice. The basic problem is that state and local governments are being starved for tax revenue by business closures. From a budgetary perspective, a restaurant or hair salon is a source of revenue. Reopening more businesses sooner means smaller shortfalls and fewer furloughs of cops and librarians. Schools, by contrast, are a cost center. Paying teachers to do remote learning is cheaper than operating actual school buildings — and much cheaper than trying to operate schools with enhanced sanitizing protocols. But this is a policy choice made at the federal level. Current interest rates are extremely low — in inflation-adjusted terms, they’re negative — which means Congress can basically extend zero-interest long-term loans to any kind of remotely creditworthy entity. Adam Ozimek and John Lettieri have developed a detailed proposal to do this for small businesses, calling broadly for interest-free 20-year loans to any company with fewer than 500 employees that has experienced a revenue loss of 25 percent or more. If implemented, the idea would be a huge improvement over the current status quo for business owners, as well as make a more gradual approach to “reopening” personally and economically viable. Conversely, while a low-interest loan isn’t going to teach a kid to read, Congress could — and should — fill state and local coffers so they’re able to ride out a sharp downturn in sales tax revenue without curtailing public services. That would allow local governments to make responsible decisions about both public health and education, instead of rushing willy-nilly into a potential fall disaster. The problem, obviously, is that schools are moderately difficult to operate in a fully hygienic way. Indeed, little kids in school and child care settings are notorious cesspools of ordinary colds and flus, so the concern that they’d be a huge vector for coronavirus spreading is completely understandable. But this is exactly what makes the deprioritization of reopening schools so dangerous. If infection rates are very low three months from now, school should be able to mostly proceed as usual. You’d need extra attention to sanitation, kids wearing masks, and plenty of surveillance testing so that you could shut down a school quickly when a positive case emerges to minimize the extent of intra-school spread. If you start the school year with few sick people in the community, shutdowns should be relatively rare. But if we settle for stagnating caseloads as the price to pay for saving small businesses in America instead of making a real push for suppression this summer, any effort to bring kids back to school in the fall is likely to end in failure. That risks not just compromising another semester of learning, but also sparking big “second-wave outbreaks,” especially as colder weather makes it harder for people to do things in safer outdoor settings. Decisions are being made right now by state and local officials, some of whom understand the risks and others who are excessively reckless. But fundamentally, all of them are making decisions that are shaped by the same budgetary realities that only Washington can solve. As long as the president is uninterested in solving them, we’ll be stuck hurtling toward an educational policy disaster. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.At the end of No Country for Old Men, hitman Anton Chigurh arrives to murder Carla Jean, the wife of his dead nemesis. He offers her one chance to live: He’ll flip a coin, and if she guesses right, he’ll spare her life.  “Call it,” he says. She refuses.  “Call it,” he says again. “The coin don’t have no say,” she replies. “It’s just you.” Which brings me to the House Democrats. The House Democrats’ $3 trillion HEROES Act has much of what the economy needs. A trillion dollars in aid to state and local governments. Another round of stimulus checks. An expanded SNAP benefit. An extension of expanded unemployment benefits through January 31. But conspicuously absent is the policy that would do the most to guarantee — or at least support — ongoing recovery: automatic stabilizers.  The idea is simple, and backed by an array of economists. We’re in a depression. The support people need should be tied to the economic conditions they face, not arbitrary expiration dates.  There are various proposals for how to do it. Rep. Don Beyer’s (D-VA) Worker Relief and Security Act is a good place to start. It groups states into tiers based on their unemployment rates, and ties both extensions and expansions of unemployment insurance to those tiers. The support doesn’t end until the economic emergency ends.  “Peter Drucker wrote years ago that the best leaders make the fewest decisions,” Beyer told me, referencing the famed business author. “Let’s make the decision now and let things play out.” In the runup to the HEROES Act, House Democrats seemed united around automatic stabilizers. The progressives supported them. But the moderates did, too.  “We’ve been pushing it,” says Rep. Derek Kilmer (D-WA), chair of the New Democrat Coalition, which is both the House Democrats’ largest internal caucus and the one that represents most of its moderates. “We’ve been arguing we should look past the upfront cost. These investments will be made eventually. Let’s get it right the first time, give people certainty, and avoid brinksmanship.” Surveys showed the idea was popular. Polling by Data for Progress from May found that 73 percent of all voters — including 69 percent of Republicans — would support “a policy that would increase government spending on unemployment benefits whenever the average unemployment rate increases above 5 percent.” So what happened?  At a May 14 press conference, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi laid it out. “I’m a big supporter of having stabilizers in the bill,” she said. She blamed their absence on the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), which estimates the costs of legislation, because under CBO’s rules, the likely cost of the stabilizers “counts in the bill today.” What Pelosi is saying happened is this: House Democrats sent CBO a version of the bill that included automatic stabilizers. CBO estimated how high unemployment would be over the next few years to project how much the automatic stabilizers would cost. I’m told that for the unemployment insurance, CBO’s estimate was in the $1-2 trillion range. When Pelosi saw the price tag, she decided the sticker shock could kill the bill. So she cut the stabilizers. “If we put every good idea people wanted in the bill, it would be an $8 trillion bill,” a senior House Democratic staffer told me. $3 trillion was simply the biggest bill Pelosi thought could pass. “It’s called political reality,” the staffer said, with some exasperation. I’m not in a position to argue with Pelosi over how big a bill House Democrats will or will not support. She knows them better than I do. But this is a terrible indictment of House Democrats. They are choosing, in effect, to spend more, and permit far more economic suffering, so they don’t have to look at the entire price tag at once.  This is fiscal irresponsibility masquerading as fiscal responsibility.  We’re used to policy debates over how much the federal government should spend. But that’s not the issue here.  “We couldn’t do [stabilizers], but I do think that everybody should know that the actions taken by Congress are predicated on the needs of the American people,” Pelosi said in that same press conference. “And should there be reason later to do that, we will be there.” Pelosi, in other words, is saying that House Democrats are committed to providing as much economic support as the country needs, for as long as it needs it. If that’s true, then stabilizers don’t increase the actual amount the federal government will spend. After all, if the economy recovers rapidly, and the money doesn’t need to be spent, the automatic stabilizers cut the spending automatically.  House Democrats are, to paraphrase the old spiritual teaching, mistaking the finger for the moon. The price tag of the bill isn’t what should scare them. The massive economic suffering that price tag reflects is what should scare them. And what it should scare them into doing is insisting on automatic stabilizers.  “CBO’s initial estimate shows just how deep an economic hole the country will be climbing out of,” says Oregon Sen. Ron Wyden, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee. “The score wouldn’t be that high if there wasn’t an unprecedented need.” Even the most committed budget hawks think it’s shortsighted for Democrats to worry about the price tag rather than the actual economic needs. “I don’t think people should be dissuaded by the cost if it is just capturing the costs that would otherwise be recognized over time,” says Maya MacGuineas, president of the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget.  Automatic stabilizers are, if anything, cheaper than the alternative. They ensure the money is spent as soon as it’s needed. “The faster you act, the more effective the relief will be at fighting the recession,” says Claudia Sahm, the director of macroeconomic policy at the Washington Center for Equitable Growth.  There is an alternative to automatic stabilizers. We saw it in 2009 and 2010. It’s brinksmanship and sabotage. The political economy of this moment is distinct. Republicans control the White House and the Senate. Though they are ideologically and temperamentally opposed to the kinds of economic support Democrats are seeking, President Trump’s reelection, and McConnell’s Senate majority, depend upon its passage.  That means Democrats have leverage. But if they win in November, that leverage evaporates. Even if Democrats exceed expectations in the polls, they’ll still only control a narrow majority in the Senate — well short of the 60 votes they’d need to get anything big done.  “If we don’t get these triggers now, Republicans will fight us every single day when we try to get a fair shake for workers when we win in November,” says Wyden. “And then they will say it’s the Democrats’ fault.” This is, as Wyden says, a movie we have seen before. In 2009, facing the Great Recession, Democrats passed a too-small stimulus, believing they could come back for more if they needed it. They were wrong. The recession was longer and nastier than necessary because Republicans, freed from the responsibilities of governance, fought tooth and nail against further stimulus. The result was economic pain that Republicans weaponized into midterm gains in 2010. “A lot of newer members aren’t really familiar with a lot of the Republican economic sabotage we’ve seen,” Wyden says with a sigh. If Democrats win the White House and the Senate in November, but they don’t lock in automatic stabilizers now, this will be the reality of Joe Biden’s presidency: endless, brutal fights to reauthorize support the economy badly needs, against a Republican Party ideologically and strategically opposed to further stimulus. Biden’s agenda will be a dead letter, overwhelmed by the same dynamics that undermined Obama.  House Democratic leaders dismiss this as tomorrow’s problem. McConnell is Senate majority leader now, and he’s not going to accept a $5 trillion bill. He’s refusing to even take up House Democrats’ $3 trillion bill. “What we were trying to do was put a reasonable first step out there,” says the Democratic staffer. And Democrats do have their demands. In a call with reporters, House Majority Leader Steny Hoyer (D-MA) said the state and local aid and a new round of stimulus checks were the House Democrats’ “red lines.” They will refuse to pass any bill without those policies.  But those are policies that Republicans need as much or more than Democrats do. For Republicans to oppose state and local aid and further stimulus checks is for them to hold a gun to their own heads and threaten to shoot. Those are the programs that pump blood through the economy between now and November, the only programs that give Republicans a bare shot at retaining power.  By contrast, Republicans actually don’t want automatic stabilizers: Many of them believe Trump will lose in November, and the absence of automatic stabilizers will let them mire Biden’s presidency in economic misery. You can’t pass a Green New Deal if you have to spend all your time fighting over unemployment insurance.   What the country needs is stimulus that sustains no matter what happens in November. It would be nice if that wasn’t just the Democrats’ job, but it is. And right now, they’re failing at it.  “We’re all hoping we Democrats take back the Senate and have Joe Biden as president,” says Rep. Beyer. “But what if we don’t? Or what if Biden wins and we don’t take back the Senate? We’re trying to thread a fairly narrow passage.” Democrats see themselves as the responsible governing party, even though they’re in the minority. But the responsible thing to do, in this case, is insist on the right policy, the popular policy. The right thing to do is refuse to pass a bill without automatic stabilizers, and let Republicans try to explain why unemployment insurance should be untethered from the unemployment rate amid a generational economic crisis.  The CBO has no say here. The House Democrats do.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   While it’s always tempting to think of the coronavirus pandemic in terms of numbers endlessly piling up — especially as the United States passes the 100,000 death mark, an unfathomable toll that is likely still an undercount — it’s important to remember that the outbreak is also constantly changing and evolving. We should be updating our understanding of the situation on the ground at all times, because it is never stable. With that in mind, I thought it would be worthwhile to answer a very simple question: What is actually going on with Covid-19 right now? Because I think that even for people who are closely following the news about the pandemic, myself and my colleagues included, it is easy to lose sight of the big picture. I looked at the data and talked to several public health experts, hoping to synthesize what I saw in the numbers. Here are three takeaways, my situation report on coronavirus here at the end of May. If we zoom all the way out and look at the United States as a whole, the number of new Covid-19 cases reported each day has gradually fallen over the last month, from a peak of nearly 37,000 new cases on April 24 to about 19,000 new cases on May 26, according to data compiled by the New York Times. As you’ll see in the chart below, there is a lot of noise in this metric. Sometimes, there are lags in government agencies reporting new cases and the number of daily new cases reported is partly dependent on how many tests are being conducted at a given time. But this should give you a general sense of the trendlines: the rapid growth in new cases in March and into April, before the rate starts to level off and then declines through May. The higher number of daily cases reflects both the coronavirus’s spread throughout the United States and the increased testing, which improves our surveillance of how widespread the disease actually is. There is no one ideal number of tests to be performed, but experts have said the percentage of tests that come back positive should be at least below 10 percent and even lower (5 percent or less) if countries are going to relax social distancing. On May 26, the positive test rate in the US was 5.4 percent — a significant improvement from the days when 20 percent of tests were positive, but still not quite down to the 3 percent or so that South Korea, the global model of early and widespread testing, achieved weeks ago. Still, there has generally speaking been a decline in new cases nationwide over the last month, which recent research indicates is a reflection of the social distancing policies put in place by states and cities. But the national picture can be a bit misleading depending on where you live. There is a lot of variation across the states. “Some areas, like NYC, are slowing. As big as their outbreak was, that alone makes for a marked decline in new cases nationwide that we’re seeing,” Tara Smith, a Kent State University professor who studies infectious diseases, told me. “Most other places seem to be better than they were in March as far as rate of new cases.” “But even if the epidemic has slowed, it’s not gone, and some places are picking up.” The New York Times continually updates this reference page that has some handy charts showing where coronavirus outbreaks seem to be tailing off and where they may be intensifying. The Times breaks the states down into three categories: states where new Covid-19 cases are increasing, states where new cases are mostly the same, and the states where the number of new cases is declining. Let’s run through the two extremes quickly; if your state isn’t on the lists below, that means the situation appears stable, not worsening but not improving. States where daily new coronavirus cases are increasing, as of May 27: States where daily new coronavirus cases are decreasing, as of May 27: It’s important to remember that these states are starting from different places, though. New Jersey’s daily counts have been going down, but it has to date seen far more cumulative Covid-19 cases (about 155,000) than has Alabama (15,700) or North Carolina (24,000), some of the states where the number of daily new cases is on the rise. It is also difficult to say for certain how much the relaxation of social distancing policies in some states has affected Covid-19’s spread so far and whether those policy changes explain some of the trends in new cases. The coronavirus is a very sneaky pathogen with symptoms often taking a week or more to show up. Yet people can begin infecting others before symptoms set in. It could then take another week or two for those people to realize they may be sick. Given the lag in new infections revealing themselves, and the fact that an infected person will on average (and without social distancing) infect two or three other people, it may be some time before we have a good idea of how much states’ reopening has affected the pandemic’s arc. The reopenings only began a month ago. Increased testing could again help to explain some of the increases in new confirmed cases, further complicating efforts to isolate the impact of easing social distancing. “I think speculation there is premature,” says David Rehkopf, a Stanford professor and fellow at the university’s Center for Population Health Sciences. If you look at other metrics — such as the number of daily new cases as a share of a state’s population — there isn’t really a clean breakdown between different types of states. As much as we might want it to, the coronavirus has generally not conformed to tidy narratives. The bottom line: the general plateau of new cases nationally obscures the variations across states, which are driven more by local conditions. To repeat, this is not one coronavirus outbreak but many. On that point, some of the recent spikes in cases can be linked to specific incidents; Arkansas has traced its recent surge in cases to a high school swim party, a church gathering, and poultry plants (at least for starters). The latter is representative of one other important trend in America’s Covid-19 pandemic. To paint with a very broad brush, the coronavirus pandemic in the US seems to have started with the jetsetting crowd. People taking cruises. International travelers who brought the virus to the US in the first place from China or from Europe. The metropolitan areas where Covid-19 initially appeared — New York and Seattle and Boston and San Francisco — are among the wealthiest places in the country. But the pandemic has quickly become stratified along socioeconomic and racial lines. The coronavirus may have been blind to color and class during the early weeks, especially when it was spreading undetected. But once states and cities began to lock down, the disparities began to deepen. People who have higher incomes generally find it easier to work from home or even take time off work. They may also be able to simply leave a city where Covid-19 is running rampant: the New York Times reported that wealthier neighborhoods in the Big Apple have seen a much higher percentage of their residents leave during the pandemic compared to working-class neighborhoods. People with lower incomes (who are also more likely to be black or Hispanic) typically have less flexibility in their work situation. So they are more likely to be laid off or they have been asked to continue working despite the ongoing risk because their job is considered essential. These populations have higher rates of preexisting conditions like diabetes and heart disease that can make them more susceptible to the coronavirus, too. They may also live in places more exposed to air pollution or have other economic restraints that affect, for example, their ability to seek out medical care. The exact causes of these disparities in Covid-19’s toll will be studied for years. But the data already shows black people in particular are getting infected and dying at higher rates than white people. One example of these trends in practice would be the high rates of infection among New York City transportation workers. Another would be the outbreaks in meatpacking plants across the country. In addition to occupational hazards, these populations are also more likely to live in intergenerational households and that can induce more spread, an observation made to me recently by an epidemiologist based in New Orleans. “There are a wide range of health behaviors and environmental exposures, not the least of which are crowding and occupations that require more exposures, that come together to explain this,” Rehkopf told me. Now the coronavirus is spreading to rural areas, which are also often at a financial disadvantage compared to wealthy enclaves, which may exacerbate these socioeconomic trends. Taken together, these three trends should help explain where the coronavirus pandemic stands in the US as June approaches. The virus is still widespread, and hitting vulnerable populations the hardest, even if at the national level, we have begun to see this gradual decline in new cases. Get our newsletter in your inbox once a week. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. As we hit a gruesome milestone — 100,000 reported deaths from the novel coronavirus in the United States — we must focus on the single most important part of the response: saving the most lives. The SARS-CoV-2 virus is likely to kill more than 1 million people worldwide by the end of this year, and 60 million people will die this year from other, often preventable causes, as they do every year. As we confront the most devastating infectious disease threat the world has faced in a century, unless we are more careful, there will be many more avoidable deaths, not just from Covid-19 but also from the disruption it causes. If there’s one constant in the varying effectiveness of responses in different cities, states, and countries, it’s the tight correlation between how fully political leaders are guided by and support public health (for example, in Singapore, Germany, New Zealand, Seattle, and elsewhere) and how well they prevent their people from being killed by the virus. To save as many lives as possible, both from the coronavirus and other causes, public health specialists must guide and political leaders must fully support five things at the core of public health.  Although deaths are not an early indicator of the spread of the coronavirus and other health trends, tracking death rates is crucial to understanding and counteracting the impact of the pandemic. Tracking deaths identifies increases from the virus missed by testing and tracking systems and provides an early warning if deaths from other conditions increase.  What gets measured can be managed, and so every US state and every country must report all-cause mortality every week. Many higher-income countries can start weekly reporting by age group compared with historical levels, as Switzerland and others have done.  Even in the United States, this information isn’t readily available, and in places ranging from New York City to Georgia, public health leaders have had to resist pressure from political leaders to hide this key data.  We need to change the expectation so that we learn the death rates every week, in every community — both deaths caused by the coronavirus and all deaths. In lower-income countries where basic vital registration systems are often weak or lacking, this will require training, supporting, and paying community health workers and hospital registrars and also improving the capacity to collect, analyze, and disseminate real-time data. Last week, our organization, Resolve to Save Lives, joined the World Health Organization and others in releasing practical guidance on how countries can do just that.  In the US, this increase in deaths from other conditions, which results from the pandemic’s disruption, could come in the form of more heart disease deaths among those who didn’t seek care during the pandemic. At the height of the pandemic, a colleague in a New York City emergency department commented to me, “We’re seeing no angina.” It’s likely that patients with heart attacks avoided care for fear of contracting the coronavirus.  
    Related
   In Africa, meanwhile, falling immunization and malaria treatment rates could cause millions of preventable deaths. These trends can be found early — and further deterioration prevented — with rapid mortality surveillance. It is appalling that more than 100,000 health care workers have been infected with the novel coronavirus. The health and economic consequences of losing health care workers and overwhelming health care facilities are catastrophic.  This does not have to be. I began my public health career documenting and stopping the spread of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis in hospitals; it is possible to make health care much safer.  Singapore has had few if any health care workers infected by the virus at work — not thanks to high-technology interventions, but due to sensible, meticulous attention to protocols. Protective equipment is important, but comprehensive and well-implemented infection prevention programs are the most effective ways to protect health care workers and patients.  Only if health care workers are and are known to be safe will we be able to prevent avoidable deaths from people infected with the novel coronavirus and also prevent increases in mortality from other conditions that result from overwhelmed health care systems. In New York City, between mid-March and mid-May, there were more than 4,000 “excess” deaths — deaths that may have been but are not known to have been related to the coronavirus. It’s likely that many people died from non-coronavirus causes because they did not seek care, for example for heart disease, which is the leading cause of death in the US.  
    Related
   Avoiding an increase in non-coronavirus deaths is a particularly urgent priority in Africa. If we don’t take steps to preserve care, over the coming years more than 10 million people in Africa could die from malaria, tuberculosis, HIV, vaccine-preventable diseases, and other causes due to the pandemic’s disruption of health care systems. Yet the age structure — only 4 percent of Africans are over age 65 — means that the proportion of coronavirus infections that are fatal will be far below 1 percent: closer to the seasonal flu than to the devastation seen in other parts of the world.  If we fail to preserve the programs that address preventable killers, the number of people who die from the coronavirus directly might be a small fraction of those killed by other diseases because of the disruption the pandemic causes. Donor agencies, international organizations, and governments themselves must keep non-coronavirus health care going, with telemedicine, longer-term prescription refills, safer facilities, and bolstered primary and preventive care. One-third of the US coronavirus deaths have occurred in nursing homes, revealing that facilities for the elderly will be coronavirus death traps until we drastically improve efforts to keep the virus out, find it fast when the first staff or residents become infected, and stop outbreaks from spreading.  The US Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) has made a good start requiring an end to nonessential visitors, but regulators, payors, and nursing home administrators will all need to keep the virus out with strict policies. These include universal wearing of masks, limited visitors, and extensive testing. Nursing homes need to find the virus fast with rapid and repeated testing, and they need to stop outbreaks before they spread widely with rapid-response teams and test-based strategies. We need to identify and protect the highest-risk facilities — not just nursing homes, but also prisons, homeless shelters, and factories, and the highest-risk individuals, including the elderly and those with underlying conditions. Health versus the economy is a false dichotomy. Poverty increases ill health, and until people are confident, they will not resume economic activities.  Yogi Berra asked, “If people don’t want to come to the ballpark, how are you going to stop them?” Unless people feel safer working, dining, or shopping, they won’t venture out for those activities.  The coronavirus will cause the first increase in global poverty in more than two decades. In a recent survey in Africa, half of respondents estimated they would run out of money and food in a week or less.  
    Related
   Every country needs to find the balance, and this may mean allowing economically important activities to begin even before all of the ideal disease control systems are in place. This can only happen if we better protect health care workers, shield the most vulnerable, and redesign to reduce risk. In most places, most economic disruption from the pandemic isn’t from lockdowns, but from fear — much of it rational — that everyday activities could kill us or our loved ones.  It’s not a “guns or butter” dilemma. We can save the most lives and protect our economy most effectively by urgently strengthening public health and emerging as soon and as safely as possible, focusing on the most important societal activities first. This means widespread use of face masks, hand-washing, staggered shifts, telework, and prompt contact tracing to prevent cases from becoming clusters, clusters from becoming outbreaks, and outbreaks from forcing another retreat into our homes. The British epidemiologist William Farr wrote, “The death rate is a fact; anything beyond this is an inference.” Weekly mortality tracking can guide a response that rapidly identifies and prevents further increases in coronavirus and non-coronavirus deaths. Only focused and intensive action will prevent another 100,000 deaths in our nursing homes alone.  As future waves of the virus hit, we need to be ready to adapt rapidly to reduce spread, stop outbreaks, and protect the vulnerable. In every step we take, we must first remember: Illness and economic damage are reversible. Death is not. Tom Frieden is a senior fellow for global health at the Council on Foreign Relations, CEO of Resolve to Save Lives (an initiative of Vital Strategies), former director of the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and former commissioner of the New York City Health Department. Follow him @DrTomFrieden on Twitter and Instagram. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Officially, 100,000 Americans and counting have now died from the novel coronavirus, another unfortunate marker in the pandemic. In the three months since the first reports of a US Covid-19 death on February 29 in Washington state, the death toll has reached six figures, according to the New York Times’s count. An unprecedented nationwide lockdown, with almost every state issuing a stay-at-home order and all of them placing restrictions on public activities, could only do so much to slow the virus’s spread (although earlier action likely could have saved more lives).  The coronavirus now looks like it will soon claim more lives in the US than the influenza outbreaks of the 1950s and ’60s that resulted in more than 100,000 deaths — the worst pandemics in modern history, behind only the 1918 flu that killed about 675,000 Americans. 
    Related
   Going by raw totals, more people have died in America from the coronavirus than in any other country in the world. Even adjusting for population, the US has one of the highest rates in deaths per million people, ranking behind only the hardest-hit countries in Europe. The US may have been particularly vulnerable to Covid-19 because of high rates of chronic health conditions, which increase the coronavirus’s lethality, and the disease’s presence in nursing homes populated by seniors who are more at risk of a serious case or death if they get infected. The New York Times reported in mid-May that one-third of confirmed Covid-19 deaths were nursing home residents or workers. Policies like one in New York that directed people diagnosed with the coronavirus to nursing homes, possibly seeding more outbreaks and leading to more deaths, have come under scrutiny as the fatality figures increase. The official tallies — in the US and around the world — are also almost certainly undercounts. In April, autopsy records revealed that the first official Covid-19-related death occured on February 6, but was not reported at the time. The Washington Post, in partnership with researchers from the Yale School of Public Health, estimated in late April that 15,400 more Americans died between March 1 and April 4 than ordinarily would have been expected, a substantially higher number than the 8,128 coronavirus deaths that were reported over that time by US government agencies.  Not all of those excess deaths can be blamed on Covid-19. But experts believe many of them are uncounted casualties of the virus. It is no mystery why more people have died during the coronavirus pandemic than the government figures indicate. The officially reported number of Covid-19 deaths generally comes from hospitals. People who die at home may not be counted if they are never tested for the coronavirus. Instead, they may have a pulmonary embolism or heart attack listed as their cause of death, even if Covid-19 was the catalyst for their passing. Whichever way you count it, the coronavirus’s toll has been devastating. And recent research indicates that it could have been at least partially avoided. Columbia University researchers projected that if lockdowns had taken effect a week earlier than they did in reality, as many as 36,000 fewer people might have died of Covid-19.  President Donald Trump’s administration and many state officials were reluctant to order the lockdowns, however, fearing the economic consequences; the country also had a more limited understanding of the virus’s spread because of early problems with tests sent out by the federal government. The US coronavirus response has been defined by its missteps. And Americans are still paying the price for those failures. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Without proper planning, the threat of hurricanes combined with Covid-19 is a recipe for disaster.  Think about how, when Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans in 2005, around 20,000 people took refuge in the Superdome stadium. By their very nature, hurricanes force people to gather close together in shelters, at treatment locations, and during evacuations — at much higher numbers and densities than the CDC recommends for countering a Covid-19 outbreak. And vulnerable populations such as residents of senior care facilities and individuals with disabilities are particularly affected by both hurricanes and infectious diseases. The Atlantic hurricane season starts on June 1, and every state and territory on the Atlantic coast is vulnerable. This year’s hurricane season is predicted to be more active than normal, with the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasting three to six major hurricanes. Given indications that the Covid-19 outbreak will continue into the hurricane season, this situation requires a new kind of planning from both emergency managers and the public. And that planning needs to happen now. Emergency managers — including federal officials, private sector authorities, and nonprofits — need to analyze their strategies to develop hurricane-plus-Covid-19 scenarios. This approach can yield complementary strategies instead of two separate plans for each situation.  Among the many issues to be considered: Covid-19 is already placing unprecedented strain on disaster management, health, and other systems; a hurricane will exacerbate that strain. With outbreaks across the entire nation, an area hit by a hurricane is less likely to get aid from other states or regions. Federal resources are limited in authority and capacity. Many hospitals are struggling to provide care due to limited resources and personnel, and at the community level, many are experiencing the economic effects of Covid-19 and have fewer resources and greater uncertainty. 
    Related
   Instead of assuming “business as usual,” plans need to be reassessed. For example, this might entail looking at how workforce shortages, delays in material and money, and insufficient hospital capacity impact hurricane response, and incorporating those changes into plans. Traditional calculations of when to issue evacuation warnings should be reassessed in light of Covid-19, which may change decisions of when to fortify and shelter in place. Emergency evacuations are typically called for based on the expected impact of the hurricane, and may involve large populations moving to concentrated locations like emergency shelters or hotels — or leaving the area entirely. Even without a disease outbreak, evacuation decisions are always difficult, both practically and politically. The decision process should be altered during an epidemic because usual evacuation risks (traffic accidents, for example) will have to be balanced against the risk of increasing disease transmission, which could have longer-term effects than the hurricane itself. The pandemic makes clearly communicating exactly who should evacuate even more important: Those in the storm surge zone should go while others should be encouraged to shelter in place and be prepared for wind, rain, and power outages.  If evacuation occurs, emergency managers may need to get creative. Evacuees should be screened for symptoms of the coronavirus, and those with symptoms should be placed in separate facilities. The elderly and immunocompromised should be separated as much as possible and housed in smaller facilities to reduce their risk of catching the virus. Hotels might be used to keep people apart, though large shelters and evacuation camps crowded with people may be inevitable. There’s a much higher possibility that supplemental facilities, such as military shelters and hospitals, may be needed. Household stocking of supplies may be even more critical than normal to get through the hurricane season. People have been stockpiling food and supplies (sometimes to the extreme) in response to Covid-19. Some of these stocks can be doubly useful for hurricanes. However, the coronavirus outbreak has also led to unique needs, such as disinfectants, soap, and masks. People should remember these different needs as part of their hurricane planning. 
    Related
   Response organizations might also be able to combine their supply planning for Covid-19 and hurricanes. Some of the materials are distinct, of course: Hurricane preparation requires material to harden buildings and careful transportation route protection, while Covid-19 preparation requires personal protective equipment and other medical supplies. However, their needs are similar in many other respects, requiring stockpiles of emergency food and supplies and dedicated response staff.  Stocking up on supplies is also an equity issue. Poorer and more vulnerable populations might have greater needs and fewer resources to meet those needs. Response organizations should look to support these groups as part of preparedness planning. Hurricane response involves a great number of people, including first responders like police, firefighters, search and rescue organizations, utility companies responsible for getting critical infrastructure back up and running, and incident managers who coordinate response efforts. Since people themselves spread Covid-19, how do you safely deploy them across the country, as well as deal with reductions in staff availability? Strategies are already being developed for managing the coronavirus outbreak in a way that minimizes disease spread, such as remote emergency operations centers and enhanced personal protective equipment for first responders. Such strategies will need to be considered when dealing with the hurricane workforce. Disaster recovery is a long-term process that plays out over the course of months, years, and decades. This means that much of the recovery efforts should be occurring after we might expect to have a coronavirus vaccine. However, the economic slowdown from the pandemic may affect the speed and scale of recovery. 
    Related
   Emergency managers generally view individual households as the center of recovery efforts. Amassing an emergency fund is a crucial part of hurricane preparedness, but for the nearly half of Americans living paycheck to paycheck, that’s almost impossible. With millions more people out of work entirely since March, many more people are likely to need external aid, such as financial support to secure temporary housing and to repair damages to their homes. Instead of assuming people are able to recover on their own, the government may need to play an even more active role in assisting with the recovery. Aaron Clark-Ginsberg is an associate social scientist at the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND Corporation. His research focuses on disaster risk management, including issues related to disaster risk reduction, response, and recovery. Gary Cecchine is director of the RAND Gulf States Policy Institute and a senior policy researcher at the RAND Corporation. His research focuses on emergency preparedness and response, environmental and health policy, and military medicine. W. Craig Fugate is one of the world’s leading experts in emergency and crisis management. The head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency under President Obama, Mr. Fugate is currently Chief Emergency Management Officer for One Concern, an AI company focused on using big data to improve disaster management. Craig Bond is a senior economist at the nonprofit, nonpartisan RAND Corporation. His research focuses on applied welfare economics, including risk and resilience issues affecting the Gulf Coast. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A California church asked the Supreme Court over Memorial Day weekend for an exemption to the state’s stay-at-home order, claiming that the order violates the Constitution when applied to places of worship.  If granted, even a temporary emergency order would have sweeping national implications: It would be a clear signal that the Supreme Court, with its record of sympathy for religious conservatives, intends to expand “religious liberty” rights, even potentially at the expense of public health. It is very likely that the Court will take up this case, South Bay United Pentecostal Church v. Newsom — or at least one like it from another place of worship that claims it has a right to hold in-person services during the coronavirus pandemic. Lower federal courts have split on whether churches have a constitutional right to hold services despite the pandemic, and the Supreme Court typically steps in to resolve conflicts among federal appeals courts. What happens to states’ power to regulate in-person religious gatherings if the Court does rule in the church’s favor is unclear, but it is likely that more gatherings will occur that could spread the virus. Several outbreaks of Covid-19 have been traced back to churches, including an outbreak of at least 70 infections linked to a church in Sacramento, California, and an outbreak at an Arkansas church that sickened more than one-third of the congregation and killed three people. If the Court does rule in favor of the church, many states would no longer be able to order places of worship to hold services online until the public health crisis ebbs sufficiently to allow people to gather safely for worship.  Some judges have suggested that states could issue narrower orders limiting the size of religious gatherings, but it’s unclear just how much a conservative judiciary will allow states to limit the size of church gatherings — and it is unlikely that states could effectively enforce such an order if churches are committed to defying it. There are only so many law enforcement officers in each state, and most of those officers have better things to do than to stand in the back of church services counting heads.  South Bay United arises just a few days after President Trump falsely claimed the power to order churches reopened on his own. Though Trump’s words have no legal effect, he remains the head of the Republican Party, and he wields a great deal of influence over many of his fellow partisans. So his rhetoric makes it more likely that a Republican-controlled judiciary will do something that Trump himself cannot: hold that stay-at-home orders affecting churches must be lifted. The Constitution guards against laws “prohibiting the free exercise” of religion, but that does not mean that any law that burdens anyone’s religious practices is unconstitutional. Rather, as Justice Antonin Scalia explained in Employment Division v. Smith (1990), “the right of free exercise does not relieve an individual of the obligation to comply with a ‘valid and neutral law of general applicability on the ground that the law proscribes (or prescribes) conduct that his religion prescribes (or proscribes).’”  That is, the government may subject religious institutions to the same regulations it opposes on others. It simply cannot single out the faithful for inferior treatment. Lower courts, however, are bitterly divided on what constitutes a “neutral law of general applicability,” and whether it is possible for states to gradually allow different businesses and other institutions to reopen without running afoul of decisions like Smith. California, like many states, instituted a strict lockdown order in March that closed most of the state’s workplaces, except for a small list of businesses deemed “essential.” As the spread of the disease slowed, however, the state permitted businesses to gradually start reopening. Currently, California is in “Stage 2” of this process, which allows manufacturers and some offices to reopen. Retail businesses may also reopen, although in much of the state they must offer curbside pickup. In-person worship services, meanwhile, are grouped with movie theaters and other places where medium-sized groups of people gather for extended periods of time. Churches, theaters, and the like won’t be allowed to fully reopen until Stage 3. And the biggest gatherings, such as live concerts or sporting events, won’t resume until Stage 4. So, to answer whether California’s stay-at-home order is “neutral” with respect to houses of worship, courts must answer a threshold question: “neutral” compared to what? On the one hand, the California order does treat churches differently from, say, factories, in the sense that many factories are allowed to reopen sooner than churches. On the other hand, the order treats churches the same as entertainment venues, such as theaters, where people sit and gather for long periods of time, as they do in church.  The California stay-at-home order, in other words, is a “neutral law of general applicability” in the sense that it applies the same rules to both secular and religious institutions that gather medium-sized groups of people together in an auditorium-like setting. But some judges have read it as non-neutral because churches are treated differently than some businesses that do not gather people together in such a setting. Perhaps unsurprisingly, lower court judges have largely split along partisan lines when weighing whether churches should be exempt from stay-at-home orders. In South Bay United, two federal appeals court judges appointed by Democratic presidents held that the California stay-at-home order does not run afoul of Smith. “Where state action does not ‘infringe upon or restrict practices because of their religious motivation’ and does not ‘in a selective manner impose burdens only on conduct motivated by religious belief,’ it does not violate the First Amendment,” those two judges wrote, in an opinion quoting a 1993 Supreme Court decision. Trump-appointed Judge Daniel Collins dissented, suggesting that the mere fact that the state has allowed some businesses to reopen, without doing the same for churches, renders the stay-at-home order constitutionally suspect. “The State is continually making judgments, at the margins, to decide what additional activities its residents may and may not engage in, and thus far, ‘religious services’ have not made the cut,” Collins wrote, adding that he is “at a loss to understand how the State’s current maze of regulations can be deemed ‘generally applicable.’” A Republican panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit relied on similar reasoning when it held that churches must be allowed to reopen in Kentucky. That state allowed businesses such as “law firms, laundromats, liquor stores, and gun shops to continue to operate so long as they follow social-distancing and other health-related precautions,” but it did not permit churches to hold in-person gatherings. That rendered the Kentucky stay-at-home order constitutionally suspect, at least according to these three Republican judges. There’s also another reason to believe that the Supreme Court could favor churches and disfavor public health officials — there are probably five votes on the Supreme Court to overrule Smith and significantly expand the rights of religious conservatives who object to following particular laws. Though Smith was authored by Justice Scalia, a conservative icon, it’s fallen far out of favor with judicial conservatives, who tend to support an expansive reading of the Constitution’s Free Exercise Clause. In 2016, shortly after Scalia’s death temporarily deprived Republicans of a majority on the Supreme Court, Justice Samuel Alito penned a dissenting opinion arguing that pharmacy owners have a constitutional right to refuse to offer contraception, if those owners object to birth control on religious grounds. Though Alito’s opinion in Stormans v. Wiesman wouldn’t have explicitly overruled Smith, it would have narrowed it to the point of near irrelevance. Notably, Alito’s Stormans opinion was joined by Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Clarence Thomas. And Alito’s two newest colleagues, Justices Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh, both have very conservative records in “religious liberty” cases. So it is likely that there are now five votes to, at the very least, significantly expand the power of religious objectors to defy generally applicable laws. Last February, moreover, the Supreme Court announced that it would hear Fulton v. City of Philadelphia, a case asking whether religious organizations have a constitutional right to defy Philadelphia’s ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination by government contractors. The plaintiffs in Fulton explicitly ask the Supreme Court to overrule Smith. Even before the pandemic, in other words, the Court’s Republican majority has been eager to expand “religious liberty” rights. They even agreed to hear a case that could remove one of the primary obstacles to religious objectors who seek exemptions from state laws. South Bay United, in other words, presents a question that the Court is already very interested in deciding: whether the rights of religious objectors should be expanded. And it is likely that a majority of the Court will vote for such an expansion. If the Supreme Court does overrule Smith, or otherwise hold that stay-at-home orders targeting churches are constitutionally suspect, there is still a constitutional safety value that could prevent churches from being freed from public health regulation altogether. As a general rule, state governments have a broad power to regulate in ways that advance a compelling interest — such as the protection of human life from a deadly disease — so long as those regulations are narrowly tailored to impose the least possible imposition on constitutional rights. Indeed, this safety valve applies even when the government burdens many rights that are explicitly protected by the Constitution. As Justice Robert Jackson warned more than seven decades ago, the Constitution should not be read as a “suicide pact.” But the burden is on the state to show that its order is sufficiently narrowly tailored, and it is far from clear that this Supreme Court will invoke this safety value to preserve broad stay-at-home orders like the one in California. The Sixth Circuit’s decision exempting churches from Kentucky’s stay-at-home order, for example, determined that the state’s order was not sufficiently narrowly tailored because Kentucky could have taken actions that imposed fewer burdens on churches — such as allowing churches to hold in-person services, but limiting the number of people who can attend those services. The state would probably be able to issue a new, narrower order if a broader order is struck down. But the fate of that new order would also be in the hands of a conservative judiciary. If the Supreme Court agrees with the Sixth Circuit on this point, that will likely set off a new round of litigation. States will likely issue new orders limiting the size of religious gatherings, and churches will likely file new lawsuits claiming those limits are also too restrictive. It is unclear how courts will resolve these challenges, and equally unclear how states will enforce limits on the number of people who can attend worship services.  But the Sixth Circuit’s rationale would, at the very least, still permit some regulation of religious gatherings that could spread the coronavirus. There will most likely still be a great deal of legal uncertainty even if the Supreme Court does side with the church in South Bay United. But there will also almost certainly be many more public gatherings that could transmit the virus. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The big tech platforms found themselves in an unusual position during the first part of the coronavirus pandemic: getting praised for how they handled misinformation.  It was nice while it lasted. As the coronavirus spread around the world in March, Google, Facebook, and Twitter quickly announced that they would ban and take down misleading and dangerous material about Covid-19 on their sites — or at least prevent it from getting much traction. It was a notable change from their much-criticized performance in the last presidential election. And the tech companies said the lessons they learned from 2016, and the changes, hires, and investments they had made since then, let them move quickly this time to battle disinformation. Two months later, it seems as though the sheer volume of garbage that gets dumped into the platforms may overwhelm their efforts to keep a lid on it. Witness the conspiracist “Plandemic” video, which suggests, among other things, that wearing a mask can make you sick: It moved widely around Facebook and YouTube for weeks before the platforms took it down earlier this month. But it’s not just the amount of stuff that gets uploaded to the platforms that’s posing a problem for the tech companies as they try to figure out what to leave up and what to take down.  It’s that the coronavirus is more than a public health crisis. It’s an unending series of political arguments, over everything from the Trump administration’s miserable response to the pandemic to the way government aid should be distributed to disputes over mask-wearing or not-wearing. The debate about when and how to open up parts of the country is getting more rancorous and partisan.  And it will certainly continue through the US presidential race: On Tuesday, Twitter took its first action against a Trump tweet, by fact-checking his claim that mail-in voting leads to “substantially fraudulent” results. Expect to hear calls for the service to do the same the next time he tweets something misleading about the pandemic — say, promoting hydroxychloroquine as a way to stave off or cure Covid-19. Which means the platforms, which desperately want to be seen as apolitical, are facing more political fights, where they’ll have to make hard decisions about taking down — or leaving up — controversial content like arguments against social distancing. It won’t be nearly as clear-cut as deciding to pull down fake news stories about the pope endorsing Trump. The platforms, of course, are used to hearing complaints from across the political spectrum: Left-leaning commentators blame the tech companies for creating an environment that invited abuse and helped elect Trump. Conservatives argue (with little evidence) that tech companies unfairly censor them (even while they continue to use them and advertise with them, to great effect). These political divides over how to respond to the pandemic have already forced the platforms to make controversial calls. Last month, for instance, Facebook took down event posts for anti-stay-at-home protests in at least three states, on the basis that the events “def[ied] government’s guidance on social distancing.” But in other states with similar rules, Facebook left up similar event posts promoting similar gatherings, which featured closely packed protesters who didn’t wear masks. The takedowns drew immediate criticism from Republicans, including Sens. Ted Cruz and Josh Hawley.  And at the end of April, YouTube removed an hour-long video featuring an interview with two California doctors, who argued that the coronavirus wasn’t nearly as harmful as other diseases, like the common flu — but only after the video, and clips of it, had been widely circulated on social media and had begun to be promoted by personalities on Fox News (and Tesla CEO Elon Musk). That removal also drew howls from the likes of Tucker Carlson: “Informed debate is exactly what the authorities don’t want,” he told his Fox News audience. “They want unquestioned obedience, so they are cracking down on free expression.” From the other side of the aisle, Democratic Rep. Adam Schiff in April called on YouTube, Twitter, and Facebook to crack down harder on content on their platforms that spread “medical misinformation” (citing a Recode story) about conspiracy theories, like the one that claims the coronavirus is caused by 5G wireless tech. When it comes to politicians and government leaders, the platforms have traditionally been resistant to curbing any speech. This year, however, they have shown some willingness to crack down on misinformation. In March, for instance, Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube all removed posts from Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro promoting hydroxychloroquine as a coronavirus treatment. At the time, the drug hadn’t been proven to help Covid-19 patients, and since then, a study published in the medical journal The Lancet found that Covid-19 patients taking hydroxychloroquine had a higher risk of death than other patients. Around the same time, Twitter also took down similar messages from Rudy Giuliani, Trump’s lawyer.  That kind of restraint isn’t consistent, though. Trump has posted similar commentary on Twitter for weeks — and was at it again last week — and at this point it’s hard to imagine any of the big tech companies taking down anything the president of the United States says.  But never say never. On Tuesday, Twitter waded into uncharted waters when it affixed a “get the facts about mail-in ballots” button to a Trump tweet attacking mail-in voting; that button led to a page that declared Trump’s commentary “misleading.” Trump responded predictably, calling the label an attack on “FREE SPEECH.” It’s reasonable to expect the president will try to goad Twitter into fact-checking him again, all while making use of the enormous reach the platform affords him. So: Is Twitter willing to attach the same kind of “get the facts” warning when Trump says that, say, social distancing rules should be ignored, or that the official death tolls from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are inflated?  It depends, says Twitter spokesperson Liz Kelley. Twitter already has a policy that calls for actions against “potentially harmful, misleading information related to COVID-19.” But when I asked her about Trump’s most recent tweet promoting hydroxychloroquine, she told me that “we won’t take action on wishes of hope for treatments, rather calls to action that would increase someone’s likelihood of harm, i.e., ‘stop social distancing and go out into the streets.’” Translation: Trump’s tweets promoting an unproven, potentially dangerous drug are probably okay in Twitter’s view, as long as he walks a very fine line. Telling America he’s taking hydroxychloroquine is one thing — telling everyone to take it would be another, even if it’s very close on the continuum. This isn’t what the tech executives thought they would be dealing with, at least early on. At the start of the pandemic, you could almost hear their relief as they explained that this time around, things were simpler. This was a medical and scientific problem, so there couldn’t be a political component to what they were doing.  That is: They were simply relying on advice from nonpartisan groups like the World Health Organization and the CDC, and obeying mitigation rules set up by individual governments. If they found stuff that contravened it, they didn’t have to agonize about what to do — they got rid of it. “Anything that would go against World Health Organization recommendations would be a violation of our policy,” YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki told CNN in April. “If someone’s spreading something that puts people in imminent risk of physical harm — we take that stuff down,” Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg told the same network the same month. They were also trying to preempt problems by sending their users to what they think are reliable sources of information, whether that’s the CDC or news outlets. Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube all routinely promote sites and videos with information about the pandemic; last month, YouTube introduced a “fact-checking” feature that will surface information boxes when users type in specific queries like “bleach coronavirus.” But now the platforms are back to struggling with how to moderate politically contentious content, and they’re contorting themselves in familiar ways as they try to explain specific actions.  Facebook, for instance, says the company didn’t take down protest posts at the behest of government agencies. But officials in New Jersey and Nebraska say they did reach out to Facebook before the site took the posts down. (The line between a social platform acting on its own volition to stop speech that violates government regulations and acting to take down speech because it’s been told to by government regulators is a thin but important one, notes Jesse Blumenthal from Stand Together, a think tank funded by the Koch family.) And YouTube’s on-the-record explanation of why it took down the popular video of Dan Erickson and Artin Massihi, the two doctors questioning California’s lockdown strategies, is hard to parse at best. Here’s Ivy Choi, a YouTube spokesperson, via email:  We quickly remove flagged content that violate our Community Guidelines, including content that explicitly disputes the efficacy of local healthy authority recommended guidance on social distancing that may lead others to act against that guidance. However, content that provides sufficient educational, documentary, scientific or artistic (EDSA) context is allowed — for example, news coverage of this interview with additional context.  In practice, this seems to mean that some elements of the 58-minute interview are acceptable on the platform. Also: news stories that quote unacceptable parts of the interview.  But good luck figuring that out if you’re a casual news consumer who might hear that YouTube is “censor[ing] anything that just doesn’t fit their own agenda,” as Mike Huckabee told Fox & Friends last month. And good luck trying to understand why YouTube, which says it has trained its computers and its army of content moderators to quickly flag disinformation before it gets circulated on the platform, didn’t act on the video even as millions of people saw it and passed it around. The tech giants aren’t the only ones that misjudged parts of the pandemic. Many news outlets, as I previously wrote, fumbled the coronavirus story in its early weeks and for some time didn’t fully grasp the scope of the problem.  You can chalk up the tech leaders’ mistake to a different kind of misidentification. They thought this was an information problem they could solve with deletes and redirects. But if government officials and politicians are turning even the most basic elements of the pandemic — like the official tally of people who have died to date (a number Trump and his allies are trying to question) — then the platforms can no longer point to government guidance as their primary guide. As was the case in 2016, this all leaves them trying to rule over unruly global platforms they specifically designed to run on their own — and they don’t have clear rules about how to proceed.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. After the coronavirus interrupted schooling for more than 1.5 billion children worldwide, some of them are heading back to the classroom — and offering lessons for American students and educators. In Germany, students administer coronavirus tests on themselves to track if they have the disease or not. In Vietnam, children and adults get their temperatures checked before entering the school building and wear masks once inside. And in New Zealand, parents or students worried about returning too soon can delay returning until they feel comfortable. These and other policies aim to help resume schooling safely and end the months of disruptions that experts say hurt students and caused excess stress for teachers worldwide. Some experts consider school restarts worth the risk, since young people aren’t as vulnerable to the disease as older people, though the data on whether or not kids can spread the virus much remains inconclusive. There’s no one-size-fits-all solution, and not every idea has worked perfectly. But if there’s one silver lining from the United States reopening schools later than other countries due to its large coronavirus outbreak, it’s that it now has time to learn from their attempts. “It’s a huge opportunity to rethink how we deliver these services,” said Robert Schwartz of the Harvard Graduate School of Education. “The old American exceptionalism in education is breaking down a bit, so maybe leaders will look abroad at how others are bringing kids back to school.” Here are three countries’ methods that should have American educational leaders taking notes. In mid-May, the New York Times told the story of Lea Hammermeister, a 17-year-old high school junior in the small northern German town of Neustrelitz. Before going to class, she grabbed a coronavirus test kit, swabbed her throat, and then properly prepared the device for evaluation. Later that night, she received the result in her email: negative. That allowed her to wear a green sticker, which means she can walk freely about the school without a mask.  It’s a procedure Hammermeister and her classmates follow every four days to keep tabs on Covid-19’s spread within her school. She and others told the Times that they appreciate the program, as it helps students feel safe in the classroom and allows parents and other caregivers to work without having to also care for their children during the workday. “Schools are the spine of our societies and economies,” Henry Tesch, the school’s headmaster, told the New York Times. “Without schools, parents can’t work and children are being robbed of precious learning time and, ultimately, a piece of their future.” Such a testing program isn’t in every German school, but it’s one that many others might adopt in the near future.  In the meantime, schools in Germany continue to follow new directives for reopening schools: Hallways are now one-way avenues, masks must be worn in classrooms, seats are assigned and spaced far apart, and everyone is encouraged to wear heavier clothing as windows must be kept open to improve air circulation. All of that is in addition to already common practices such as keeping a 6-foot distance between students when standing in line. But implementing these measures has come with challenges. For example, some schools simply can’t fit every student inside the building if they are to maintain social distancing. In the Neustrelitz high school, only about a third of the student body can be in class at a time — and even then, a teacher might have to teach two groups in two classrooms at once. Still, keeping tabs on the disease through testing and minimizing exposure is one of the better ways to keep the lessons going. Vietnam, which used testing and contact tracing early and aggressively to get a handle on its outbreak, continues to use similar methods to reopen schools. After a three-month hiatus, Vietnam’s 22 million school-age students were allowed to return to their classrooms this month after first passing a mandatory temperature check at their school’s entrance. If a child doesn’t have a fever, they’re allowed to attend classes, but they must wear a mask throughout the entire school day. One school in Hanoi, the capital, bought 10,000 masks to ensure it had enough for students to use. Some may find wearing a mask for hours cumbersome, but 11-year-old Pham Anh Kiet, who attends a western Hanoi school, doesn’t mind. “I feel safe when I wear a mask and have my temperature checked, I am not afraid of being infected with the virus,” he told Agence France-Presse (AFP) on May 4.  As in Germany, Vietnam’s schools are also enforcing social distancing measures. However, Nguyen Xuan Khang, a head teacher in Hanoi, told AFP that maintaining separation could pose a challenge for younger students. “They are very active,” he said. Another challenge will be sanitation: About 30 percent of Vietnamese schools don’t have access to running water or soap, according to the government’s own data. That means hand-washing for 20 seconds won’t be a ubiquitous practice among students, increasing the chances of a possible outbreak. Still, the widespread use of masks in Vietnamese schools may minimize that risk. Not everyone, though, is ready to return to school. New Zealand’s government recognizes that and has offered a pathway to allow parents to send their kids to school only when they feel comfortable doing so. New Zealand’s schools resumed classes on May 14, but students and parents who thought that date was too soon were allowed to opt for a “transition arrangement” with their school. “We also know that children and young people’s wellbeing is important and there may be students whose parents are anxious about their return to school, as indeed the students themselves may be. In these instances, we can help you work through a transition arrangement that will take longer than the period of time talked about here,” New Zealand’s Ministry of Education stated this month.   However, the government provided no real clarity on what such an arrangement would look like or for how long it should last. Those details were left up to the schools, all but assuring a lack of uniformity in the kind of “arrangements” agreed to throughout the country.  Yet experts say the government’s decision to allow for some flexibility and individual decision-making by families will help with promoting mental health in the pandemic, not just physical well-being.  Schwartz, the Harvard education expert, doesn’t believe all these ideas are foolproof but offered some of his own, mainly having schools invest lots of money in developing teachers into better online educators. He thinks having US officials learn from other countries’ experiences with reopening schools is a worthwhile endeavor. “The US is notorious for not thinking it can learn from the world, but it should be in this case,” he told me. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In an effort to stem the spread of the novel coronavirus, President Donald Trump will soon ban travelers coming from the latest hotspot: Brazil.  Any noncitizen who has been in Brazil within the last 14 days will be turned away starting Tuesday at 11:59 p.m. Trump had initially said the ban wouldn’t go into effect until Thursday but then moved up the effective date.  Brazil has the highest daily Covid-19 death rate worldwide and could see deaths increase fivefold by August to 125,000. President Jair Bolsonaro, who has prioritized keeping businesses open against the advice of his health ministers and described the virus as just a “little flu” has yet to implement shutdown measures in order to slow the rate of infection.  “Today’s action will help ensure foreign nationals who have been in Brazil do not become a source of additional infections in our country,” White House Press Secretary Kayleigh McEnany told reporters on Sunday. “These new restrictions do not apply to the flow of commerce between the United States and Brazil.”  Trump told reporters on May 19 that while he didn’t want Brazilians “coming in here and infecting our people,” he has ensured that the administration is sending thousands of ventilators to the country, whose health system has buckled as it faces almost 400,000 confirmed coronavirus cases. The country’s underfunded hospitals are ill-equipped to care for the many Brazilians living in poverty should they be infected, as my colleague Alex Ward writes.  But while Trump has been publicly sympathetic to the people of Brazil and their president, his longtime ally, the governor of Sao Paulo said that Brazil’s “diplomatic and economic relationship with the US will be affected by Mr. Trump’s decision” to restrict travel. Brazil is just the latest country to face travel restrictions in the US.  In January, Trump blocked foreigners who had recently visited China and in February, he imposed additional restrictions on Iranians, many of whom were already subject to a travel ban unrelated to coronavirus. In March, Trump began barring entry for all travelers from Europe, including the UK and Ireland. US citizens who were visiting these countries, however, were exempt, meaning that they could have imported coronavirus without detection.  Trump is also reportedly weighing a travel ban on Russia, which has the third-highest number of confirmed coronavirus cases.  Though these bans may have prevented some transmission of coronavirus, they have come at a great socioeconomic cost for the countries affected.  “China’s economy is taking a huge hit, with a ripple effect felt around the world,” Nicole Errett, lecturer in the University of Washington Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Science, said. “Airports and borders are closed, supply chains are interrupted, businesses are shuttered. Health and health systems are also affected, as it becomes difficult to transport health care workers and resources where they are needed, and people avoid or can’t access routine health care services.” While Trump has repeatedly cited these bans as key policies in his response to the virus, researchers are still learning about how travel bans can curb the spread of coronavirus. Since Trump imposed his initial travel restrictions on people coming from China at the outset of the pandemic, they now have a better understanding of the circumstances under which restrictions might be effective.  New Zealand, which brought the number of daily new coronavirus cases down to zero, and Australia, which has just over 7,000 cases, have both enacted strict lockdowns and sent overseas travelers to mandatory 14-day quarantine upon arrival.  China and Italy, on the other hand, both adopted stringent restrictions on domestic and international travel but were unable to avert a pandemic.  China’s decision to lock down domestic transportation in the Hubei province, where the virus originated, coupled with international travel restrictions, led to a delay both in the spread of the virus internally and in other countries — one paper estimates by about 2.9 days. Another paper recently published in Science that has yet to be peer-reviewed determined that the combination of those approaches produced a “much larger synergistic effect” than either of them would have alone. It’s not yet clear whether travel restrictions in Italy had a similar impact. Italy was the first European Union country to ban flights to and from China on account of coronavirus, going against the recommendations of the World Health Organization.  Joshua Michaud, associate director for global health policy at the Kaiser Family Foundation, said that these case studies show that travel restrictions can prevent the spread of the virus if placed early enough and if they’re stringent enough.  “The difficulty with this virus is that, if it’s not early enough, it may not have the intended effect,” he said. “If you have an incomplete travel ban or it comes too late, it doesn’t help very much. It’s like pulling the fire alarm when the house is on fire.” The US’s initial ban on Chinese travelers didn’t cover all people coming from China because they could re-route through other countries and get around the ban. What’s more, the virus had already reached the US undetected, mostly coming from Europe.  At this point, community transmission within the US is so high that further travel restrictions will likely have a comparatively marginal effect — but they will prevent at least some transmission. Whether preventing that transmission is worth the obvious diplomatic and socioeconomic costs of shutting down travel is still an open question.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The NBA — among the first professional sports leagues in the US to suspend play due to the coronavirus pandemic — is looking to relaunch its season in late July at Walt Disney World’s ESPN Wide World of Sports Complex near Orlando, according to a statement from Mike Bass, the league’s chief communications officer. No agreement has yet been struck. But the plan would essentially move basketball to the Disney complex— a 255-acre campus with arenas and ample hotel space — on a full-time basis, with players and staff living, practicing, and playing there. Fans would not be permitted to attend games. The following is a statement from NBA Chief Communications Officer Mike Bass: pic.twitter.com/8gfK5iVXs8 The NBA suddenly suspended its season March 11, after Utah Jazz center Rudy Gobert tested positive for Covid-19 — a move that sent a nationwide signal to Americans about the seriousness of the virus. Since then, at least 10 NBA players and multiple members of team staff have tested positive for the virus, and the mother of one prominent player, Minnesota Timberwolves center Karl-Anthony Towns, died after contracting Covid-19. But after more than two months without NBA basketball, one of the world’s most popular sports leagues, one idea gained traction: What about keeping players, coaches, and staff in a single location, testing them regularly, and permitting them to practice and play in a quarantine “bubble” of sorts? The NBA appears to be seriously considering it — with Disney World as the location of the bubble. While millions of Americans and television executives have eagerly awaited the return of live team sports, sporting events offer specific challenges to stopping the spread of the coronavirus, among spectators as well as among players and staff. Basketball requires close physical proximity and contact — across the country, basketball hoops have been removed from parks and playgrounds to prevent people from playing. Still, the NBA has been taking steps to prepare for a season relaunch. The league allowed voluntary practices with four or fewer players present to begin on May 8, with Covid-19 testing provided to players and staff in locations where that’s possible. As of May 8, that included the Los Angeles Lakers, the Los Angeles Clippers, and the Orlando Magic. If the season did not restart this year, players would stand to lose roughly $850 million in gross pay. According to results sent to NBA agents and others, a recent poll performed by the National Basketball Players Association (NBPA) found that most NBA players wanted to play again, even in empty facilities. Polling conducted by Morning Consult indicates that fans are ready to get back to watching sports, too — even if they aren’t permitted to attend. Forty-one percent of those polled from May 19-21 said they wanted leagues to start playing sports again, empty venues or not. That’s an increase from just 16 percent in early April. As Top Leagues Move Closer to Return, Fans Are Increasingly Open to Crowd-Less Sporting Events https://t.co/ioLdQhKbXP via @AlexMSilverman pic.twitter.com/bv9eNbUDCv In an interview with ESPN, NBPA executive director Michele Roberts said that players were ready to finish the season. “It’s time. It’s time,” she said. “It’s been two-and-a-half months of, ‘What if?’ My players need some level of certainty. I think everybody does.” I reached out to the National Basketball Coaches Association (NBCA) to find out how coaches in the league viewed the NBA’s new plans. I will update this story if and when I hear back. A lot of plans for the return of sports have centered on creating a “bubble” of sorts, where players, coaches, and staff would live, practice, and play games while quarantined from the outside world, with frequent temperature checks and coronavirus testing. And for the NBA, Disney World might make an ideal staging area. Florida launched phase two of its reopening plan last week, with some restaurants, gyms, and hair salons permitted to open with limited capacity. The state has publicly pitched itself to professional sports leagues and teams across the country as a safe place to relaunch. “We want to have you here,” Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis told reporters May 13, referring to professional sports teams. “We want to have basketball practicing again, we would love to have Major League Baseball.” He later added: “What I would tell commissioners of the leagues is, if you have a team in an area where they just won’t let them operate, we’ll find a place for you here in the state of Florida, because we think it’s important, and we know that it can be done safely.” As Yahoo! Sports’s Keith Smith detailed, the Disney complex offers abundant hotel space and basketball facilities. And perhaps more importantly, because the complex is private property, Disney could block off roads and other means of access so that NBA players and staff could stay quarantined. And from Disney’s perspective, the potential value of the NBA playing exclusively on its property is incalculable. Disney owns ESPN, which in turn broadcasts hundreds of NBA games each year (a deal worth a little over $2.6 billion annually). The company has been hit hard financially by the coronavirus pandemic, with parks shut down and ESPN losing money with few live sports to broadcast. As an unnamed former Disney executive told the Athletic’s Joe Vardon, an NBA presence in Disney World could be a much-needed boon to Disney — and ESPN’s — profits, encouraging visitors to return to the amusement park when possible: “Right now that message is so important, one in our culture, two as it relates to sports being a place that people can go back to and feel safe. I think it’s a very powerful message. It says, ‘Wow, the NBA guys who are worth tens of millions of dollars and the owners are worth billions and billions of dollars, have felt like this is a safe place to put their athletes.’” But there are lots of questions left for the NBA, Disney, and the NBPA to answer. Which teams would go to Disney World? Would the NBA season begin where it left off, or will teams move on to the playoffs? Would players be quarantined for two weeks upon arriving at Disney World? What about players’ families? And if itt works (leaving aside what “works” even means for a potentially truncated NBA season held in what’s essentially a sports theme park), what does it mean for other sports, especially those with larger staff and bigger teams, like football? Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Trump has framed the fight against the coronavirus as a war against an “invisible enemy.” But if this is a war, Trump has been a disastrous commander in chief. He’s offered the nation no real plan to defeat the coronavirus. He continually undercuts the authority of his “generals” in this war — top health officials like Dr. Anthony Fauci who are critical to the war’s success. He’s failed to give his front-line troops — the doctors, nurses, and hospital staff working to treat and save coronavirus patients — the vital equipment they need. And he’s done little to bring the country together to support the war effort.  “I don’t take responsibility at all,” Trump infamously told reporters in March. Americans must not only suffer the indignity of being drafted into Trump’s war, then, but also suffer the indignity of losing it. More US citizens have died from the coronavirus than during the Vietnam, Afghanistan, and Iraq Wars combined. “These are the worst decisions that any commander has made even considering Iraq, Afghanistan, and Vietnam,” Kristofer Goldsmith, an Iraq War veteran, told me, “and it’s all happening here in the United States.” Vox’s Ezra Klein noted two weeks ago how amazing it is that, months after the US declared a national emergency over the coronavirus, there is no plan to defeat the disease and return the country back to normal: The closest [the administration] has come is a set of guidelines for states to consult when reopening. You can read them yourself at the White House’s “Opening America” landing page. The guidelines are not quite a plan, but they are at least a framework: They call for states to reopen when caseloads have fallen for 14 days, when hospitals can test all health care workers continually, when contact tracing architecture is up and running. It’s as outrageous as if Trump had sent actual troops into an actual war with no war plan.  “In the war against this virus, we need a campaign plan, and the commanders and command structure to execute it. We don’t seem to have either a plan or commanders to implement it,” Andrew Weber, the Pentagon’s top biological defense official from 2011 to 2014, told me. “That was perhaps excusable in February and March, but beyond the pale as we enter month six of this pandemic.” Goldsmith, who gathered intelligence for the US military in 2005, told me he sees parallels between the lack of planning for the Iraq War and Trump’s handling of the coronavirus.  “This administration, like [George W.] Bush’s, is going to war rhetorically while having ‘troops’ go into war without the proper equipment, numbers, or strategy,” he told me. “A lot of the frustrations first responders are feeling today are what soldiers in Iraq felt.” On top of that, Trump is already declaring victory despite the war being far from over. He’s calling to reopen the country and have everything go back to the way it was, even as the US confirms around 1,000 to 2,000 new coronavirus cases per day. This, in effect, is just like when President George W. Bush declared “mission accomplished” well before the Iraq War was won. This approach, to put it mildly, is not a war plan. It’s improvisation. It’s the fighting equivalent of saying, “We’re not going to follow sound military strategy. We’ll just kill when we need to.” That may help at the margins, but it won’t lead to victory. Despite the best advice out there, Trump has decided he alone knows the path to victory. But so far the path he’s chosen has led to disaster. Since March, the president has boosted hydroxychloroquine as a miracle drug against the coronavirus, claiming it has “a real chance to be one of the biggest game changers in the history of medicine.” ....be put in use IMMEDIATELY. PEOPLE ARE DYING, MOVE FAST, and GOD BLESS EVERYONE! @US_FDA @SteveFDA @CDCgov @DHSgov Asked soon after if Trump was right that the drug was effective against the coronavirus, Fauci said the president oversold the antimalarial drug’s efficacy against Covid-19.  “No. The answer is no,” Fauci said in front of Trump during a White House press conference. “You really can’t make any definitive statement about it.” Immediately, the president stepped in, saying he was still a “big fan” of hydroxychloroquine and that he’s “seen things that are impressive.” It was one of the earliest, most dramatic moments in Trump’s handling of the country’s coronavirus response. Here was a specialist in the field of pandemic response clearly stating that there was no evidence yet that hydroxychloroquine was even effective, let alone a silver bullet. Yet Trump immediately undercut Fauci’s cautious, fact-based response and hyped the unproven drug once again.  Two weeks ago, Fauci told the Senate Health Committee it was too early to consider reopening the country, primarily schools, while the coronavirus rages. “The idea of having treatments available or a vaccine to facilitate reentry of students into the fall term would be something that would be a bit of a bridge too far,” he said.  Asked about Fauci’s comments the next day, Trump said he was “surprised,” adding, “[T]o me it’s not an acceptable answer, especially when it comes to schools.” Rick Bright, a former top US vaccine official and now whistleblower against the president’s handling of the coronavirus, alleges Trump loyalists had him demoted at the Department of Health and Human Services for raising alarms about hydroxychloroquine. “Government leadership was rushing blindly into a potentially dangerous situation by bringing in non-FDA approved chloroquine from India and Pakistan from facilities that had not been inspected by the FDA,” Bright told reporters in May. “I could not in good conscience ignore the scientific recommendations to limit access to those drugs under the direct care of a doctor, and instead allow political ambition and timelines to override scientific judgment.” It’s clear the president has no qualms about openly lambasting top advice from his aides, which in Trump’s own parlance would be like him publicly decrying his military’s war strategy. For some, that’s well within his right to do as commander in chief. “They are advisers to the president, not commanders. They’re not elected officials and have no authority to make decisions on behalf of the nation,” Ephraim Mattos, a former Navy SEAL sniper, told me. “President Trump is the leader and commander and these complex decisions are his to make. His reelectability will rise or fall based on public opinion, and so he absolutely should be outshining his staff.” There’s a lot of truth to that. Presidents have long pushed back on military advice in wars, and even relieved top commanders who didn’t perform to their liking.  But this reveals one of the major problems (though certainly not the only one) with viewing the coronavirus fight through the lens of war.  “As the organization with legitimate use of force, the military has the power to defend society but also threaten it — so civilian leaders have a ‘right to be wrong’ in order to ensure civilian oversight of the military, which is critical to the functioning of a democracy,” Sara Plana, a warfare expert at MIT, told me.  “In the coronavirus context, the relationship between the government and health experts does not involve this dynamic,” she said, “and it is challenging the expertise of health professionals that threatens society.” “To question experts so publicly not only undercuts the strategy but portrays a sense that the leaders we all depend on don’t really know what they’re doing,” Plana continued. “That’s a pretty scary thing for Americans who are trying to survive right now.” Bright, the whistleblower, told a congressional subcommittee earlier this month that the Trump administration never ramped up to give the nation what it needed to combat the disease. “I knew that we were going to have a crisis for our health care workers because we were not taking action. We were already behind the ball,” he told the panel. “[January] was our last window of opportunity to turn on production to save the lives of our health care workers, and we didn’t act.”  Trump allowed the Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) of medical equipment and drugs to dwindle on his watch. Despite the president’s assertions that his predecessor depleted it, Dr. Tara O’Toole, a former homeland security official in the Obama administration, told FactCheck.org in April that “the SNS was definitely not an empty shell.” In late March, Christi Grimm, then the acting inspector general at the Department of Health and Human Services, surveyed over 300 hospitals in nearly 50 states and territories to better understand what they faced as an influx of coronavirus patients flooded their facilities.  What she found was “their most significant challenges centered on testing and caring for patients with COVID-19 and keeping staff safe. Hospitals said that severe shortages of testing supplies and extended waits for test results limited hospitals’ ability to monitor the health of patients and staff.” “They also reported that widespread shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) put staff and patients at risk,” wrote Grimm, whom Trump ousted in May for authoring the report. “In addition, hospitals said that they were not always able to maintain adequate staffing levels or to offer staff adequate support.” While the report didn’t directly question the federal government’s response, it made clear hospitals still had serious concerns about their ability to care for patients many weeks after the first coronavirus case was detected in the US.  In other words, front-line medical workers were left to face the disease without the requisite armor or weapons. Trump could have tried to rectify the situation by invoking the Defense Production Act, a Korean War-era law that allows the president to compel industry to make needed equipment for a national security emergency. In the coronavirus case, he could require major companies with large factories to make masks, gowns, ventilators, hospital beds, and more. Instead, Trump wavered for weeks, saying companies were already making those items without government intervention and that any use of the law would somehow turn the American economy socialist. “We’re a country not based on nationalizing our business,” Trump said during a late March press conference. “Call a person over in Venezuela; ask them how did nationalization of their businesses work out. Not too well. The concept of nationalizing our business is not a good concept.” But both of those arguments are deeply flawed. While a lot of private businesses like General Motors and Ford upped their production, the lack of federal government involvement in the procurement and distribution process meant those products weren’t necessarily going to the cities and states in most dire need of them. As Vox’s Jen Kirby wrote at the time, “State officials keep saying that without some sort of government guidance, they’re left competing for the same equipment (as opposed to having that equipment go where it’s most needed) and thus overpaying.” And the DPA, when used as intended, doesn’t involve a government takeover of industry. “It doesn’t nationalize businesses, but rather allows the US government to contract with companies to prioritize manufacturing of critical goods — in this case, medical supplies,” Kirby also noted. “It’s a scalpel, not an ax,” James Hasik, a DPA expert at George Mason University, told me in March. Trump finally relented on April 2 and invoked the DPA to have companies make more masks and ventilators. That was a good move, but it was far, far too late.  Now, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is telling Americans — citizens of the richest and most powerful country on the planet — to make their own face coverings.  Three days after 9/11, then-President George W. Bush famously stood atop the smoldering ashes of the World Trade Center and vowed retribution against the attackers. But he also used the occasion to comfort a reeling nation.  “America today is on bended knee in prayer for the people whose lives were lost here, for the workers who work here, for the families who mourn,” he said, his left arm around a first responder. “This nation stands with the good people of New York City and New Jersey and Connecticut as we mourn the loss of thousands of our citizens.” It was a moment that, at the time, brought the country together. Goldsmith, the Iraq War veteran, told me Trump had a chance to do the same thing. “We’ve just had a 9/11 moment,” he said, but “the president has chosen quite purposefully not to bring Americans together.” A Bush critic, Goldsmith sounded incredulous when he heard himself say that “George Bush comparatively was so much better at handling a crisis. I now hold fondly the man who sent me to war in Iraq for weapons of mass destruction that didn’t exist.” In April, Trump bashed New York City — the epicenter of America’s coronavirus outbreak — falsely claiming officials were inflating the death toll. A spokesperson for New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio, a staunch Trump opponent, told CBS News at the time that such rhetoric insulted the dead. “These were people with names, hobbies, lives,” the staffer said. “They leave behind grieving loved ones. They deserve to be recognized, not minimized.” Trump has also continued his habit of attacking those who criticize him or don’t praise him effusively enough. Also in March, Trump told Vice President Mike Pence not to call governors who criticized the administration.  That, in the war analogy, would be like Trump purposefully refusing to arm a battalion because its commander doesn’t like the strategy. He’s also tried to deflect blame onto former President Barack Obama, in some instances, ludicrously. In April, for example, Trump said his predecessor “left us nothing. We started off with bad, broken tests, and obsolete tests.” The problem with that argument is the coronavirus didn’t exist until 2019 — two years after Obama left office. That makes the state of tests a Trump responsibility, not an Obama one. Trump has also revived his earlier political attacks on Obama, falsely alleging that he orchestrated an illegal spying operation on the Trump campaign.  Time spent on the conspiracy theories takes away from the time Trump should be focused on winning his war. A national response requires a president focused on the task at hand, not dividing a nation that should come together during a time of crisis. As expected, the result of Trump’s leadership (or rather, lack thereof) has been a more polarized America. Amazing split. Republicans think the U.S. response to coronavirus has been better than the ones by South Korea, Germany, UK, Italy and China.Democrats think that the U.S. response to coronavirus has been worse than the ones by South Korea, Germany, UK, Italy and China. pic.twitter.com/bnHQCD2CBj Put together, it’s clear Trump isn’t winning the war he boasts of waging. Instead, he’s severely outmatched by the enemy he faces. He may pay the price for it at the ballot box in November, but the rest of us may continue to pay for it with our lives. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Federal public health officials worked to remind Americans celebrating Memorial Day weekend of the importance of maintaining social distancing Sunday, highlighting that although the coronavirus crisis appears to be gradually improving in many regions of the United States, many still remain at risk of infection. “With the country starting to open up this holiday weekend, I again remind everyone that the coronavirus is not yet contained,” Stephen Hahn, commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, tweeted. “It is up to every individual to protect themselves and their community. Social distancing, hand washing and wearing masks protect us all.”  And on ABC’s This Week, Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, also emphasized the need to keep space between people, even outdoors. “Social distancing is absolutely critical, and if you can’t social distance and you’re outside, you must wear a mask,” Birx said. “These are items that are really critical to protect individuals. We’ve learned a lot about this virus, but we now need to translate that learning into real changed behavior that stays with us so we can continue to drive down the number of cases.”  The reminders came as the US Covid-19 death toll approaches 100,000 — and as reports and photos circulate online showing large crowds at beaches and other vacation spots, some of them enclosed. With outdoor recreational areas like beaches and parks drawing large numbers of people across the US, ideal social distancing is not always possible. Video went viral Sunday of a packed pool in Missouri, and there were reports of long lines and crowds at the Jersey Shore, water parks in Texas, and beaches in Florida. “Without a doubt, this is one of the busiest weekends I’ve seen in many years,” Volusia County Beach Safety Deputy Chief Andrew Ethridge told the Daytona Beach News-Journal, in Florida. “We have 47 miles of beach in Volusia County and every bit of it has crowds.” In many photos and videos it’s unclear how close together strangers are standing, but in some images it’s evident that there is less than 6 feet between strangers, and that people are not wearing masks. This is a cause for concern, not because going out is inherently unsafe or because pools and beaches are dangerous spaces, but because crowds offer unique opportunities for infection. As Vox’s German Lopez has explained, there are a number of ways to stay safe while outdoors — the most important of which Birx and Hahn highlighted: wearing masks and staying distant from others. But: The risk here is close and prolonged contact. A jogger running by you for a couple of seconds isn’t the end of the world. But if you’re within 6 feet of someone else for longer than that — especially for hours — it could be dangerous. “The two variables we worry about is that distance from another person who might be sick and the time spent with them,” Crystal Watson, senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, told me. This applies to the outdoors, too. While the outdoors are generally safer than the indoors, it’s still a good idea to avoid packed parks or beaches. People who don’t live together just shouldn’t be stacked together for long in any setting. So if you’re going out to eat, consider skipping the packed restaurant. If you’re going to a park or beach, look for an area without too many people around. Birx was asked about these images of crowded areas Sunday on Meet the Press and said there are ways “to be together socially, yet distant.” She also stressed, “This only works if we all follow the guidelines and protect one another.” And following those guidelines — staying 6 feet apart and wearing masks — limits the sort of prolonged contact experts believe is dangerous. By doing that, those hoping to enjoy a holiday weekend can do so while minimizing the risks of becoming infected or infecting others. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.America’s public health experts are working hard to map out a plan to combat the coronavirus in America. And there are indeed many proposals — from academic centers, from think tanks, and from the government. While the plans differ, nearly all of them rely on some combination of surveillance, mass testing, isolation, and contact tracing. Many of them point to countries like Singapore, South Korea, and Germany as examples of how to intelligently respond to the pandemic. But what if the successful strategies in those countries just won’t work in America? This question was posed by Keith Humphreys, a Stanford University professor who works on addiction and public health policy, in a viral Twitter thread last week. Humphreys argued that a lot of his public health colleagues weren’t thinking seriously enough about the cultural obstacles that might undercut the country’s efforts to test, trace, and isolate Americans. He later penned a Washington Post column drawing out his arguments in a little more detail. Humphreys’s basic claim is that any plan we adopt, no matter how wise, is useless without “widespread political consent” from American citizens. And the obsession with individual liberties in America, coupled with a general distrust of government, poses an enormous challenge to even the best conceivable plan. I spoke to Humphreys by phone about what he thinks public health experts are failing to recognize, and if he believes America is too libertarian to handle a collective action problem like the coronavirus pandemic.  A lightly edited transcript of our conversation follows.  Lay out America’s “political-cultural” problem for me. Why are you worried that we can’t deal with this pandemic the way other countries have? Well, I think we’re different from the other democracies that have handled this well in our long-term resistance to the growth of the state in general, but also in the domain of health. Why is it that every other developed country has government-guaranteed health care and we do not? The obvious reason is that there’s an instinctive aversion to government power in the DNA of America. This is the only major democracy in which a huge number of people have fought to prevent a government guarantee of health care for all citizens. This aversion is especially potent now, but it goes back to the very beginning of the country, a country founded by people who lived in fear of a king. Our Constitution was set up with checks and balances out of fear of the power of the state. And that libertarian streak is with us through everything and it also applies in the domain of health. There are some advantages to that libertarian instinct, and I think you admit that, but the problem is that it’s just the wrong ideological software to be running in a pandemic— Right. I don’t think we want to live in [a more authoritarian society] like Singapore, for example. But the question is what do you do about an epidemic when we really are all in it together and there is no way to run a test, trace, and isolate program without seriously increasing government surveillance and having access to a lot of quite intimate personal information? Those libertarian impulses stand athwart that.  So I just don’t think we can do what Germany does, where there’s higher confidence in the state and higher trust in the state. I don’t think we can do what democracies in East Asia are doing, where there’s a more recent history of autocracy and a lot of deference to the state. Even though I’m a public health person and I admire all the people working on all the technical problems and thinking about what we should do to halt this virus, I just believe that we’re underestimating the political and cultural obstacles here. What, exactly, can countries like South Korea and Germany do that we can’t? In South Korea, you basically had authoritarian rule up until the ’80s. The adults in that country grew up in a place where if the government was worried about a parasitic infection, you had to submit stool samples to the officials — it’s just what you did. And these are the people deciding, right now, whether or not to follow the orders of their government or whether to hand over personal information. And what we’ve seen is that most people are willing to do it.  The case of Germany is a little different. Contrary to stereotypes, Germans are not deferent to their state. They have a lot of concerns about health information, for example. But I think the big difference there is that people have comparatively more trust in the state. They believe their state is fundamentally competent. Virtually all the polling we have on Americans shows that many of them simply don’t trust the state, and that’s a huge problem when the state is asking you to sacrifice so much for the sake of the public good.  My problem with libertarianism has always been that it gives us a language of rights but it can’t give us a language of obligations — it’s fundamentally an individualistic philosophy. What you’re really saying, in my mind at least, is that America is too libertarian to deal with a collective action problem like this. Is that fair? Yes, that’s a very pithy way to express what I’m saying, but it’s exactly right.  I should say that I’m raising all these questions out of anxiety. In other words, I’ll be delighted if I’m wrong. But I keep thinking about other times where we’ve been in precisely this situation around health, going back to Harry Truman proposing national health insurance and getting beaten. And I worked for President Obama, so I was right there as we struggled to get some version of the Affordable Care Act passed. I watched several states turn down Medicaid expansion. And I saw how the ACA was unable to get a single Republican vote and I don’t think anyone lost their seat because of that, because they voted against it. So I’ve seen this dynamic play out over and over again in different contexts and I worry it will be the thing that limits what we’re able to do in our efforts to stamp out this virus. I guess I can’t put it any better than you: I don’t think we can reconcile our libertarianism with the need for a sense of shared purpose in a time of crisis.  If what you’re saying is true, then it makes no difference who the president is or which party is in charge, because our problems are fundamentally cultural. And in that sense, you’re defining the problem as insoluble.  I think that would be a little bleak. I would say that the president does matter. I was talking to a friend the other day and he said that if Trump put on a mask at a press conference and said, “I’m doing this because it’s a smart thing to do,” that would matter to some people who are resistant, that signal from someone they trust would matter. So it’s not that leadership is irrelevant, but I do think there are real limits to what’s possible in the country and the origins of that stretch back to our founding.  All right, Keith, you’ve forced me to play the optimist here. I take all your points and I don’t think anyone can deny our libertarian streak, but here’s my counter: A majority of Americans have shown a remarkable willingness to cooperate and social distance in spite of the vacuum of leadership at the top — and that’s true across party lines. Does that give you any pause at all? That’s a very good point and it is encouraging. And some of the data I’ve seen from across the country shows that most people are choosing to stay home, even in places that have lifted their lockdown, like Georgia. So there is some consensus on that. The question for me is, does that translate into behavior? The psychologist in me can see that 80 percent of Americans think masks are a good idea, for example, but does that mean 80 percent of Americans are actually wearing masks? Because I’m not seeing that and I live in one of the places you’d expect to see that.  Wouldn’t it, at least, be fair to say that our cultural capacity might be wider than you’re suggesting? I think we have to be careful not to confuse distrust of this administration with distrust of government as such, even though I agree Americans are unusually distrustful of government. Still, there are reasons to think that there’s a reservoir of goodwill that could be marshaled if we had a competent leader who mapped out a clear plan to deal with this pandemic, a plan that inspired confidence and justified the sacrifices and the inconveniences— Well, there are some places where I think you could establish that empirically by looking around the country. I live in the Bay Area, for instance, and the governor, Gavin Newsom, is pretty well-regarded. He was out ahead on this and he imposed a lot of restrictions that people mostly accepted. I suspect most people will follow their local leaders when the restrictions are wise and explained decently.  I would say, though, that I think a lot depends on there being an actual shared interest that’s obvious to everyone. My parents, for example, live in an assisted living community where everyone else is in exactly the same situation, so there’s a total consensus. They do not take visitors, they do not go out. But they can do it because everyone recognizes the shared risks. To be even more clear, I recognize that a lot of people are willing to cooperate and sacrifice. The question we have to ask, the question that virologists, in particular, have to ask, is will it be enough? If 20 percent of the country opts out, or if several states opt out, will that compromise our national response? Or will it be just enough to keep the pandemic raging on?  My worry is that we’ll have just enough dissent, for all the reasons we already discussed, to keep this thing going. In that case, we might want to factor that into our thinking about what’s possible here. We need some idea of the level of compliance we’ll need for any plan to work, and if we can’t replicate the compliance levels in countries like South Korea or Germany, we probably shouldn’t try to replicate their approach. Those are good questions and I don’t know the answers. Neither do I. But look, when I say we’re different from other countries, I’m not saying we’re bad or worse. I’m just making an assessment of what we’re good at and what we’re not good at. I mean, if someone wanted to write a book about how much they hate Keith Humphreys, I’d tell them to publish it in America, not Britain, because the libel laws are more lenient here and we value free expression and you can get away with it. So that’s just an assessment based on the legal culture in this country. We have lots of strengths in America that can be of incredible value in normal times, but in a pandemic, those same strengths can become a liability. That’s all I’m really saying. You conclude your thread by saying we’ll probably end up with something like a Swedish coronavirus policy by default. What does that mean exactly? How does that scenario end? One of the pushbacks I got was that our approach won’t be as good as Sweden’s because we don’t have universal health care. So, I think what this means is that the virus will continue to spread fairly consistently across the country. I wouldn’t be surprised if the death toll has doubled by Labor Day. I would, of course, be incredibly happy to be wrong about that.  And there’s really only two things that could interrupt this: 1) a vaccine, which is very unlikely for at least a year or more, or 2) increased development of therapeutics. So maybe we’ll have a breakthrough in our ability to treat the symptoms. What I think is most likely is that a huge number of people contract this virus and we develop immunity over time. If that happens, the virus will diminish over time, but it won’t be because of our test, trace, and isolate efforts. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Department of Justice has weighed in on stay-at-home orders in Illinois and California — and has warned officials in both states that the federal government believes they may be exceeding their legal authority with their current means of containing the spread of the coronavirus pandemic. The Justice Department’s signals — a statement of interest backing a lawsuit against Illinois Gov. J.B. Pritzker’s lockdown order, and letters to both Los Angeles officials and California’s governor — are part of an initiative announced last month by Attorney General William Barr meant to monitor and take legal action against any state or local ordinances that represent an “overbearing infringement of constitutional and statutory protections.” The warnings come as the Trump administration is aggressively promoting the reopening of venues like churches and nonessential businesses amid a crashing economy, and as the administration looks for ways to accelerate a return to pre-coronavirus normalcy. On Friday, Justice Department lawyers filed a statement of interest backing a lawsuit brought against Pritzker by Illinois state Rep. Darren Bailey. Bailey, a Republican, claims that Pritzker illegally extended state stay-at-home restrictions past a 30 day period in which the governor was allowed to exercise emergency powers. “However well-intentioned they may be, the executive orders appear to reach far beyond the scope of the 30-day emergency authority granted to the Governor under Illinois law,” said Steven Weinhoeft, the US Attorney for the Southern District of Illinois, in a statement explaining the federal government’s statement of interest. “Even during times of crisis, executive actions undertaken in the name of public safety must be lawful.”  Weinhoeft continued, “And while the people of Illinois must be physically protected from the effects of this public health crisis, including by complying with [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] guidelines their constitutionally guaranteed rights and liberties must be safeguarded as well.”  Clay County Circuit Judge Michael McHaney ruled in favor of Bailey in late April, but Pritzker has since moved the lawsuit to federal court. The lawsuit applies only to Bailey himself, but would allow individuals and groups to challenge restrictions themselves. And in another development on Friday, Eric Dreiband, assistant attorney general for the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division, wrote a letter to Los Angeles officials expressing concern about “an arbitrary and heavy-handed approach to continuing stay-at-home requirements.” The letter came in response to city officials’ statements last week indicating their commitment to long-term restrictions on movement. Los Angeles Mayor Eric Garcetti said last week that his city would “never be completely open until we have a cure” in an interview with ABC’s Good Morning America. And Los Angeles County Public Health Director Barbara Ferrer said some form of quarantine restrictions will remain in place for the county “for the next three months.” She later clarified by saying that “while the ‘Safer at Home’ orders will remain in place over the next few months, restrictions will be gradually relaxed.” “Reports of your recent public statements indicate that you suggested the possibility of long-term lockdown of the residents in the City and County of Los Angeles, regardless of the legal justification for such restrictions. Any such approach may be both arbitrary and unlawful,” Dreiband said in his letter. Garcetti responded to the letter from the Justice Department during a press briefing on Friday, saying, “We are not guided by politics in this, we are guided by science. We are guided by collaboration. ... The numbers will always guide us forward — there is nothing else. There’s no games, there’s nothing else going on.” Tuesday, Dreiband sent a similar letter to California Gov. Gavin Newsom, arguing that the state needs to allow churches to reopen sooner than it currently plans to, accusing Newsom of “pronounced unequal treatment of faith communities” and of violating the civil rights of worshippers.  California plans to allow places of worship to reopen once criteria are met for the state to move to phase three of its reopening plan, which would allow “higher-risk workplaces” to resume normal business.  Although a number of “superspreader events” have been tied to religious meetings in South Korea, France, and the United States, the DOJ argued in its letter that “California has not shown why interactions in offices and studios of the entertainment industry, and in-person operations to facilitate nonessential ecommerce, are included on the list as being allowed ... while gatherings with social distancing for purposes of religious worship are forbidden. Newsom’s office has replied to comment requests by saying only it had received the letter, and the governor promised Monday worship would be back in session within “weeks, if everything holds.” Neither letter contained any threat of legal action, but both — as well as the department’s involvement in the Illinois case — are clear signs of the Department of Justice’s willingness to assist the president in his push to reopen the country.  President Trump has advocated for a rapid reopening for weeks, encouraging anti-lockdown protesters with a series of tweets stating someone should “liberate” their states, and regularly advocating for businesses to be allowed to reopen on Twitter. REOPEN OUR COUNTRY! But there are hard limits to what the federal government can do in a federalist system that empowers states to oversee much of their own pandemic responses, as Vox’s Ian Millhiser explained Friday, after Trump announced he would order churches to reopen — and “override the governors” if they resisted: Congress could theoretically override some decisions by state governors. The Constitution gives Congress the power to “regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states,” a provision which gives Congress broad authority to regulate the national economy and to remove obstacles to interstate trade. So, if Congress disagreed with a state order closing businesses, it could likely enact a federal law preempting that state order. But even assuming that churches have a substantial enough impact on interstate commerce that Congress could order them reopened, Trump is not Congress. Trump can invoke existing laws that give the federal executive branch some power to help manage a public health crisis, but those statutes largely permit the federal government to support ongoing state efforts to control a disease, or to quarantine people seeking to enter the country or to cross state lines. This leaves the Trump administration with limited options for advancing its reopening agenda, particularly in states not governed by allies of the president. But the DOJ’s actions suggest it is increasingly willing to help the president find ways around this limitation. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.   At a press conference Friday afternoon, President Donald Trump announced he would order churches reopened despite the coronavirus pandemic — something he almost certainly does not have the power to do. State governors, Trump claimed, need to allow churches to reopen “right now, for this weekend.” He added that “if they don’t do it, I will override the governors.” Trump angrily reads his statement about reopening places of worship and then leaves without answering questions pic.twitter.com/HiZH7AyJhO Trump also reportedly ordered the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to release guidance for houses of worship seeking to reopen. There have been several outbreaks of coronavirus that were traced back to church gatherings. In April, at least 70 infections were linked to a church in Sacramento, California. More recently, the CDC determined that “among 92 attendees at a rural Arkansas church during March 6-11, 35 (38%) developed laboratory-confirmed COVID-19, and three persons died.”  Although many governors have either ordered churches closed or restricted gatherings within churches, some governors have allowed places of worship to reopen. There have also been some court challenges to orders closing houses of faith, but the impact of these challenges, at least so far, has largely been marginal. State governments, not the White House, have the primary responsibility to decide how their states will react to the pandemic.  Congress could theoretically override some decisions by state governors. The Constitution gives Congress the power to “regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states,” a provision which gives Congress broad authority to regulate the national economy and to remove obstacles to interstate trade. So, if Congress disagreed with a state order closing businesses, it could likely enact a federal law preempting that state order. But even assuming churches have a substantial enough impact on interstate commerce that Congress could order them reopened, Trump is not Congress. Trump can invoke existing laws that give the federal executive branch some power to help manage a public health crisis, but those statutes largely permit the federal government to support ongoing state efforts to control a disease, or to quarantine people seeking to enter the country or to cross state lines. Notably, when reporters asked White House press secretary Kayleigh McEnany to identify which provision of federal law permits the president to override a governor’s public health order, McEnany did not do so. Instead, her answer — “the president will strongly encourage every governor to allow churches to reopen” — appeared to concede that Trump only has the power to try to persuade governors to change their policies. Yet while Trump almost certainly does not have the lawful authority to order churches reopened, he is the head of the Republican Party and his words are likely to shape the views of many GOP partisans — some of whom are sitting judges. Under the Supreme Court’s decision in Employment Division v. Smith (1990), churches and other religious institutions may be subjected to the same laws as anyone else, so long as they are not singled out for inferior treatment. As Justice Antonin Scalia wrote for his Court in that case, “the government’s ability to enforce generally applicable prohibitions of socially harmful conduct, like its ability to carry out other aspects of public policy, ‘cannot depend on measuring the effects of a governmental action on a religious objector’s spiritual development.’”  But Smith has fallen out of favor with judicial conservatives, and it is likely the Supreme Court’s Republican majority will overrule it in a case they are scheduled to hear in the fall. Even if Smith is overruled, however, state governments may still regulate churches — or even close them down — so long as the rules regulating those churches are narrowly tailored to advance a compelling interest, such as preventing the spread of a deadly disease. While existing law provides that governors may close churches in order to protect human life, it is far from clear that an increasingly conservative judiciary will follow this law. Last month, for example, Trump-appointed Judge Justin Walker wrote a highly partisan opinion that seemed to liken a Kentucky order, which allegedly banned drive-in church services, to tales of slaves being beaten for “attending prayer meetings.” So, while Trump does not have the lawful authority to order churches reopened, his rhetoric is likely to influence politicians and at least some Republican judges. That means the courts could require churches to reopen long before the virus is under control — potentially leading to new outbreaks like the ones in California and Arkansas. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Since coronavirus lockdowns began in the US, most Americans have drastically changed their patterns: following instructions to stay home, limiting almost all contact with others, and venturing out only for essential trips and exercise.  As states begin to ease social distancing restrictions, people are beginning to have more options. Between those wanting to patronize newly reopened businesses or socialize in person, and more employers calling people back to work, survey and cellphone data suggests people are already starting to trickle out of their homes. But for many people, it’s really not clear which kinds of gatherings are safe and which aren’t. And that uncertainty can spark anxiety. Fortunately, health experts know more about the coronavirus than they did when the lockdowns began, and they can point us to different levels of risk as we begin to reengage. There’s also advice on how to minimize harm. “There’s been a polarization between two purported options of staying home indefinitely … versus going back to business as usual,” Julia Marcus, an infectious disease epidemiologist at Harvard, told me. “The idea of harm reduction gives us a way of thinking about risk as a continuum and thinking about the middle ground between those two options.” Marcus and Boston University epidemiologist Eleanor Murray created an infographic showing the different scales of risk. We at Vox were inspired by it and, with Marcus and Murray’s permission, adapted it: “A lot of people, when they hear that you can’t completely get rid of your risk, they think, ‘Well, that means that it’s inevitable, and I’ll just go and do everything that I was normally doing before, and if I get sick, I get sick,’” Murray told me. “But there are lots of things you can do in between nothing and everything.” First and foremost, the advice that has been repeated for much of the past few months remains true: Your home is still the safest place to be during this pandemic. You should continue trying to stay home as much as possible, because the virus is still circulating at a very high rate in many communities. (If you want to be extra careful, some resources, like Covid Act Now, help show how much transmission there is in your area.) But whether you need to for work or you’re simply tired of looking at your home’s walls, there are ways to mitigate risk when you go out. For one, outdoors is generally safer, thanks to the open air — where the virus can more easily disperse — and, potentially, the warm, sunny weather. As Duke health policy expert Mark McClellan told me, “It’s a good year for outdoor dining and outdoor shopping and outdoor all kinds of activities.” It also matters who you’re hanging out with. It’s okay to closely interact with people you live with (unless one of you gets sick; then whoever’s sick should isolate). But you should try to keep your distance from people you don’t live with. And you should try to avoid interacting with too many people at once; even if it’s theoretically possible to keep 6 feet from others in a crowded space, it’s still better to avoid it. That’s true for the outdoors, but it’s especially true for the indoors. When you go out, also take the now-familiar precautions: Wash your hands. Don’t touch your face. Wear a mask, particularly in indoor public spaces. Avoid shared surfaces and crowded settings, and keep physical distance — at least 6 feet — from people you don’t live with. If you’re 65 or older or have chronic health conditions that could exacerbate Covid-19, you should take all of this advice more seriously. Separately, experts say it’s a good idea to space out trips outside your home as much as possible — ideally, by two weeks, to match the virus’s incubation period. You could also establish a “closed circle” with people you want to regularly interact with, in which both sides agree to minimize contact with anyone else (although some experts are skeptical of this idea). With these tips, you can’t completely eliminate the risk of leaving your home. But you can greatly reduce that risk. For some, that could make the prospects of going out — with the benefits that going out can entail for your physical and mental health — much more feasible. It all begins, though, with the understanding that risk during the coronavirus pandemic is really a spectrum, not a black-and-white choice. “People will take risks, whether we like it or not,” Marcus said. “The best thing we can do is give them strategies to reduce harm in those situations. If we don’t do that, we’re missing an opportunity.” For more detailed tips for going out and the explanations for them, read Vox’s full explainer. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Throughout May, America has made a lot of progress in scaling up its coronavirus testing abilities. But as they dug deeper over the month, experts and journalists have increasingly questioned whether some of the testing data can really be trusted. First, the good news: America’s testing numbers continued trending up this week. There were about 380,000 tests a day over the week of May 14, up from roughly 320,000 tests a day over the week of May 7 and around 150,000 a day during much of April, based on data from the Covid Tracking Project. That’s still not the 500,000 a day that many experts say is necessary — much less the tens of millions a day that some have called for — but the country is making noticeable progress nonetheless. But then there’s the bad news: Several states are inflating, deliberately or not, their testing numbers by including two different types of tests that experts say should be separated out. That includes the numbers reported by the Covid Tracking Project and subsequently used in Vox’s chart, which rely on the data that states report. Only a handful of states are confirmed to be doing this, and a few have already backed off, based on reporting from Alexis Madrigal and Robinson Meyer at the Atlantic. So it’s not all of the data that’s now under question. But it’s a worrying trend that presents a somewhat rosier picture of the Covid-19 testing numbers than is perhaps warranted. And that makes it hard to gauge whether these states are really ready to start reopening their economies, even as some have already begun to do so. Traditionally, Covid-19 testing numbers have been measured based on the number of diagnostic tests on a daily basis. Diagnostic tests gauge whether a person has the virus in her system and is, therefore, sick right at the moment of the test. Some states’ counts, however, now include antibody tests, which check if someone ever developed antibodies to the virus to see if she has ever been sick in the past. It’s a way for states to pad the numbers — but at the cost of accuracy, since antibody tests are generally less precise, and timeliness. Since antibody tests can’t tell you if someone is sick at the moment of the test, they can’t tell you, like diagnostic tests can, what the current state of Covid-19 in a community is. “We need to understand that there is a new case of a new disease happening in our community,” Pia MacDonald, an epidemiologist at the research institute RTI International, told me. “There are public health interventions that need to happen around that.” Given these different purposes, experts say that states should separate out diagnostic and antibody tests in their counts. Only then can they truly isolate their Covid-19 preparedness in the present by tallying their diagnostic tests and metrics attached to those, such as the positive rate, while separately gauging the overall impact of Covid-19 on the population via antibody tests.  “Both of [the tests] are useful, but you can’t put them together,” MacDonald said. Yet some states are doing just that. Madrigal and Meyer reported in the Atlantic on May 14 that Virginia was “blending the results of two different types of coronavirus test in order to report a more favorable result to the public.” Then on Thursday, May 21, they reported that Georgia, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Vermont were doing the same, as well as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at the federal level. Maine was also mixing its test results, but reversed course on Wednesday, May 20. Virginia also stopped, following reporting from the Atlantic and the Richmond Times-Dispatch. Apparently, not all of these states did this deliberately. At a press conference with the governor, Vermont officials claimed that “they didn’t know they were — they were just publishing numbers from testing sites that were adding em in,” VTDigger reporter Erin Petenko tweeted. Regardless of intent, the practice muddies the waters — making it harder to know if states really are in a better place to start reopening their economies. Testing is a crucial component to getting control over the pandemic. When paired with contact tracing, testing lets officials track the scale of the Covid-19 outbreak, isolate the sick, quarantine those whom the sick came into contact with, and deploy community-wide efforts as necessary. Testing and tracing are how other countries, like South Korea and Germany, have managed to control their outbreaks and started to reopen their economies. “The whole point of this social distancing is to buy us time to build up capacity to do the types of public health interventions we know work,” Natalie Dean, a biostatistics professor at the University of Florida, previously told me. “If we’re not using this time to scale up testing to the level that we need it to be … we don’t have an exit strategy. And then when we lift things, we’re no better equipped than we were before.” Some states have explicitly built testing into their reopening plans, calling for a certain amount of tests or positive rates. But those goals were built with advice from experts that by and large assumed the metrics would be based on diagnostic tests, not antibody tests. So we’re left with a situation in which America’s testing numbers do seem to be improving (finally), but how much of that improvement is real, and how much of it suggests that any particular state is ready to reopen, could come down to how honestly places are reporting their numbers. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Senate is leaving for a one-week Memorial Day recess without advancing any new coronavirus stimulus measures. While the House approved a $3 trillion round of stimulus last week, Senate Republicans dismissed the legislation and have yet to offer any alternative of their own. The recess, which was previously scheduled, comes as top Republicans like Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy question the urgency of additional funding and raise concerns about the national debt. “I don’t see the need right now,” McCarthy told CNN on Tuesday. McConnell was more circumspect, but similarly hesitant. “We’ll discuss a way forward in the next couple weeks,” he said the same day. Their stances reflect those of many Republicans — though the party is somewhat split — even as the economic fallout from the coronavirus only continues to get worse: As of this week, more than 38 million US workers have filed for unemployment since the start of the pandemic. “This is the biggest shock we’ve seen in living memory, and the question looms in the air of, ‘Is it enough?’” Federal Reserve Chair Jerome Powell warned about current recovery efforts at a Senate hearing May 19. Some Republicans, however, appear content to wait and see how existing aid and other economic indicators play out. “Before we rush out and do another spending bill, we should actually let some of this stuff go to work,” Sen. Pat Toomey (R-PA) said during the hearing. A slew of Republican lawmakers are currently trying to hit the brakes on new stimulus bills while workers and businesses continue to suffer from severe financial strain. The degree of economic fallout thus far has been evident: Demand at food banks has skyrocketed in the last few months, more than 100,000 small businesses have permanently shuttered, and companies in a range of industries continue to impose layoffs. States and cities haven’t received additional federal aid since the CARES Act, even as they face cuts to vital programs while revenues from sales and income taxes plummet. Republicans say their reluctance to approve more legislation stems from the desire to see how previously approved aid continues to work. “The problem is, we don’t even have all the money out the door yet,” Sen. John Cornyn (R-TX) told Politico.  While some programs are still in the process of being implemented — like a bailout fund for medium-sized businesses run by the Federal Reserve — others, like an expansion of the unemployment insurance program, are already fully underway. And the need for more support is pressing: The expanded pandemic unemployment insurance is due to sunset at the end of July, for example. Some GOP members are pushing for more, though there’s no clear consensus yet on what that looks like, CNN reported. In one case, Sens. Josh Hawley (R-MO) and Cory Gardner (R-CO) have backed a federal paycheck guarantee plan, while Sen. Mitt Romney (R-UT) has released a proposal aimed at providing hazard pay to frontline workers. Lawmakers like Sens. Lindsey Graham (R-SC), Roy Blunt (R-MO), and Roger Wicker (R-MS), meanwhile, have also expressed interest in another bill that would include infrastructure spending. Although Republicans are reluctant to move quickly on new stimulus efforts, even McConnell has previously conceded that more money for cities and states likely needs to be approved. So even though lawmakers are leaving the Capitol this week without having made much progress, the expectation is that an additional measure could still happen down the line. McConnell’s chief priority for that bill has so far been the inclusion of liability protections for businesses that could be sued by customers and employees in the wake of the pandemic. Blunt told CNN that the Senate could “optimistically” advance another bill before July 4 — more than a month away. In the near term, the upper chamber is set to be out for recess all of next week, returning on Monday, June 1. And until Republicans commit to meaningful negotiations with Democrats on the next package, the country is in economic limbo. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The decision of some Americans to not wear a mask in public has become a political act, the latest demonstration of how misinformation is complicating the American response to the Covid-19 pandemic.  As states reopen, enforcement of new mask requirements in public spaces has led to conflict: A Target employee in California broke his arm after trying to remove two customers refusing to wear masks. In Flint, Michigan, a security guard at a Family Dollar store was shot and killed after a dispute with a disgruntled customer over wearing a face mask.  Now, these kinds of confrontations are also happening in medical clinics and hospitals, endangering health care staff.  A urologist in Florida, who requested anonymity because of fear of losing his job, tells Vox he had his first patient refuse to wear a mask on May 13. The doctor works at a private clinic, which recently instituted a policy requiring all patients to wear a mask while in the building to minimize transmission of the virus. The patient was given a mask at the front desk, but refused to put it on.  “The nurse asked him to put his mask on if he wanted to be seen,” the urologist said. “He got verbally aggressive with her, saying he had a right not to wear a mask, and that we were denying his constitutional rights.” The clinic manager was summoned to speak with the patient, and explained that the mask was to protect both him and the medical staff. “He continued to refuse, so the administration asked him to leave.”  At that point, the patient called 911 to complain he was being denied medical care. “We’re a private property, not an emergency room,” the urologist said. “We’re not required to treat him, and he was not having an acute emergency. I think he just had a very poor understanding of what his rights were.”  The dispatcher declined to send an officer to the scene, but the clinic then called the police. “He ended up walking out of the building before the cops showed up.” The mask is, the urologist says, “not just for his safety. It’s for the safety of those around him.”  It’s difficult to gauge how widespread a problem mask refusal is, and it’s probably uncommon. A recent HuffPost/YouGov poll found that most Americans say they’re mostly or always wearing masks when they’re in public and around others. Nearly 70% of Americans say wearing a mask near others is respectful. Just 8% see it as a sign of weakness. https://t.co/FyfceHGs05 pic.twitter.com/Q00Oi4bqhW But medical professionals interviewed by Vox in three states say health care workers are at times being put at risk by people refusing to wear masks in health care facilities. This rejection of a public health measure only adds to the threats to front-line health care workers, who remain at higher risk of Covid-19 infection, especially in the continued shortage of protective gear, like masks, gloves, and surgical gowns. Some of the potential confusion about mask-wearing stems from changing recommendations from health authorities. In February, the US surgeon general told Americans to “stop buying masks” because they allegedly would not protect users from infection, and that health care workers needed them first. By early April, however, the CDC changed its guidance to recommend people cover their faces in “public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain.”  
    Related
   As the CDC told NPR, recent studies have demonstrated that the virus is frequently spread when people are presymptomatic and asymptomatic. As many as 31 percent of people with Covid-19 may be asymptomatic, and people can be infected for two to 14 days before developing symptoms. Precisely because you might not know who has been infected on a crowded sidewalk, in a hospital, or a doctor’s office, other people’s masks protect you, and your mask protects them.  SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus, is very, very small, and surgical and homemade masks are not as effective as the N95 masks worn by health care workers at filtering the virus. (One study shows the type of fabric used changes homemade masks’ efficacy, with T-shirt fabric performing the best of the tested materials.) Yet researchers say they still seem to reduce the transmissibility of the virus by reducing the transmission of infected droplets. 
    Related
   For this reason, a growing number of doctors, scientists, and public health experts are now calling for universal masking in indoor public spaces and crowded outdoor spaces. One recent study, not yet through peer review, analyzed data from Hong Kong, where near-universal masking was voluntarily adopted very early in the pandemic. It suggests coronavirus transmission may drop as much as 75 percent when surgical masks are used. And other studies suggest that if mask use were universal, it would control transmission even better than a strict lockdown. Especially as the US begins to reopen, masks will be critical tools to help control public transmission.  This evidence-based message, however, has been politicized in the US, with mask refusal by some on the right becoming a symbol on the right for personal freedoms. A poll published May 7 by the Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs Research suggests 76 percent of Democrats wear a mask when they leave home, compared to 59 percent of Republicans.  The divide is also evident in top Republican leadership. Even as two White House aides tested positive for Covid-19 — including one of President Trump’s personal valets and Katie Miller, the Vice President’s press secretary — the president recently told advisers wearing a mask would make him “look ridiculous.”  
    Related
   Vice President Mike Pence has followed Trump’s lead, recently refusing to wear a mask when touring the Mayo Clinic, a medical center in Rochester, Minnesota. Pence was the only person not wearing a face covering during the tour, a violation of the clinic’s policy as well as federal guidelines.  Why is *everyone* wearing a #mask *except* @VP @Mike_Pence⁉️What a “leader.” #coronavirus #COVID19 @Acyn  pic.twitter.com/6gCtCWFu4B After Pence’s tour, Fox News’s Laura Ingraham doubled down on rejecting masks, saying, “social control over large populations is achieved through fear and intimidation and suppression of free thought.” Republican Ohio state representative, Nino Vitale, is required by Ohio’s department of health to wear a mask, but is so far refusing. “We are all created in the image and likeness of God. That image is seen the most by our face,” he wrote on Facebook,  Part of the problem, explains Saskia Popescu, an infectious disease epidemiologist, is the early mixed messaging on masks created space for doubt in the public’s understanding of masks’ benefits. “Anytime there is uncertainty, there is opportunity for harnessing that for politicization — which is frustrating, as novel outbreaks like Covid-19 inherently have uncertainty.”  She explains it’s inevitable that guidelines will continue to change as we learn more about the virus. “I hope that people want us to evolve our processes with the latest data and research,” Popescu says. “What worries me is when politics form the agenda for public health, and not the other way around.”  A nurse at a VA hospital in Kansas, who requested anonymity because of fear of losing her job, also told Vox about a patient who refused to wear a mask this month. “We have a mask policy for all employees and all patients,” she says. Because personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies at the hospital are still limited, nurses are given one surgical mask per day, and patients without masks are loaned cloth masks that the hospital launders after they’ve been used.  The patient was “ranting and raving,” she says. “He said he had been trying to get it and hadn’t caught it, so he didn’t think he needed to wear a mask. I wish I could be that confident and willing to take everyone in this building’s lives into my hands.”  Despite his refusal to don a mask, the patient was cared for, although staff wore gowns and masks as if he had Covid-19. “Some [staff] were irritated,” he was treated, the nurse says, “but it’s not their job to strong-arm someone out of the clinic. What do you want them to do?”  She’s uncertain of what will happen the next time a patient refuses a mask. Although the entire VA medical system requires everyone coming into a medical facility to wear a mask, the nurse’s clinic doesn’t have security staff to enforce it.   So far, all the management has done is give staff permission to wear additional PPE if patients refuse to follow the mask policy.  “At the end of day, as nurses we can’t just kick a sick person out,” she says. “We need to try to help them even if they are stubborn. We need to try to educate them even if they don’t want it,” she says. “It’s part of the gig.” Ryan Shannon, an ER doctor in Florida, describes a patient refusing to wear a mask, even though she was in a room next to an immunocompromised person at high risk of severe Covid-19 illness and death. “She refused, threw the mask on the floor, and proceeded to berate myself and my staff for being a part of the ‘conspiracy and hoax’ that is Covid-19,” he wrote in a May 11 Facebook post.  After the patient’s refusal to follow guidelines, her husband insisted on sitting in the part of the waiting room designated for patients with respiratory complaints like Covid-19, instead of in his car as he was instructed. “We are at the point where social media has turned into a cesspool of misinformation. Misinformation that puts people’s lives at risk,” Shannon wrote. “We are at the point where we have politicized a pandemic. Where one’s political belief almost determines whether or not they wear a mask,” he concluded. “Just wear the bloody mask.” Yet mask rules at health care facilities are not consistent state by state or clearly communicated to staff who have to enforce them. Medical boards of some states, like Texas, have issued clear requirements state-wide that “a mask must be worn by both the patient and physician.” But Florida, for example, appears to have not issued universal guidelines for mask-use, leaving these decisions up to individual facilities — meaning mask rules could vary from hospital to hospital.  Confusion about when and where masks should be worn is also playing out in other high-risk places that provide medical care, like nursing homes. Sue Krohn-Taylor is an administrator at a 72-apartment low-income senior living facility in the large town of Grand Island, Nebraska, where a resident has tested positive for Covid-19. She says she’s been battling some residents who refuse to wear masks, and is exhausted.  “This week, the son of one of the residents told me I was taking away their liberties by making them wear a mask in the common areas,” she says. “If they were only harming themselves, I would back off, but they are placing each and every resident here, and my staff, and our families in harm’s way.” “I can fight the virus, but fighting the lies is what becomes overwhelming,” she says.  Lois Parshley is a freelance investigative journalist and the 2019-2020 Snedden Chair of Journalism at the University of Alaska Fairbanks. Follow her Covid-19 reporting on Twitter @loisparshley. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  The idea of some kind of major federal infrastructure spending bill has circled for years now in Washington. It’s generally a popular idea that seems to have at least some support across party lines.   But new polling, provided exclusively to Vox by the Data for Progress think tank, underscores that public support for infrastructure spending is highly dependent on how you say you’re going to finance it.  When they framed the question as “some Democrats in Congress are proposing spending $100 billion per year for 10 years on a new infrastructure plan,” 62 percent of the public say they think it’s a good idea. And unlike many other progressive policy ideas that poll well but don’t get broad support across states needed to pass the Senate, infrastructure spending faces basically no penalty in the white-skewing Senate map: If you reweight the poll to account for Senate skew, it still has 62 percent support.  But actual congressional appropriations either increase the budget deficit or else need to be offset with some kind of tax increase. And what Data for Progress — a group whose mission is to use credible polling to try to figure out what kind of progressive ideas are actually popular — finds is that the popularity of infrastructure spending varies widely according to how you say you’re going to pay for it.  A $1 trillion infrastructure package described as paid for by a wealth tax is overwhelmingly popular, securing support from over 70 percent of the public. By contrast, paying for increased infrastructure spending with a higher gas tax — an idea well-liked by technical experts across the board — is very unpopular, earning the backing of just 32 percent of voters.  Results like this are important for understanding the politics of specific issues. But they also illustrate a broader message about how politics works.  Running on popular positions on issues while avoiding unpopular activist demands is a good way to win close elections. But which ideas are popular is only loosely related to their ideological coding in elite circles. The most left-wing idea about how to finance an infrastructure package may not be the best on the technical merits or the one most likely to secure cross-party support in Congress in a closed-door negotiation, but it does seem like the best one to run on in an election year.  This graphic summarizes the findings of the poll, conducted in mid-May. In the left-hand column, you get the level of support for the idea in a representative national poll. In the right column, the results are reweighted to take Senate skew into account, part of a larger project to identify Senate-friendly issues for progressives to run on, given the difficulties of the political map.  In this case, unlike issues related to immigration or gun control, the Senate penalty is very mild across the board, so an infrastructure debate in general is friendly terrain for Senate-minded Democrats.  You also see that while infrastructure funding is broadly popular (that’s the control case with no stated funding mechanism), talking about funding quickly complicates the politics.  The deficit case is particularly instructive. Interest rates on government debt are very low, and in fact in inflation-adjusted terms they are negative. Under the circumstances, the substantive case for financing useful investments with greater borrowing is very strong. But while in practice voters rarely seem all that interested in the budget deficit, messages warning about the perils of debt accumulation are pretty effective. When presented with a pro argument citing the stimulus virtues of deficit spending versus “Republicans say that the national debt is the greatest threat to future generations and that increasing the debt is irresponsible,” the infrastructure package becomes much less popular, getting just 50 percent support.   By contrast, four different ways of making rich people pay for infrastructure — the wealth tax, a special surtax on incomes over $200,000, a financial transactions tax, and an effort to make corporations pay taxes on the profits they report to investors rather than the lower sums they report to the IRS — are all very popular.   But paying for infrastructure in ways that involve higher taxes on the broad mass of the public are unpopular. They’re also unpopular in ways that policy wonks might deem perverse. Compared to a broad national retail sales tax, a higher gasoline tax would at least have substantial environmental benefits and spare many of the very poorest households (who are much less likely to own cars). But the voters really hate that idea.  This polling illustrates a few broader themes that everyone should keep in mind.  A lot of ideas that are coded as left-wing or even fringe-y — like the wealth tax or the “real corporate profits tax” — are very popular. The mass public has no great affection for the rich and is eager to find ways to redirect their wealth to publicly spirited purposes.  At the same time, one of the main things that left-wing Americans believe is that private consumption is overrated relative to public services, and it would be better for America to be more like Europe, where taxes are broadly higher and public services are more generous. And the polling finds that idea is not really in line with public sentiment. Most people don’t really want to pay more in taxes (note the wave of bond initiative failures in California just before the pandemic took over) and are very open to conservative arguments that public-sector funds are likely to be wasted.  The United States has enough income inequality that (especially after the Trump administration passed a huge regressive tax cut) it’s pretty easy to come up with ways to pay for lots of things by taxing the rich. As long as you do that, it’s not hard to find politically appealing ways to spend the money.  But efforts to push into broad middle-class tax increases — even ones that have a lot of technocratic support and code as relatively moderate — are huge political risks, even when used to finance something as popular as infrastructure spending.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently released its most detailed reopening guidelines yet, weeks after the White House reportedly suppressed them. The new 60-page guidance is not quite as detailed as a version that leaked on May 13, as first reported by the Associated Press, but has a structure and comprehensiveness that has not been previously seen in federal reopening documents.  It covers not just nonessential businesses, but also offers suggestions on contact tracing and best practices for schools, places of worship, and public transportation. The document, while not compulsory, is useful because it provides a step-by-step plan; unfortunately — in spite of the assurances of CDC Director Robert Redfield — few states actually meet the suggested criteria for phase 1 of reopening, a fact that hasn’t kept about 30 states from beginning to do so. States and jurisdictions should see at least one of the following over a two-week period before beginning the reopening process: a decline in the number of confirmed cases, a decline in the number of cases requiring intensive care, a decline in the number of people presenting at Emergency Rooms with flu-like symptoms, a downward trajectory in positive tests as a percentage of total tests, producing faster test results, and showing an ability to care for all cases without crisis care. The gating criteria are similar to those laid out in the White House guidance for Reopening America in early May. The document notes that some areas will not be able to move through the phases in order, as viral transmissions rise and fall. “Given the potential for a rebound in the number of cases or level of community transmission, a low threshold for reinstating more stringent mitigation standards will be essential,” reads the guidance.  The document also offers detailed guides for individual jurisdictions and public spaces like retail stores, bars, and schools during the reopening process.  “This guidance sets forth a menu of safety measures, from which establishments may choose those that make sense for them in the context of their operations and local community,” it reads. The document comes as many schools are making plans for how or whether to reopen in-person learning. The guidance recommends that schools remain closed in phase 1 of reopening. Schools can safely start to reopen in phase 2, but the CDC recommends that several important health measures be put in place first, such as daily temperature checks for staff and students, and having students eat lunch in their own classrooms. It also strongly encourages cloth facial coverings for staff and older students, especially when social distancing isn’t possible. Hygiene supplies, like soap and hand sanitizer, should also be readily available for students, and classroom and bus surfaces should be disinfected daily. Windows and doors should be open as much as possible to increase airflow; however, this likely won’t be possible for districts in cooler, northern locales. The guidance also offers ideas on how to keep students physically separated as safely as possible. While some school districts are looking at limiting the number of days students are physically present at school, the CDC recommends keeping the same group of students and staff together as often as possible. This would be easier to accomplish with elementary students, but middle and high schoolers, who typically share a classroom with a new set of students and staff for each class period, could see big changes to the way their classes are scheduled as a result. Several of these important criteria, however, are complicated by regional differences in testing capacity and reporting. Adding to the confusion, Redfield said Tuesday that it was safe for states to start reopening now, in violation of his own agency’s guidelines. “I want to clarify that the community-based transmission, the community-to-community transmission that overwhelmed the public health departments in late February, March, April, that’s really coming down,” Redfield said in an interview with the Hill. Most states are now taking definitive steps toward reopening — though it appears that only 13 states had actually met the CDC guidelines to do so as of May 17. White House guidelines were in place in late April, when Georgia, Tennessee, and South Carolina began the process of reopening. Georgia in particular made aggressive moves toward reopening, allowing bowling alleys, gyms, tattoo parlors, barbershops, nail care technicians, beauticians, and massage therapists to open their doors on April 24, and restaurants and movie theaters that enforce strict social distancing guidelines to open April 27.  Because of the lag time between infection and a positive test, it’s still too early to make definitive statements about Covid-19 in a place like Georgia. But after an initial decline in positive tests just after reopening (from infections that occurred two weeks earlier), Georgia is again seeing its infection rate begin to rise again. According to the 60-page document, Georgia may need to start considering reinstating a shelter-in-place order or other, stricter social distancing measures. However, states aren’t required to follow the guidelines, and, moreover, there’s enough room for interpretation within the guidance that Gov. Brian Kemp could wiggle out of doing so. The confusion lies in some of the soft language used throughout the document. Despite the use of firm gating criteria, some recommendations within the document are prescribed for areas with “low levels” of Covid-19 spread and those “with confidence that the incidence of infection is genuinely low.” Adding to the difficulty in managing a cogent reopening process is regional differences in infection rates within states themselves. For example, in Virginia, many rural areas of the state have low infection rates to begin with, and some meet several of the gating criteria for phase 2 or 3. But in the northern part of the state, in the Washington, DC, suburbs, for example, community spread is still happening at a fairly high level, which the guidance says would mean waiting to begin reopening or move through the phases. This puts Virginia Gov. Ralph Northam in a difficult spot in making statewide decisions. In response, Northam has lifted many of the statewide restrictions while allowing some counties, like in northern Virginia, to apply to reopen later. It’s a pattern now seen all over the country. Progress is made in controlling the outbreak in one part of a state, while the situation worsens in another city or county. Reopening done well in the US will likely see many fits and starts until an effective treatment or vaccine becomes widely available. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. In recent years, there’s been an explosion of academic work on the psychological foundations of our politics. The basic theory goes like this: Some people are innately more suspicious of change, of outsiders, of novelty. That base orientation will nudge them toward living in the town where they grew up, eating the foods they know and love, worshipping in the church their parents attended. It will also nudge them toward political conservatism. The reverse is true, too. Some people are naturally more oriented toward newness, toward diversity, toward disruption. That base orientation will push them to live in big cities, try exotic foods, travel widely, appreciate weird art, sample different spiritualities. It will also nudge them toward political liberalism.  In Predisposed: Liberals, Conservatives, and the Biology of Political Differences, John Alford, John Hibbing, and Kevin Smith summarize the evidence: Numerous studies have linked these personality dimensions to differences in the mix of tastes and preferences that seem to reliably separate liberals and conservatives. People who score high on openness, for example, tend to like envelope-pushing music and abstract art. People who score high on conscientiousness are more likely to be organized, faithful, and loyal. One review of this large research literature finds these sorts of differences consistently cropping up across nearly 70 years of studies on personality research. The punch line, of course, is that this same literature also reports a consistent relationship between these dimensions of personality and political temperament. Those open to new experiences are not just hanging Jackson Pollock prints in disorganized bedrooms while listening to techno-pop reinterpretations of Bach by experimental jazz bands. They are also more likely to identify themselves as liberals. Researchers have sliced, measured, and analyzed these psychologies through dozens of schemas. NYU’s Jon Haidt is known for moral foundations theory, which emphasizes the value structures underpinning our political beliefs. Political scientists Marc Hetherington and Jonathan Weiler study “fixed” and “fluid” personalities. Michele Gelfand tracks “tight” and “loose” societies. Some scales measure “openness.” Others measure “authoritarianism.”  But all of them converge on the same psychosocial cleavage. Put simply, conservatives are psychologically tuned to see threat, and so they fear change. Liberals are tuned to prize change, and so they downplay threat.  “Liberalism and conservatism are rooted in stable individual differences in the ways people perceive, interpret, and cope with threat and uncertainty,” write Christopher Johnston, Howard Lavine, and Christopher Federico in Open versus Closed. “Of the many factors that make up your worldview, one is more fundamental than any other in determining which side of the divide you gravitate toward: your perception of how dangerous the world is,” write Hetherington and Weiler in Prius or Pickup.  “Conservatives react more strongly than liberals to signs of danger, including the threat of germs and contamination, and even low-level threats such as sudden blasts of white noise,” writes Haidt in The Righteous Mind. If that’s true, though, why is it conservatives who are downplaying the coronavirus, and liberals who are sheltering in fear of it? A virus isn’t just any threat, some researchers say. It is the threat at the root of these psychological cleavages. Infectious disease has, historically, been humanity’s most lethal foe. Our immune systems have evolved to protect us, but so, too, have our cultures, societies, and psychologies. As Haidt writes, “It’s a lot more effective to prevent infection by washing your food, casting out lepers, or simply avoiding dirty people than it is to let the microbes into your body and then hope that your biological immune system can kill every last one of them.” To some researchers, much of human civilization is a lightly disguised effort at pathogen avoidance: The purity laws of the Old Testament are, from this perspective, a spiritually branded public health campaign. Spicy foods are more common in pathogen-rich areas because they kill bacteria. How a society treats strangers is of particular importance. Strangers carry novel pathogens, diseases to which you and your community have amassed no immunity. A mix of psychologies helps strike the right balance between being overrun by outsiders spreading infection and reaping the benefits of trade and cooperation.    Dozens of studies have confirmed the relationship between the rate of disease and political attitudes. For example, in a 2008 paper titled “Pathogens, Personality, and Culture,” Mark Schaller and Damian Murray showed that worldwide, people were less open, less extroverted, and more sexually conservative in regions rich with disease. In another study, Randy Thornhill, Cory Fincher, and Devaraj Aran found that a “high prevalence of infectious disease” regionally predicted more conservative political values. Gelfand has looked at US states and found the “tightest” political cultures are in the states “with the most disasters and pathogen prevalence.”  But here we are, in the midst of a pandemic, and it’s conservatives seemingly dismissing the danger, opening states and counties prematurely, refusing to wear masks, waving off the deaths of older people as a small price to pay. “One day, it’s like a miracle, it will disappear,” said President Trump.  And, more often, it seems to be liberals who’re locked in their homes, who are warning the worst is yet to come, who are shaming anyone who dares step foot on a beach or forgets to don personal protective equipment. A recent Pew poll showed 61 percent of conservatives fear that state restrictions won’t be lifted quickly enough, while 91 percent of liberals worry they’ll be lifted too quickly.  This is the opposite of what a straightforward read of decades of political psychology research would predict. Early in the pandemic, it was plausible to argue that the divide reflected the virus hitting blue cities first, and sparing red counties its punishments. But Covid-19 has made its way into Trump country, and at any rate, studies show that political beliefs are a more powerful driver of views on the virus than personal experience.  So I asked political psychology researchers: Why are liberals more afraid of the coronavirus than conservatives? And what does that say about political psychology more broadly? In conversations with more than half a dozen political psychologists, three theories dominated. One is that we aren’t seeing anything unexpected at all. John Jost, at New York University, suggested that my reading of the reaction was mistaking its psychological foundations. Liberals were acting out of care, not fear. And conservatives are panicked, he suggested, but showing it in odd ways. “The fact that liberals are taking the scientific evidence and medical recommendations seriously does not, in itself, mean that they are more threat sensitive than conservatives,” he wrote over email. “All of the liberals I know have been self-sequestering to ‘flatten the curve’ — to save other people’s lives.”  As for the right, “some conservatives are denying and repressing fear, but that doesn’t mean they are cool cucumbers. Fears of economic devastation (and the anger by conservative activists in Michigan and elsewhere) may even reflect displacement of the fear. For all we know, Americans who are explicitly denying the problem are experiencing (even) more stress and anxiety than those who are not.” A second camp argued that the tension is real, but it was being swamped by partisanship. Perhaps, in laboratory conditions, conservatives would be more afraid of the virus. But politics doesn’t play out in laboratory conditions. Trump is the leader of the Republican Party, and his decision to downplay the threat, his dismissal of masks, and his clear desire to reopen is the stronger signal.  Now that our Country is “Transitioning back to Greatness”, I am considering rescheduling the G-7, on the same or similar date, in Washington, D.C., at the legendary Camp David. The other members are also beginning their COMEBACK. It would be a great sign to all - normalization! “Yes, I would expect conservatives to be more worried about virus X coming in from abroad,” said Haidt. “When Obama was president and America was threatened by Ebola, it was conservatives freaking out, demanding a more vigorous government response to protect us, while Obama kept steady on following scientific advice.” Trump, it’s worth noting, was at the forefront of the Ebola panic. “Ebola is much easier to transmit than the CDC and government representatives are admitting,” he tweeted in October 2014. “Spreading all over Africa — and fast. Stop flights.” Here, though, it’s been the opposite. “Trump laid out his view of reality very early: This is nothing to worry about, it’s a plot to discredit me, and it will magically go away,” Haidt continued. Trump’s leadership “overwhelms the small average difference in disgust sensitivity which would, ceteris paribus, have Republicans more concerned about contagion.” Federico made a similar point. “Chronic sensitivity to threat, disgust, and disease is one factor that should influence concern about Covid-19, [but] it is not the only one. Partisanship itself is perhaps the most important factor in shaping how people respond to issues or public concerns.” Gelfand said much the same. “Even though groups tighten up under threat, that signal can be weakened. Groups follow their leaders.” This would confirm what we’ve seen throughout the Trump presidency. A 2018 paper by Michael Barber and Jeremy Pope showed that the more conservative someone believed themselves to be, the more likely they were to follow Trump when he took an unexpectedly liberal position on an issue. Trump’s connection with his base has often, well, trumped his heterodoxies. A third argument, which acts in some ways as a bridge for the first two, is that everyone was scared, but for conservatives, fear was coming out more through acts of xenophobia than epidemiology — in part because that’s where fear of the virus and Trump’s natural politics find harmony.  “I can’t resist noting that current events are perfectly consistent with my claim that those on the right, and especially the Trumpian right, are not generically more threatened but rather only more attentive to those threats they believe to be emanating from human outsiders (defined broadly to include welfare cheats, unpatriotic athletes, norm violators, non-English speakers, religious and racial minorities, and certainly people from other countries),” wrote Hibbing. “Thus, disembodied threats such as climate change, Covid-19, and economic inequality are not primary sources of concern for them.” That would explain why Trump oscillates between downplaying the threat of the coronavirus and escalating tensions with China over its response to it. When Trump wants to bludgeon the Chinese, he plays up the threat of the virus; when it comes to domestic governance, he plays it down. More than 70 percent of Republicans now hold an “unfavorable” view of China, a doubling of anti-Chinese sentiment since George W. Bush’s presidency. “In some ways, this pandemic was tailor-built for right-wing xenophobia, and we are fortunate (thus far, at least) that Trump’s response was to downplay it solely to keep the stock market from tanking completely,” said Jost.  And that “thus far” is ending quickly. “The National Republican Senatorial Committee has sent campaigns a detailed, 57-page memo authored by a top Republican strategist advising GOP candidates to address the coronavirus crisis by aggressively attacking China,” reported Politico, and Stephen Miller is using the coronavirus to push a broader anti-immigration agenda.  Here’s my view: Political psychology is like the soil in politics. There are differences in the liberal and conservative soil — particularly in how they view threat, change, tradition, outsiders, and diversity — so different kinds of politicians, tactics, and movements take root on the two sides. Trump is, at his core, a suspicious, threat-oriented, traditionalist figure — he’s nostalgic for the way things were, hostile to outsiders, angry over demographic change (he’s even, in normal times, a germaphobe). There’s a reason he took root in conservative soil.  By contrast, former President Barack Obama is optimistic, cosmopolitan, and temperamentally progressive — he looks at change and sees hope, he looks at other countries and sees allies, he sees diversity as a strength. There’s a reason he took root in liberal soil. But once a politician captures a party, other dynamics take over. For one thing, partisans trust their leaders and allied institutions. Very few of us have personally run experiments on the coronavirus, or gone around the world gathering surface temperature readings over the course of decades. We have to choose whom to believe, and once we do, we’re inclined to take their word when describing contested or faraway events.  For another, we all fall prey to motivated reasoning, in which we shape evidence, arguments, and values to align with our incentives. As Upton Sinclair said, “It is difficult to get a man to understand something when his salary depends upon his not understanding it.”  Many Republican officeholders, led by Trump, think the coronavirus threatens their reelection because the lockdown threatens the economy. As such, they’re motivated to believe that reopening the economy sooner is better, and attracted to evidence and arguments that support that position. Sometimes that means downplaying the coronavirus. Sometimes that means accepting its risk but suggesting the costs of reopening are worth it. In both cases, the argument is working backward from the desired conclusion.  The political tragedy for the Republican Party, and the actual tragedy for America, is that the politics and the substance here should have been aligned. If Trump had taken the disease seriously from the outset and mounted a competent and consistent response, his approval ratings would be higher today, and the country would be in a better position to reopen safely, and sooner. As it is, Trump has been denied the polling bounce other governors and world leaders have seen, and he’s split his own coalition, forcing them to choose between their fear of the disease and their trust in him.  “The thing people often miss about moral foundations theory is that the foundations are just foundations,” says Haidt. “People don’t live in the foundation of their house. A house must be built upon those foundations. Moral and political entrepreneurs build structures, over time, and invite people to live in them.” Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. A friend of mine, another journalist, texts me every few days with the latest coronavirus case and death counts from Singapore. On Monday: “Singapore is now at 28k cases and 22 deaths.” I checked the Johns Hopkins dashboard on Wednesday morning to confirm: 29,364 confirmed Covid-19 cases and still just 22 deaths. All of us are amateur epidemiologists now, and my friend’s fascination with Singapore is all about the country’s remarkably low case fatality rate. Based on those numbers, just 0.07 percent of people in Singapore who contracted the coronavirus have died from it. Compare that to the United States, where more than 6 percent of confirmed Covid-19 cases have resulted in death. To look at it a different way, this chart compares total Covid-19 deaths per million people in both countries: The US is trying to bend the curve. Singapore doesn’t even have a curve to speak of. What’s going on? For starters, to return to my friend’s obsession with case fatality rates, those are a very crude metric. They are extremely vulnerable to variations in testing, because the denominators in this equation are confirmed cases — i.e. positive tests. The US and Singapore are interesting examples that show this metric’s usefulness and its limitations. The United States is almost certainly undercounting its Covid-19 cases because of under-testing. The real infection fatality rate in the US — total deaths divided by the real number of infections, confirmed or not — is much lower than 6 percent. But it’s also effectively impossible to know the actual death rate right now because a not-insignificant number of people infected by Covid-19 don’t show serious symptoms and therefore never get tested. Conversely, Singapore’s case fatality rate may be so low because it is testing a lot of people with mild or no symptoms. The country has escalated its testing because of Covid-19 outbreaks in the dormitories that house many of Singapore’s low-wage migrant workers. You may recall that, by late March, the island seemed to have Covid-19 under control. Leaning on the lessons from the SARS outbreak in 2003, the country implemented a rapid testing-and-tracing program, as well as restricting travel into Singapore and requiring self-quarantines. But then cases started to rise again — almost entirely because of infections among migrant workers, who live together in tightly packed dormitories on the edge of the city. As the second wave began to crest in Singapore in mid-April, about 90 percent of the new cases turned out to be foreign workers who were living in the dorms. So Singapore implemented a new screening program with the goal of testing effectively every single worker living in those facilities. It is testing thousands of workers every day, whether or not they show any Covid-19 symptoms. These people are generally young; they’ve come to Singapore to work on construction projects or in manufacturing or in the health care sector. And we know the Covid-19 fatality rates among younger people are much, much lower in general than among seniors. So if you want to understand why the case fatality rate is so stubbornly low in Singapore, part of it is a matter of chance: The groups of people who got sick were at a lower risk of dying. But equally — if not more — important is the prevalence of testing and the country’s focus on testing these younger and sometimes asymptomatic people. “This programme likely detected cases that would otherwise not have presented to healthcare centres for diagnosis,” Ooi Eng Eong, deputy director of the Emerging Infectious Diseases Program at the Duke-National University of Singapore Medical School, told me over email. That inflates the total number of cases, the denominator used to calculate the case fatality rate. Singapore’s testing skews younger because of the emphasis on the migrant dorms, and the country appears to have mostly avoided Covid-19 outbreaks in its nursing homes where more vulnerable elderly people live. “While the screening programme led to more cases being reported than if case detection was limited to those that fit the COVID-19 case definition, it also expanded the denominator in the mortality rate calculation: the number of fatal cases divided by total number of cases,” he said. So now you might be asking why there was an outbreak in these migrant worker dormitories. It seems to have been a bit random. The New York Times reported that government officials thought somebody might have picked up the virus at a nearby shopping mall favored by migrant workers. Or they may have been infected at a construction site linked to a small cluster of cases. Or both. Either way, once the coronavirus arrived at the dormitories, it flourished in close living quarters where as many as 20 people share a single room. The poor health coverage for migrant workers — dependent on their employers, who are eager to limit their financial liability — may also have delayed people from seeking out care, allowing the virus to fester before public health authorities were able to detect it. This cascade of unpredictable events reminded me of a post that my colleague Brian Resnick put up Wednesday morning, on chaos theory and the inherent uncertainty of a pandemic: There’s a simple mechanical that is helping me understand the many possible futures we face with the Covid-19 pandemic. It’s the double pendulum, and as a physical object, it’s very simple: A pendulum (a string and a weight) is attached to the bottom of another. Its movement is explained by the laws of motion written by Isaac Newton hundreds of years ago. But slight changes in the initial condition of the pendulum — say it starts its swing from a little higher up, or if the weight of the pendulum balls is a little heavier, or one of the pendulum arms is a bit longer than the other — lead to wildly different outcomes that are very hard to predict. As Brian points out, the coronavirus pandemic is even more complicated than the double-pendulum model. It makes the future very difficult to predict. And so it’s difficult, if not impossible, to isolate one ingredient that explains why the death rate in the US is so much worse than it is in Singapore. We still don’t have a very good idea of the real infection fatality rate, though the best estimates over around 1 percent or a little lower. And the case fatality rates, as shown by the United States and Singapore, can vary widely depending on how the pandemic has played out in different places. But that doesn’t mean we know nothing. And the Singapore example does conform to certain expectations we already have for the disease. Singapore can be thankful that its worst outbreaks have been in dorms full of young workers instead of nursing homes, as we’ve seen in the United States and Europe. Some credit is also certainly due to the testing-and-tracing programs, the travel restrictions, and Singapore’s strong health care system (disparities for migrant workers notwithstanding). Some of these things could be applicable in America: The country could do better testing and tracing, and it could build a stronger health system. The US does have a relatively young population compared to other countries and so more testing could potentially reveal a more widespread outbreak — and, paradoxically, a lower death rate — than the current data suggests. But the coronavirus has already infiltrated nursing homes in the US. It is little comfort to seniors and their families, nor to younger people who have gotten very sick or died, to know that the fatality rate may be closer to 1 percent (or lower) than 6 percent if only we tested younger people and found people who have been infected but have no symptoms or mild ones. Bad luck and a poor initial response have already distinguished America’s outbreak from the one in Singapore. Every country’s coronavirus experience is a reflection of factors both within its control and then chaos and random luck that nobody, not even Singapore, can control. The same is true of every individual’s risk, a convoluted mess of their race, age, economic status, preexisting medical conditions, and biology that science is only beginning to understand. I do plan to send this article to my friend. I hope it provides some insights into his question. But I don’t expect it to be entirely satisfactory either. There is simply too much uncertainty for that. This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. The Apple-Google exposure notification tool, announced on April 10, is one step closer to being launched. The two companies released software that will help public health authorities build apps that incorporate their exposure notification tool. Apple, specifically, rolled out a software update to iOS devices that some users could download immediately. This big public unveiling raises a couple very important questions: Will any government agencies actually build those apps? And will anybody use them?  These questions remain unanswered. They also raise another, more essential question: How will the new Apple-Google tool help the world fight the pandemic? The companies sold the concept early on as part of a tech-based solution to a very hard problem. But now, Apple and Google admit the tool is not meant to be a silver bullet. Yet, there is progress. Following the late April release of a beta version of the technology, Apple and Google announced on Wednesday that the application programming interface (API) for its exposure notification tool is now being released to public health authorities. According to the companies, several countries and three US states — Alabama, North Dakota, and South Carolina — will base their digital contact tracing apps on the tool. While Apple and Google consulted with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to build the tool, there is no indication that any nationwide app is forthcoming. “Starting today, our Exposure Notifications technology is available to public health agencies on both iOS and Android,” Apple and Google said. “Today, this technology is in the hands of public health agencies across the world who will take the lead and we will continue to support their efforts.” One of the early adopters of the Apple-Google tool is North Dakota, a state that has already struggled with contact tracing technology of its own. “North Dakota is excited to be among the first states in the nation to utilize the exposure notification technology built by Apple and Google to help keep our citizens safe,” Gov. Doug Burgum said in a statement. “As we respond to this unprecedented public health emergency, we invite other states to join us in leveraging smartphone technologies to strengthen existing contact tracing efforts, which are critical to getting communities and economies back up and running.” What remains to be seen is how many states will accept North Dakota’s invitation. Several states have told Recode that they don’t plan to incorporate the Apple-Google tool into their apps or contact tracing plans. That’s surprising, given the initial optimism when the exposure notification tool was first announced. Apple and Google, the companies behind the tool as well as the operating systems used by the vast majority of smartphones in the world, teamed up in the early weeks of the pandemic to create the infrastructure on which a Bluetooth-based contact tracing system could be built. This partnership was unprecedented, reminiscent of the well-worn trope where sworn enemies team up to fight the greater threat. It meant that any app using the tool would have a significantly lower bar to widespread adoption, especially once Apple and Google integrated the new technology into the phones’ operating systems themselves. Additionally, many — though certainly not all — of privacy advocates’ concerns were addressed by the tool’s strict requirements. Those included that users be kept anonymous; no location data be used; data stay on users’ devices rather than go to a centralized database maintained by a government authority; the system be opt-in only; and that the tool ends when the pandemic threat is over. Altogether, the proposition seemed like a win-win. Surely public health authorities would be champing at the bit to use it. But with the release of the API, which represents a milestone in the development of a new breed of iOS and Android public health apps, the reality seems different.  First of all, the implementation of the tool is not quite what was initially expected. Two weeks after the initial announcement in early April, Apple and Google changed the name of its technology to downplay its role, calling it an “exposure notification” tool rather than a “contact tracing” tool. This was meant to stress the tool’s role as an aid to contact tracing efforts rather than the contact tracing effort itself. Apple-Google have repeatedly stressed that they have only created a tool, and it is up to public health authorities to develop, implement, and manage apps based on it as they see fit (within Apple-Google’s strict guidelines, of course). Some countries publicly clashed with Apple-Google over its privacy-preserving restrictions and developed their own apps when Apple-Google wouldn’t budge on things like allowing them to have a centralized database. But apps that didn’t use the Apple-Google tool drew complaints that they were buggy and didn’t work correctly, as only apps that used the tool could run smoothly using minimal battery life in the background.  So other countries have decided it was worth agreeing to Apple and Google’s terms and conditions to have the best possible chance of producing a functional app. But with no location data being tracked and no centralized database to store it, the apps they could build are severely limited in the amount of data they can collect. And therefore, public health authorities can get limited benefits from the apps that use the Apple-Google tool. In the absence of a national effort led by the Trump administration, individual states are beginning to reopen and assemble a patchwork of contact tracing plans. This raises the question of which states, if any, are willing to make use of the tool at all.  In an attempt to answer this question, Recode asked Apple and Google multiple times if any public health authorities had agreed to use it. Aside from the mention of participation from Alabama, North Dakota, and South Carolina in press materials, the companies did not offer any details of more widespread adoption. Recode also reached out to all 50 states as well as Washington, DC, and the Department of Health and Human Services to ask if they were planning to use the Apple-Google tool. Of the 30 states that responded, none confirmed they were using it, and several said they weren’t.  But again, we now know there are at least three using the tool, though it’s unclear how far along they are in developing their apps.  North Dakota told Recode it already had an app, called CARE19, and then spoke to the Washington Post about its struggles getting Apple and Google to let it use their tool in its existing app. The CARE19 app uses location data, which the Apple-Google tool forbids, so North Dakota ended up building a second, separate app using the new exposure notification tool.  Alabama Department of Public Health’s Karen Landers told Recode on May 18 that the state “has not decided” whether to use the Apple-Google tool. Two days later, Alabama announced that, along with the University of Alabama System and the University of Alabama at Birmingham, it had a “partnership” with Apple and Google to “harness technology to accelerate exposure notification to slow the spread of COVID-19.”  South Carolina, which did not respond to Recode’s request for comment, announced today that it was using the Apple-Google tool for its SC Safer Together app. Other states indicated to Recode that they were focusing their limited resources on a tried and true contact tracing tool called human beings. This involves health officials questioning people about who they’ve seen in an effort to trace the spread of the virus, and the states using human-based contact tracing will use with technology to organize and facilitate their efforts, rather than replace them. A recent ProPublica report suggests that this may still be the best method, with health experts saying that something like the Apple-Google tool, which relays no data back to public health authorities and relies on widespread adoption to be effective, will be of limited use.  So, many states seem to be using a mixture of new and old-fashioned methods. Maryland, for example, is using a platform called “COVID Link” to assist traditional contact tracing methods after a known exposure, as opposed to contact tracing apps that track all contact whether or not someone tests positive. As Charles Gischlar of the Maryland Department of Health told Recode, the state “continues to explore all options and technologies available, but there are currently no plans to use contact tracing apps.”  North Carolina is taking a similar tack. Amy Adams Ellis of the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services told Recode that the state is “using a new software system to support contact tracing efforts.” That system does not include the apps that use Bluetooth, GPS, or other location-based tools. Several states are using a tool called Sara Alert. Built by the nonprofit Mitre Corporation, Sara Alert is an open source project developed with the cooperation of several state public health authorities, which is similar in some ways to what Apple and Google are trying to do. Arkansas, Idaho, and Pennsylvania all told Recode they were using the Sara Alert system.  There are other privately built tools, too. Hawaii told Recode it was using an app developed by HealthSpace, and Connecticut told Recode it was using a system from Microsoft (dubbed “ContaCT”). Meanwhile, Washington state is still not sure it wants an app at all. “Apps are not for everyone and while they may help in the process, we are going to start each contact investigation by calling each person,” Barbara LaBoe, spokesperson for Washington state’s COVID-19 Response team, told Recode. “We also are still working to get an understanding of the various privacy and security issues involved in those apps and tools,” LaBoe added. Finally, the state hit hardest by the pandemic, New York, told Recode, “We are evaluating various technology applications that could assist in the initiative, but the key to effective contact tracing is direct outreach by individuals to work with a positive case to successfully identify their contacts.” At the time of the API launch, Apple and Google would only say that several states have expressed interest in the tool. The companies would not give an exact number or offer more details about plans from public health authorities. Some states indicated to Recode that they are taking a wait-and-see approach, so it’s possible that several may join Alabama, North Dakota, and South Carolina in the coming days. It’s also possible that some states will change their minds and come around to the Apple-Google technology. That’s what Germany did. In fact, of the many countries using contact tracing apps, a handful of countries like Austria, Ireland, and Switzerland have committed to using the Apple-Google tool.  In the weeks to come, significant questions remain about how successful contact tracing and exposure notification technology will be. This depends on how many people download and use the technology offered in their region, not to mention the integration of other efforts, like human-based contact tracing. So while the Apple-Google tool hasn’t had the universal acceptance that might have been expected when the tool was first announced, it’s not a total flop. By all appearances, it looks like Apple-Google wanted to contribute to society and make their mark on fighting the spread of coronavirus, and that’s laudable. But it’s now clear that the two companies also, characteristically, wanted to do it only on their terms, even if it meant reducing the efficacy of the apps based on their tool from a public health agency perspective. And when two massive companies control nearly 100 percent of the smartphones out there between them, they can dictate whatever terms they want — even in a worldwide crisis. Open Sourced is made possible by Omidyar Network. All Open Sourced content is editorially independent and produced by our journalists. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Paid sick leave has such strong support from voters that it could prompt some to vote Democrat over Republican in key House and Senate races this fall, according to a new poll.  The results of the survey, commissioned by Paid Leave for All Action, a group advocating in favor of such policies, suggest that voters would more likely favor the Democratic candidate in battleground House and Senate races if that person supported paid sick leave and the Republican candidate did not.  In 42 front-line House districts — districts that have been swing seats in the past — people identifying as undecided voters were more likely to choose the Democratic candidate by 14 points on the generic ballot, on average. When voters were informed about the Democrat’s support for paid sick leave for essential workers and the Republican’s opposition, undecided voters picked the Democrat by 48 points.  The survey, which was conducted between April 30 and May 4, found that paid sick leave has overwhelming voter support in general. The poll included 1,000 interviews with voters in 11 Senate battleground states and 1,004 separate interviews with voters in 42 front-line House districts. Its results have a 3.1 percent margin of error.  The results of this poll echo a trend that’s been documented by other surveys in the past. According to a 2016 poll from Pew Research Center, 85 percent of people supported leave programs that enable workers to address health conditions.  The dearth of paid sick leave protections has become especially apparent during this pandemic. Just 12 states and Washington, DC, have enacted laws requiring companies to offer full-time workers paid sick leave, and employees in lower-wage jobs are the least likely to have access to such programs. There is currently no federal law that mandates paid sick leave for all workers. “All of us that they say are essential are working the hourly jobs that don’t have the paid leave. Why is that?” asks Kris Garcia, a Colorado resident who currently works for an airline and a package-handling company, who helps advise Paid Leave for All Action.  The Families First Coronavirus Response Act made some progress in addressing this gap, but it doesn’t apply to many workers. As part of the measure, which Congress passed in March, a segment of workers is guaranteed two weeks paid sick leave at their full salary if they need to be quarantined for coronavirus or are experiencing symptoms. Costs for the program are covered by the federal government and paid out to companies via a tax credit. As Vox’s Anna North reported, however, millions of workers were excluded: The provisions in this law only applied to some public employers and private companies that had fewer than 500 employees. That means many employees still don’t have mandated protections — including workers at several larger corporations: According to an analysis by New America, companies including Applebees, Dunkin’, and Kmart have not put out public statements about paid sick leave options in response to the pandemic.  Democrats sought to close these loopholes in the Heroes Act, their latest stimulus proposal, though this measure is not expected to gain any traction in the Republican-controlled Senate. As a result, thousands of essential workers are forced to continue to show up at their jobs with no guarantee of paid leave were they to fall ill.  “There are restaurant workers, there are people who work for fortune 500s who don’t have a paid sick day, there’s home health workers,” says Paid Leave for All Action Director Dawn Huckelbridge. “If we’re not giving people these protections, we’re going to be forcing them to choose between their life and their livelihoods.” Offering paid sick days is a policy with broad support. When given a slate of potential relief measures that lawmakers could implement in response to the coronavirus, voters overwhelmingly backed paid sick days.  Ninety-four percent of voters in Senate battleground states backed this policy, compared to 80 percent who supported an extension for unemployment insurance programs, for example.  Democrats that support paid sick days are also more likely to garner voter support overall. When initially polled, 46 percent of voters in battleground Senate states and 49 percent of those in front-line House districts said they were leaning toward the Democratic candidate, versus 46 percent and 44 percent who were leaning Republican, respectively.  After voters were told that the Democratic candidate supported paid leave, particularly for essential workers, and the Republican candidate did not, 66 percent of voters backed the Democrat for Senate and 65 percent backed the Democrat for a House seat, compared to 34 and 35 percent who said they’d vote for the Republican.  This shift is apparent among both independent and undecided voters as well. Their margin of support for the Democratic House candidate went up by 36 and 34 points when the differences in policy positions were raised. And their margin of support for the Democratic Senate candidate went up by 46 and 32 points.  Historically, the implementation of paid leave programs has faced Republican opposition due to concerns about the additional taxes needed to pay for them and the potential burden they could pose to businesses. As the pandemic has further emphasized, however, the adoption of such programs isn’t just critical for economic stimulus, it’s a public health imperative.  Ultimately, the findings of the poll strongly suggest that paid sick leave is an important issue for many voters, and could be a critical one for electoral success in November.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Children under 5 are not known for respecting personal space or keeping germs to themselves — even in the best of circumstances. And when you get lots of these little drooling, hugging, shouting humans together in one space, such as day care, illnesses tend to spread rapidly, bouncing among children, their families, and back again.  While some child care centers around the country have remained open in the Covid-19 pandemic, many US states and localities have required them to close or limit services to health care worker parents only. According to an April poll, about half of child care centers across the country were entirely closed, the Wall Street Journal reported.  An estimated 12.5 million children younger than 6 attend some sort of child care each year in the US, according to the Center for the Study of Child Care Employment (CSCCE) at the University of California Berkeley. So the closures have created a crisis for millions of families who have previously depended on care outside of the home.  Now, the question of how to restore child care is critical for helping millions of families get back to work, because “as states rush to reopen, child care is expected to be available,” Lea Austin, director of the CSCCE, told Vox.  Although the rate of severe Covid-19 in very small children is low, the illness does not entirely spare them. And a spate of pediatric inflammatory illnesses have doctors concerned about more negative outcomes for the very youngest patients. They also might be carriers of the virus who can infect others even without getting sick themselves.  With so much still unknown about the role of children in the pandemic, day care centers and home-based care operators also have to consider the needs of essential workers (and those of workers who might not be essential but depend on child care to earn money to work) with the largely unknown health risk for their staff, students, and families — all with their own often-precarious finances. And the federal government hasn’t exactly made the process easy. “There is lots of angst about exposure and making sure [child care centers] do things ‘right,’” says Lucy Mullen Davis, consultant and coach at Denver’s Early Childhood Council. Let’s walk through why weighing the risks, and benefits, of reopening remains so tricky. The US federal government has essentially left it up to states, localities, and even individual care center owners to decide if they will be open — and if they choose to be, in what capacity.  This has resulted in a patchwork of changing policies across the country, as the Hunt Institute, an education research group affiliated with Duke University, documents in a detailed report of states’ rules and recommendations for child care operations.  California, for example, has allowed care centers to stay open but issued the guidance that they should only be for children of essential workers, and group sizes are limited to 10. Illinois closed all centers March 20 with the exception of facilities that obtained emergency licenses to care for children of essential workers. South Carolina, on the other hand, let its child care centers know, “it remains your decision as a provider whether to remain open,” and the state currently has no Covid-19-specific group size limitations for child care.  So, especially in states that have closed or drastically limited child care center availability, many families have been scrambling to either do without child care or to try to find alternative care so they can work. (And many older relatives that might previously have been first choice for that role are at a higher risk for severe Covid-19 infection and advised to limit contact with others.)  Rhode Island, which closed its day cares, recommends finding a single in-home care provider, such as a nanny. But such individualized care can cost a good deal more than day care. (And even standard day care is a huge financial strain on many families.)  So that leaves potentially millions of families wondering when their usual child care will be back up and running. And when it is, if it will be safe.  In mid-May, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) finally issued guidance (which still defers largely to local guidelines) to help child care centers, as well as camps, restaurants, bars, and other operations decide if they can safely reopen. (These documents had been expected weeks earlier but had been held back by the White House.) The newly published decision-making chart for child care facilities doesn’t add too much in the way of clarity. It includes a lot of non-binding language, such as “as feasible” and “encourage.” “The CDC [decision] tree is extremely basic,” says Mullen Davis, whose group in Denver has created its own additional decision-making tool for centers that also helps them evaluate their financial situation.  Austin also points to key differences between the new CDC guidance and earlier versions that were leaked but never published. For example, in a previous version, the CDC recommended centers close if they were in a community that was still in the midst of significant spread of the virus. “Further, the decision [-making chart] does not require increased screening for children or staff in such communities and instead recommends they should do this if feasible,” she notes. To boot, such guidelines can “provide a false sense of security.”  This scattered response for child care programs has been vastly different from that for schools, which have been closed across the country, with many discussing switching to online learning for the fall as well. These programs are also quite different from schools — and not always in ways that make infection control easier. “Because we’re talking about children at very different developmental stages, it’s important that we recognize some of the unique challenges being faced by child care centers,” Dan Wuori, director of Early Learning at the Hunt Institute, told Vox. “Child care has some very different health and safety considerations that need to be approached with real deliberation.”  For centers that have stayed open or are reopening, the CDC published relatively detailed guidance in April. Some of these recommendations include taking children’s temperature each day upon arrival (possibly while staff are in full personal protective gear), not using toys that cannot be sanitized, and using cloth masks for children over 2.  Many of these recommendations, such as changing gloves for every child temperature upon entry, are not always feasible due to supply availability and prices. (An April survey of more than 2,000 child care programs in California found that 62 percent were having difficulty obtaining cleaning supplies or personal protective equipment.)  And many other guidelines seem incongruous with young kids’ behavior and abilities, such as expecting 3-year-olds to keep masks on all day.  “It would be difficult to have children 3-5 wear [masks] all day with any reliability,” Allison Bartlett, associate medical director of the Infection Control Program and a pediatric infectious disease specialist at University of Chicago Medicine, told Vox. “In addition, kids with masks may be prone to remove them, touch their faces, reposition the masks, etc., contaminating themselves in the process.”  As the authors of a letter in the European Journal of Pediatrics concluded, “If compliance is difficult, it is better that the child does not wear the mask, and other measures for reducing infection risk, including remaining at home, are practiced.” Part of the trouble with deciding on best practices for child care centers — as well as schools — is that we don’t know very much about the risk of the virus in children.  It’s been clear since the beginning of the pandemic that kids are at a lower risk of getting severely ill and dying from Covid-19 than adults are. But some do still get sick, and some die. Children with underlying health conditions, such as respiratory issues, are at higher risk, as are the very youngest children. For example, those under the age of 1 had the highest rate of hospitalization for Covid-19 among those under the age of 18, according to a report from the CDC. The same analysis found that these infants accounted for a full 30 percent of documented pediatric ICU admissions.  “Children of all ages appeared susceptible to Covid-19,” wrote the authors of an April article in Pediatrics that analyzed data from more than 2,100 pediatric Covid-19 patients in China. From the children in their study, 7 percent of infant cases required critical care — compared with 0 percent of children ages 6-10.  And there are also the increasing reports of severe inflammatory illness in children who have had the virus — even if they never appeared sick. In New York state, more than 100 children — including some as young as infants and toddlers — have been diagnosed with this serious condition, and at least three have died from it.  And we also don’t have a good sense of how many very young children might be carriers of the virus without ever getting sick at all.  In general, “young children are well-known culprits in transmission of other respiratory viruses,” Bartlett says. “The safest assumption until we have good data is that they are vectors for Covid-19 transmission as well.”  Research has shown that adults can have a lot of the coronavirus in their system and still feel fine, suggesting that the illness can spread even from those who do not have symptoms.  “While we are thankful that children are relatively spared in the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, they are potential vectors of spread to other members in the community,” Bartlett says. “We don’t know a lot about transmission among young children, but their propensity to put things in their mouths could increase risk of spread among children,” she noted.  This liberalness with germ sharing is compounded with peer interactions at child care centers. An April report in Science looked at the change in the number of daily contacts infants and young children had before and during pandemic restrictions in Wuhan and Shanghai, China. They found there was a drop in the daily number of contacts children ages 0-6 had from about 12 to 2 in Wuhan and from about 14 to 2 in Shanghai. Reducing the number of people everyone comes into contact with has been a cornerstone of efforts to slow the pandemic.  Looking at their data from children overall, the authors noted, “while proactive school closures cannot interrupt transmission on their own, they can reduce peak incidence by 40-60 percent and delay the epidemic.”  Conversations about day cares also often leave off the question of staff exposure. Given that babies and young children need such hands-on care — pretty much all day — Austin says, there’s essentially no way for educators to physically distance themselves from the kids they are caring for.  Some precautions can help mitigate risk of Covid-19 transmission in close contact, such as “making sure child care workers change clothes if they get spit up on, etc., and having them wash their necks/arms if they are in contact with children’s secretions can help as well,” Bartlett says. But these steps will need to be taken dozens of times a day, especially for those caring for babies.  To add to the difficult situation, Austin notes, caregivers are frequently “among the black and brown communities that are being disproportionately impacted by Covid-19.” In California, for example, the majority of these roles are filled by people of color.  Austin and others have suggested child care workers who have underlying health conditions and those who are over 65 might consider not returning to work — or doing so in a capacity in which they do not interact with children. But these options are not always feasible or financially possible.  My spouse is on the board of our (nonprofit, non-university-affiliated) daycare, and listening to the calls where they try to figure out when and how to reopen is equally devastating and disconcerting. Here are a few of the things they have to consider (a thread): “Pre-pandemic child care programs operated on thin margins, and staff were earning poverty wages,” Austin says. “This crisis is exacerbating these conditions, leading many early educators to risk their lives by continuing work under the current conditions — or risk losing their livelihoods if they don’t work.” Early education workers earn a national average of about $12 an hour, her group has determined.  Some child care staff have requested testing if they are to return to work, while others have left their jobs.  There are also numerous concerns coming from families who have previously relied on group child care so they could earn money themselves.  In Colorado, Mullen Davis says they have seen an increase in families requesting tuition aid for their child care — “many of whom have never asked for this aid before,” she says. “It’s clear that many families are facing additional financial pressures right now.”  In addition, she says, “some parents are anxious to bring their children, while others ask for assurances that are often beyond the center’s control.”  The stress of the situation has trickled down to the children as well, who “have their own fears and anxieties, which can add to behavior challenges in the classroom,” says her colleague Karen Thiel, lead quality initiatives navigator at the council.  Families as well as educators have expressed other concerns related to how new health and safety guidelines at centers might impact children and their development. Thiel has had families ask, “How are children going to learn to interact in socially appropriate ways if they are expected to stay 6 feet apart?”  Mullen Davis heard from another parent recently who was worried about her infant surrounded by masked staff for 40 hours a week. “She was concerned about how masks affect language and social emotional development if children cannot see their caregiver’s friendly or responsive face,” she says. “We just don’t have research on this.”  With all of these changes, a large proportion of child care centers — like so many other small businesses — might not survive the pandemic.  In Colorado, “many center directors are worried that they will not have enough children to cover the costs of care if they reopen,” Mullen Davis says. Centers are also dealing with extreme fluctuations in staffing as well as attendance. And with many states capping group size at around 10, that takes a serious bite of tuition revenue, especially for preschool, where classrooms often average close to 17 children.  The CSCCE found in a recent survey that 14 percent of the more than 2,000 California child care programs polled that are currently closed will not be able to sustain a closure that runs past the end of May. And for those that have stayed open, they found that 63 percent would not be able to survive a closure of more than a month.  There is already a shortage of child care in the US. Some half of US families with young children have reported having trouble finding child care, according to the Center for American Progress, a progressive-leaning research and advocacy organization. (The group estimated that in 2016, 2 million US parents quit jobs or drastically changed their work due to issues with child care.)  “This crisis has revealed the central role child care teachers play in our society,” Austin says. “This is a moment to stabilize and invest in this critical component of our infrastructure so that it exists going forward and does so in a manner that protects the well-being of children, early educators, and communities.”  Some states are taking large steps to ensure child care centers can remain solvent for now. Vermont, for example, is using a combination of state and federal funds to provide any revenue centers have lost.  Others are reexamining earlier actions. “Gov. Mike DeWine in Ohio really stands out,” Javaid Siddiqi, president of the Hunt Institute, told Vox. “Just [last] week he pulled back and acknowledged that the reopening of child care was just too important to do haphazardly. He wants their plan to be based on science and safety. That’s a difficult stance to take in the face of pressure to reopen, but it’s clear that he really understands the gravity of the situation.” The state’s child care centers have been closed there since March 26 (with emergency care for health care workers), but there are now plans to reopen at the end of May with new measures in place.  Beginning Sunday, May 31st childcare providers in #Ohio will be able to re-open, with reduced numbers of children in each classroom and intensified cleaning and handwashing practices. #ResponsibleRestartOhio pic.twitter.com/oxjoeYM26i But, as Bartlett notes, “As parents of young children know, even the day care centers with the most meticulous attention to hygiene have transmission of infections. There are measures that we can undertake to decrease the risk of transmission, but it will never be zero.”  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. President Donald Trump has taken a step toward following through on his weeks-long threat to permanently cut funding to the World Health Organization unless it implements reforms that weaken China’s influence.  On Monday, Trump sent a letter to WHO Director General Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus outlining the US’s grievances about the WHO’s handling of the coronavirus pandemic and warning, “If the WHO does not commit to major substantive improvements within the next 30 days, I will make my temporary freeze of United States funding to the WHO permanent and reconsider our membership.” Trump accused the organization of “repeated missteps,” including not pushing China to allow international inspectors into the country as the coronavirus outbreak grew; falsely asserting in January that “Chinese authorities have found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission” of Covid-19; and early on failing to declare the coronavirus a pandemic due to pressure from Chinese authorities. This is the letter sent to Dr. Tedros of the World Health Organization. It is self-explanatory! pic.twitter.com/pF2kzPUpDv Trump argues that these and other perceived transgressions are evidence that the global body is too cozy with Beijing. The “only way forward for the [WHO] is if it can actually demonstrate independence from China,” Trump wrote in the letter, adding that the US and the WHO are in talks about how to do just that.  When asked what specific changes the administration wants to see the WHO take, the State Department referred me to the White House. The White House didn’t return a request for comment. According to the letter, the WHO has 30 days to reform in a way Trump approves of or it risks losing nearly $900 million in US contributions every two years, by far the most the body receives from any nation. Trump had already frozen about $400 million of that money last month while his administration reviewed its WHO pledges. While it’s true the WHO made some egregious mistakes, it’s also clear that the Trump administration failed to seriously plan for a possible outbreak in the US once it knew of the disease. On January 3, for example, Chinese health authorities told the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the WHO about a pneumonia outbreak in Wuhan. Trump’s “letter seems to indicate that had the WHO conveyed the right information, the US would have acted differently in responding to the outbreak,” said Yanzhong Huang, a global health expert at the Council on Foreign Relations. But “the president has seldom paid heed to any WHO advice.” “Whatever the WHO knew, the US knew,” he added. Some believe Trump’s ire toward the WHO is merely an effort to deflect blame for his administration’s poor coronavirus response. Even if it is, it’s not certain Trump’s gambit will actually pay off. In fact, it might backfire on him — and the world. Experts I spoke to cited three main reasons the idea of completely defunding the WHO is a bad idea. First, China gave less than 10 percent of the money America did to the WHO last year. If any leader was in a position to push the global body to reform before the coronavirus hit, it was Trump.  The administration “seems not to understand that condemning WHO malfeasance, some of which is no doubt real, also indicts the US for neglecting its influence at the organization,” said David Bosco, an expert on international organizations at Indiana University. “How did it not use that massive leverage in a more timely way?” Kelley Lee, the research chair in global health governance at Simon Fraser University in British Columbia, told Vox’s Jen Kirby last month that one way the WHO could reform is if countries give up a little of their sovereignty in terms of a global health response and give the institution more authority. That would help take politics out of the equation and make the next pandemic strategy a more technocratic one. Further, Washington’s withdrawal from the WHO would leave a massive financial vacuum that Beijing would surely be happy to fill. “If the promised cuts were enacted, China would become even more prominent as a WHO funder, and its influence would grow,” Bosco told me.  That’s already happening: During a Monday meeting of the WHO’s decision-making body, Chinese President Xi Jinping promised $2 billion over two years to boost the world’s coronavirus response, on top of the millions in WHO funding China had previously pledged. And there’s a bigger concern outside of just US-China relations: A weakened WHO will struggle to combat not just Covid-19 but also future pandemics. The organization has more than 150 field offices worldwide, and its staff helps track new illnesses and coordinate the global response for it. The body doesn’t actually send people to treat the sick directly. Instead, it basically serves as the world’s disease intelligence aggregator and assists countries with their own strategies.  With less money coming in from the US, though, it’s likely the WHO will struggle to fund those intelligence-gathering and assistance processes, meaning the world could be more blind to the next pandemic and less capable to defeat it. That, in turn, would make everyone on Earth less safe — and perhaps even require the US to spend more money down the line. In this case, then, Trump may have identified the issue — the WHO fumbled its initial coronavirus response partly because of China — but missed the treatment. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  One of the less-discussed benefits in the CARES Act is assistance for those with federal student loans. But unlike other programs in the stimulus legislation, no application is required.  The law doesn’t cancel student debt, but it does freeze payments — and their interest — for everyone who has a federally held loan. Most borrowers won’t have to worry about making any loan payments until October — for now. A number of lawmakers don’t think the law goes far enough. The HEROES Act — a $3 trillion fourth congressional stimulus package — passed by the House of Representatives Friday, would forgive up to $10,000 of both federal and private loans for borrowers meeting the criteria to be deemed “economically distressed.” The provision (which like the rest of the HEROES Act was crafted by House Democrats) is unlikely to make it into the final text of any future relief bill that gets passed by Congress, however. Nevertheless, Senate Democrats are also pushing some kind of loan forgiveness in the next bill — their proposal is similar to that of the HEROES Act: The federal government would pay at least $10,000 toward every borrower’s federal student loan balance. Other lawmakers have advocated for loan relief for essential workers, while some progressive advocacy groups, like Young Invincibles, have called for more sweeping relief akin to some of the debt cancellation proposals put forward during the Democratic primary. Some former Democratic presidential candidates have endorsed using the pandemic to enact sweeping changes to student debt policy.  Shortly after the passage of the CARES Act, former candidate Sen. Elizabeth Warren — who proposed forgiving up to $50,000 of debt for federal student loan borrowers during the primary — tweeted, “Student loan debt cancellation MUST be a part of the next emergency coronavirus package.” Presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden has released a modified version of the progressive plans championed by Warren and Sen. Bernie Sanders; his plan would cancel the tuition-related undergraduate debt of borrowers earning less than $125,000 per year. But Republican lawmakers have been resistant to such calls; one GOP aide told Inside Higher Ed members of their caucus have no “appetite for debt forgiveness or cancellation because it has nothing to do with Covid.” And a Democratic staffer told Higher Ed that Democrats were pessimistic about the chances of any loan forgiveness being included in future bills.  “Republicans balked at the large-scale cancellation of student loans,” the Democratic staffer said of discussions conducted around the CARES Act. “We pushed until the end, but it’s not happening.” While complete loan forgiveness seems unlikely, lawmakers may be able to find common ground on some forgiveness, either for certain types of workers or a smaller forgiveness amount for all loan holders. And though there’s little sign of the pandemic abating in the US, the country could be in the same dire economic straits it is in at the moment — if things aren’t even worse — come October, when the freeze on loan payments is set to expire. Such a scenario could lead to increased pressure on lawmakers to include provisions assisting borrowers in future aid packages, even if those measures don’t go quite so far as to forgive all outstanding debt.  Starting March 13, with the signing of the CARES Act, student loan interest was temporarily set to zero — for now, this will last until September 30, 2020.  For about 92 percent of borrowers, this freezes however much they owe until then — and ensures there will be no penalty or late fees for not making normal monthly loan payments. For now, all federal student loans have been placed in “administrative forbearance,” a flexible method of suspending payments the Department of Education can use during natural disasters and other emergencies. There’s no opt-in; even if you have automatic debits set up, there’s nothing you need to do to take advantage of the program. And for those that still have concerns, here is a brief guide with answers to some common questions. The CARES Act does have a provision canceling loans in a very specific case: if you were enrolled and were forced to withdraw from school due to concerns about the coronavirus. The provision does not apply to private or Perkins loans. Many schools have extended withdrawal deadlines, Dora Gicheva, an economics professor at the University of North Carolina told Vox — with some institutions, like the University of North Carolina, allowing students to withdraw after completing the semester. If you’re unclear about your school’s withdrawal rules, you should contact it directly; it should also have information on what portion of the loan might be eligible for cancellation. It isn’t clear how many people will be able to benefit from this — but for most people, no, there’s no student loan cancelation. And even for beneficiaries of this rule, loans taken for completed semesters must still be repaid, once the temporary repayment and interest freeze period is over. None of this applies to federal loans owned by private lenders, private student loans, or federal Perkins loans owned by colleges and universities. A group of Democratic and independent senators has urged private loan holders to provide relief for borrowers — and some, like Navient and Sallie Mae, have agreed to allow borrowers to place private loans in forbearance (generally without the interest freeze borrowers with federally held loans enjoy).  The easiest way to find out who holds your loan is through the Department of Education’s Federal Student Aid website. You’ll need an FSA ID to log in — more recent graduates should already have one, but those who applied for loans using paper applications may need to create one (there’s an option to do so on the homepage of the Federal Student Aid website). After you log in, information about your loans — and who services them — will be available on your dashboard. If it turns out you have a Perkins loan or another federal loan owned by a private institution, the Department of Education notes you can benefit from the freeze created by the CARES Act by consolidating those other loans into a Direct Consolidation Loan. Doing so comes with some potential dangers, however. The good news is that if you’re paying multiple loans right now, you’ll have one payment after you consolidate — and that consolidated loans are part of the temporary zero percent interest program. The potential trouble is you could end up with a higher interest rate, forcing you to pay more than you would have otherwise. And, as soon as you consolidate, capitalized interest is added to your balance — so the size of your loan will increase right away.    Whether this is worth the risk will depend on the individual and their future financial outlook, and the details and size of their outstanding interest.  Yes, you can, and you’ll be doing so at a time when interest isn’t building up. Any payments you make will first be applied to your interest, and once that’s paid off — or if it’s been paid already — your payment will go toward decreasing your loan balance, or principal.  The provisions laid out in the CARES Act cover everyone with a federal student loan besides those exceptions mentioned above.  This means if you’re on a repayment plan that’s based on your income, you won’t face any penalties for not sending in your agreed payments for the next few months.  The same is true if you’re on a payment plan arranged with a private collection company — as long as they are one that’s under contract with the Department of Education rather than with a private loan holder. Collectors have been directed by the department not to attempt collections, and not to take out automatic debits from your account.  If you have seen a debit on your account (after this policy went into effect on March 25) the Department of Education asks that you call it at 800.621.3115 (or 877.825.9923 if you are deaf or hearing impaired). Like other federally managed loans, loans in collection are exempt from interest until September 30. In general, if you’re losing wages because of reduced hours, or from being laid off, you can enroll in (or alter the terms of) an income-driven repayment plan. Basically, you’ll tell the department how much you’re making now, and you’ll be offered a new minimum monthly payment. You can apply for that here on the Federal Student Aid website. Things are a bit more complicated if you’re on a public service loan forgiveness plan. As long as you’re still working full time (more than 30 hours a week) in a role the Department of Education classifies as public service, you can skip payments until September without penalty. If you are no longer working full time, or have been laid off, you cannot get the benefit unless you obtain a new job that the department classifies as public service — and that meets the weekly hour requirement.  A Department of Education spokesperson told Vox that those who’ve lost public service loan forgiveness eligibility due to Covid-19 should remember that the program only requires a public service worker make 120 monthly payments on a loan, not that they be consecutive. This means if you were in the program, got laid off, and get another qualifying job two years from now, you just need to submit a new certification form with the Department of Education, and after being reapproved, you can pick up where you left off. Lawmakers are approaching most economic issues incrementally at the moment, and no one knows what will happen during the summer. States are reopening nonessential businesses, meaning more people may have paychecks come October. However, reopening could also mean that fewer people are employed in October, should relaxations of stay-at-home orders lead to a sharp increase in Covid-19 cases and deaths — and more stringent lockdowns in response. Should economic conditions continue to be grim — and economists who spoke with Vox’s Emily Stewart and Dylan Scott believe they could — lawmakers will likely face pressure to extend the temporary loan payment and interest freezes. In the short term, student loan issues don’t appear to be a candidate for inclusion in the fourth congressional stimulus package, despite House Democrats’ efforts to have it include some measure of loan forgiveness.  The student loan provisions in the HEROES Act do signal Democrats will continue to press the issue, but Republicans have signaled they are concerned about including measures to future stimulus bills that will add to the national debt;  Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell recently said, “We can’t keep throwing endless amounts of borrowed money at the problem in hope to fix it.” Any compromise legislation between House Democrats and Senate Republicans then, seems more likely to look like what has already been passed — a temporary hold on payments. On a recent call with local business leaders, Sen. David Perdue (R-GA) defended Georgia’s reopening process by comparing the risks of contracting Covid-19 to those of driving a car, indicating that calculating risk amounts to personal responsibility, according to a recording of the call obtained by Vox. “We get in an automobile, we drive on our public roads, and a certain number of us will die on our public roads every year,” Perdue can be heard saying on the recording of a Zoom call with the Rome Floyd Chamber last Thursday. “Well, each of us in a representative democracy have the freedom to make that determination about the risk level for me as an individual. And therefore, we choose to go or we choose not to go. In a situation like this, as long as we have good information, we can make our own decisions.” Ironically, on the day of the call, the state of Georgia announced its 1,557th confirmed coronavirus death in the 15 weeks since the state’s first confirmed case, exceeding the 1,504 automobile deaths in the state in all of 2018, the most recent year for which statistics are available. There’s still a lot we don’t know about the risks of the novel coronavirus and how it compares to other threats, but infectious disease experts have dismissed comparisons between the virus and automobile accidents. “I think that’s a false equivalency to compare traffic accidents with — I mean, that’s totally way out,” Dr. Anthony Fauci, director of the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases and a member of the White House coronavirus task force, said on March 20. “That’s really a false equivalency, when you have something that is new and is emerging and you really can’t predict totally the impact it’s going to have.” A spokesperson for Perdue’s office told Vox that “in no way was Sen. Perdue downplaying Covid-19.” The comparison to car crashes was not the only notable comment from the call. Perdue also repeated the conservative talking point that the death rate from Covid-19 compares to a bad flu season. “As the number of active cases decline, let’s all recognize that this Covid-19 crisis is nowhere near what was being forecast back in March,” he told business leaders. “So we’re about 80,000 deaths in the United States, and we don’t want to lose anybody. But we’ve had ordinary flu seasons with more deaths than we’re seeing now in this one. So we’re now trying to get a balance between the human cost of the disease and human costs of having an economy like our shutdown.” 
    Related
   Perdue, who’s up for reelection this year, is not the first senator to mention automobile deaths or the flu in relation to the economic shutdown due to the pandemic. In mid-March, Sen. Ron Johnson (R-WI) made a similar remark to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. “[W]e don’t shut down our economy because tens of thousands of people die on the highways. It’s a risk we accept so we can move about,” he said. “We don’t shut down our economies because tens of thousands of people die from the common flu.”  President Donald Trump, who has encouraged states to reopen their economies, has also made similar comparisons. Similarly, Republican governors, like Kristi Noem in South Dakota and Kim Reynolds in Iowa, have framed the risks of contracting coronavirus as a matter of personal responsibility.  The comments made by Perdue, Trump, and other Republicans who prioritize reopening the economy over trying to get the disease under control miss the larger risk of spreading the virus to others before symptoms present. Even though Perdue wants a gradual reopening with precautions, experts say it can take up to 14 days for symptoms to show, which muddies the risk calculations — and the ethics — Perdue referred to on the call. Even a gradual reopening with precautions could potentially make the pandemic even worse than it already is, especially without mass testing. With the economy tanking, millions of people are suffering. But many lives have also been saved with shelter-in-place orders and social distancing guidelines. This dynamic makes conversations about reopening particularly fraught. And, absent a coherent federal plan, states, localities, and individuals are making choices themselves. “Today, for example, if you’re in a nursing home, somebody needs to go buy your stuff,” Perdue also said on the call. “You don’t need to be out running around yet. And you need to continue to shelter in place. If you’re 35 and want to go to a restaurant in Georgia and you follow the protocols, you know, that’s well within the guidelines, and it sounds reasonable to me.” It’s true that some individuals are at higher risk of serious complications from Covid-19 than others. It’s also true, however, that asymptomatic 35-year-olds can spread the disease without knowing it, as Katherine Harmon Courage explained for Vox: Throughout the pandemic, public health officials have focused on the advice that people who have symptoms of Covid-19 should self-isolate. This is crucial, to be sure. But it is also becoming “increasingly clear that there are people who are either asymptomatic or minimally symptomatic who can transmit” the virus, Carlos del Rio, chair of the Department of Global Health at Emory University, told Vox. In fact, people can start transmitting the virus 24 to 48 hours before they start showing symptoms, he said in a briefing for the Infectious Disease Society of America. ... A study in Nature Medicine of 94 confirmed Covid-19 patients found that people were most infectious right before they started to show symptoms. The researchers obtained data about people who had gotten Covid-19 as well as those who had been around them before and after they got sick. Based on this, they estimated that 44 percent of people who caught the virus from the study’s participants had gotten it from people who felt healthy at the time. “Sen. Perdue was making the case that people should not be afraid to begin the gradual process of going back to their normal lives on account that we all face great risk every day,” a spokesperson said. But some people will have little choice in their level of exposure. A restaurant employee likely couldn’t decide not to show up for work if they feel it’s too risky for them, even if their employer is reopening. In fact, in Georgia, that would be grounds for losing access to the unemployment benefits system without approval from the employer.  An ideological rift has emerged as states have begun to ease their shelter-in-place orders. Many red states, like Tennessee, South Carolina, and Perdue’s Georgia, were among the first states to begin reopening, even in defiance of White House guidelines for reopening state economies. The pandemic and the resulting measures to “flatten the curve” have had a hugely negative effect on the US economy. According to Labor Department data released on May 8, the economy shed about 20.5 million jobs. About half of US households have lost income due to the coronavirus pandemic, according to an NPR/PBS Newshour/Marist poll conducted April 21 through 26. But despite all that, the vast majority of Americans seem to understand that shelter-in-place orders and other social distancing guidelines are meant to protect people from the potentially deadly virus. And they are hesitant for things to go back to normal without further testing, especially while the coronavirus continues to spread. A Politico/Morning Consult poll of 1,991 registered voters conducted April 24 through 26 showed that nearly three in four (73 percent) voters said the US should continue social distancing measures even if it further damages the economy. Just 15 percent of voters said social distancing measures should be lifted even if it means further spreading the virus. The conflict between those wanting to get state economies going again and those wanting to keep the populace safe from the pandemic is starting to have political consequences. Georgia’s governor, Republican Brian Kemp, has been on the leading edge of the conservative charge to reopen states, and his approval rating has taken a noticeable dive in the process. His coronavirus response approval rating sits at 39 percent, according to a recent Washington Post/Ipsos poll. It remains to be seen whether federal legislators who support reopening, like Perdue, will be celebrated or criticized for how they are managing the ongoing health crisis. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Amid misleading claims from President Donald Trump about testing capacity and concerns about the effects of the reopening of nonessential businesses, a number of states are facing criticism for poor reporting of their testing data — a problem that makes it more difficult for both lawmakers and the public to understand how the pandemic is affecting their states as they work to make informed public health choices.  The issue has been particularly notable in states that have reopened, like Georgia and Virginia, but has affected others as well — and has been seen on the federal level, with some noting Centers for Disease Control (CDC) testing numbers do not match up with those shared by states. Georgia’s Department of Public Health has been criticized in particular for sharing misleading data. Last week, it corrected a graph on its website that appeared to show confirmed case counts decreasing (shown below); the data, however, was not arranged in chronological order. The x-axis of the graph was not ordered chronologically, a method that caused the highest values to be clustered on the left, and the lowest on the right, regardless of when those values were recorded.  Georgia has struggled with presenting data clearly and accurately before, the Atlanta Journal Constitution notes, like when it changed the scale used in a heat map of the state’s counties, a modification that made it appear that counties had fewer cases than they actually did, or when the department released a daily confirmed case count that was impossible based on the number of tests conducted. Adding to the confusion is the fact that some of its data is tallied in a manner different from most other states and countries. In the hope of providing a picture of exactly when changes in spread rate began, the state backdates positive test results to the day the infected person says they first became symptomatic. For a time, this meant some of the department’s case count graphs were constantly shifting, as confirmed cases for days already past increased. To make this policy more clear, the state’s newest graphs feature a “14-day window” — based on the amount of time it can take for symptoms to manifest — that make it clear recent data is subject to change.  State officials have blamed these missteps on an outside vendor, and Gov. Brian Kemp’s office has claimed it is not pressuring the Department of Public Health to provide data supporting Kemp’s decision to reopen nonessential businesses.  “We are not selecting data and telling them how to portray it, although we do provide information about constituent complaints, check it for accuracy, and push them to provide more information if it is possible to do so,” Kemp’s communications director Candice Broce told the Journal-Constitution.  Critics of the state’s statistical work have expressed concern that something more than general ineptitude is behind the muddled data. “I have a hard time understanding how this happens without it being deliberate,” Democratic state Rep. Jasmine Clark told the Journal-Constitution. “Literally nowhere ever in any type of statistics would that be acceptable.” Georgia is striking for the number of times it has been criticized for its data — and the fact that misleading numbers are being presented to its citizens as they weigh how fully they should engage with their state’s reopening: At the moment, stores, gyms, salons, and movie theaters are among the businesses that have been allowed to reopen. Georgia isn’t alone in its problems with reporting information; other states have had problems sharing data that has obscured the reality of the situation on the ground. For instance, until last week, Virginia combined its viral and serological test results. That decision was criticized by public health experts like Ashish Jha, director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, who told the Atlantic, “It is terrible. It messes up everything.” The merging of the two test results leads to misleading figures because the viral tests simply show whether a person is infected and is at risk of spreading Covid-19, while serological tests show whether a person has antibodies meant to fight off the coronavirus. Mixing the two may seem like a way to get a broad picture of how many people have and have had Covid-19, but the sum does little to illustrate how many people are infected right now — information badly needed by both lawmakers and the public, particularly in states like Virginia that are reopening nonessential businesses.  The federal government has not been immune to sharing uncertain data either. For months, the CDC did not have comprehensive testing data available on its website. The agency is now reporting more comprehensive data, but an analysis by the Atlantic found the CDC’s state-by-state testing data does not align with the data reported by the states themselves. The magazine’s Robinson Meyer and Alexis C. Madrigal write: Using the state numbers that match the CDC’s output most closely, in 22 states, the CDC’s reported number of tests diverges from the number reported by the state government by more than 10 percent. In 13 states, it diverges by more than 25 percent. In some cases, the CDC’s tallies are much higher than what states are reporting; in others, much lower. In Florida, they note, the CDC shows more than 200,000 more tests than the state’s total. What’s behind these discrepancies is unclear: It could involve several factors with differing data collection practices, including whether agencies count multiple tests given the same person as one test or multiple.  Similarly, pinpointing the cause of opaque data at the state level is difficult. States promoting the reopening of nonessential businesses may have an incentive to share data supporting that choice (particularly given that federal guidance suggests a 14-day decline in cases before reopening is attempted). But it isn’t clear that any state errors are malicious — they could be the result of sloppiness or poor science.   Even if all of the data were perfect, everyone — lawmakers, public health officials, and the public — would have an incomplete picture. There’s been an uptick in testing, but not every American who wants or needs a test can get one. The fact that symptoms don’t manifest immediately means even once testing is scaled up, some infected people won’t be accounted for — at least not immediately. That’s why the right testing data is important: Decisions on reopening and other policies are made based on incomplete information, and it is better to have as much as possible.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  Flattening the curve through social distancing has worked in restraining Covid-19’s growth, according to new research published in Health Affairs. But that raises the question: What now? Researchers from the University of Kentucky and the University of Louisville studied the effects of four different social distancing policies — school closures, closing restaurants and bars, bans on large gatherings, and shelter-in-place orders — to tease out both their individual and cumulative effects in flattening the curve. They studied the period from March 1, before any of these policies had been put into effect, to April 27, when Georgia became the first state to start relaxing its social distancing measures. The bottom line, according to their modeling: These government interventions have worked to reduce the spread of the coronavirus. Adoption of government-imposed social distancing measures reduced the daily growth rate by 5.4 percentage points after 1–5 days, 6.8 after 6–10 days, 8.2 after 11–15 days, and 9.1 after 16–20 days. Holding the amount of voluntary social distancing constant, these results imply 10 times greater spread by April 27 without SIPOs (10 million cases) and more than 35 times greater spread without any of the four measures (35 million). The goal of flattening the curve was to prevent local health systems from becoming overwhelmed, which could have led to even higher fatalities than the US has already seen (about 90,000, as of Monday morning). Even New York City, the hardest-hit place in the country, has not seen its hospitals overrun in any kind of systemic way. Take together the reduced spread through social distancing and the medical system being able to meet the Covid-19 need, and there is solid evidence that flattening the curve has worked.  One of the supplemental charts in the Health Affairs paper makes the case: “The highly visible, strong government-imposed measures achieved one key goal: dramatically reducing the spread of Covid-19 disease while allowing the health care system to not get overwhelmed,” Aaron Yelowitz, one of the University of Kentucky economists who co-wrote the paper, told me over email. “In principle, the measures also bought time to develop a more effective testing and contact tracing infrastructure, although we will see whether that actually has been achieved as states start to reopen.” Their new research was thorough in attempting to isolate the effect of government policies specifically. They presumed some degree of voluntary social distancing even in the no-intervention scenario, and also accounted for the availability of Covid-19 testing and the differences in susceptibility to the coronavirus in various places, depending on population density and age.  The researchers could not account for every conceivable variable. They note that they do not attempt to measure how mask-wearing or closing public parks and beaches or restrictions on visits to nursing homes might affect Covid-19’s spread and impact. Nevertheless, over the period they studied, the percentage of the US population subjected to these government policies grew to 95 percent — and the effect they find on the coronavirus is sizable. Not all of the interventions had an equal impact, however, according to the Kentucky-based economists. They found statistically significant effects from the shelter-in-place orders as well as closing bars and restaurants, but not for closing schools or banning large gatherings.  The ban on large gatherings was closer to statistical significance than the school closures and, when accounting for the imprecision of any modeling like this, it is possible those restrictions had an effect that the researchers’ simulations simply failed to measure. But the authors also floated other possibilities. For instance, when schools were closed, kids and families might have instead had social interactions outside of school. The researchers failed to detect a meaningful change in spread between when kids were out of school or in school, despite fears that they could be asymptomatic carriers.  Likewise, formal large events could have been replaced by informal ones. It’s also possible the ban on large gatherings had a limited effect because many of those events were already canceled before the government policy was actually instituted. This could explain why the shelter-in-place orders — which would have also restricted those informal interactions — had the biggest measurable effect. The authors say they hope their findings will help inform policymakers in deciding how to start reopening their local economies. They avoid being too prescriptive but observe that, based on what they found, keeping schools closed but lifting shelter-in-place orders would be expected to lead to cases increasing again. Ready or not, the US is starting to reopen. I think all of us can understand people’s yearning to get life back to something resembling normalcy after two months of lockdown unlike anything any of us have experienced in our lives. And we have growing evidence that certain activities — particularly those that take place outdoors — are less risky than others. One way to alleviate all of the pent-up frustrations, as well as jumpstart the stagnated economic activity that has taken its own devastating toll, is to give people an outlet. Research like this new Health Affairs paper provides more information about what works best and what doesn’t. They also gesture at other variables they did not measure that warrant more study, such as mask-wearing or activities at public parks. We have to seek a middle ground between maintaining the social distancing policies that have worked to slow the spread and the natural need for social interaction and the urgency of relieving the economic crisis.  But all of these discussions are undergirded by one important reality. Many people, the vast majority of us, are still susceptible to Covid-19. A sloppy end to social distancing could mean a rapid rebound in the virus’s spread. “At issue moving forward is whether cases averted simply turn into cases delayed,” the Kentucky economists wrote, “and a premature return to light measures would make this more likely.” This story appears in VoxCare, a newsletter from Vox on the latest twists and turns in America’s health care debate. Sign up to get VoxCare in your inbox along with more health care stats and news.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.Every single factual claim in a tweet President Donald Trump posted on Monday morning about the state of US coronavirus testing is either blatantly false or misleading. While there’s legitimately good news on the testing front the president could be talking about, like a steady increase in the number of tests completed per day, his latest public comment on the issue reads like a 279-character greatest hits of his favorite bogus talking points — blaming former President Barack Obama for a delay in test availability, overstating how much testing the US has already done, and turning a blind eye to ongoing supply shortages the federal government has done little to solve. Trump wants people to believe that coronavirus testing in the US has been a resounding success and that there’s already enough testing capacity to reopen businesses — and thereby resuscitate the economy ahead of November’s election. Progress is in fact being made, but we’re not there yet. And since the president has largely left states to fend for themselves when it comes to building out testing capacity, he really shouldn’t be trying to take credit for recent tentative successes.  “Wow! The Front Page @washingtonpost Headline reads, ‘A BOOST IN TESTS, BUT LACK OF TAKERS,’” Trump tweeted on Monday morning. “We have done a great job on Ventilators, Testing, and everything else. Were left little by Obama. Over 11 million tests, and going up fast. More than all countries in the world, combined.” Wow! The Front Page @washingtonpost Headline reads, “A BOOST IN TESTS, BUT LACK OF TAKERS.” We have done a great job on Ventilators, Testing, and everything else. Were left little by Obama. Over 11 million tests, and going up fast. More than all countries in the world, combined. Before we get to the Post story Trump referenced, it’s worth mentioning that his claim about being “left little by Obama” is completely absurd. As I’ve previously detailed on other occasions when Trump has tried to pin blame for testing issues on his predecessor, the novel coronavirus that causes Covid-19 didn’t even exist until nearly three years after Obama left office. So Obama would’ve had to have been some sort of time traveler to develop coronavirus tests during his term. It’s also not even close to true that the US has tested “more than all countries in the world, combined.” According to data compiled by Worldometer, while the US leads the world with 11.9 million tests conducted as of May 18, the next three countries on the list — Russia (7.1 million), Germany (3.1 million), and Spain (3 million) — have done more tests together than the US. So it isn’t correct to claim that the US has done more tests than the next three countries combined, let alone the entire rest of the world. And the US is nowhere near the top of the list when it comes to tests conducted per 1 million people. On that list, the US ranks an unimpressive 39th. And while Trump is in the habit of touting the raw numbers of tests conducted because it portrays his coronavirus response in the best possible light, he’s reluctant to discuss the total numbers of deaths — the more than 90,000 deaths that have occurred in the US is more than double that of the second hardest-hit country (the UK, with more than 34,000). There’s no denying the US has made significant progress on testing over the past six weeks — according to the Covid Tracking Project, the 422,024 tests completed on Sunday were a single-day high — but the country is still falling short of the 500,000 tests per day experts believe is the minimum necessary to fully control the outbreak.  Ironically, the Washington Post story Trump cited details how the federal government is hampering efforts to get the country above that 500,000 threshold. While the article — written by Steve Thompson, Juliet Eilperin, and Brady Dennis — does discuss how some states have more testing capacity than they do people seeking tests, it also details how a lack of supplies and a national testing strategy is making it difficult if not impossible for states to put that capacity to good use. From the article: Lab capacity remains untapped for many reasons, including lingering supply shortages. While most states say they are now able to test people in hospitals, nursing homes, prisons and other front-line settings, many continue to be hampered by a lack of personal protective equipment (PPE), nasal swabs and reagents, the chemicals necessary to process tests. [...] A national strategy could make [efforts to test more people] more effective, said Danielle Allen, director of Harvard’s Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, which last week published a $74 billion road map that calls for 24-hour contact tracing and isolation facilities for people who test positive. Although many states are building those services, the patchwork approach means scarce resources may not be efficiently deployed. Instead of deploying the massive resources of the federal government to procure nasal swabs and reagents, Trump has largely left states to fend for themselves. Some, like Maryland, have resorted to buying test kits from foreign governments since help from their own hasn’t been sufficient. And rather than develop a national testing strategy, Trump has been pushing for states to reopen their economies even though very few if any meet the gating criteria for doing so developed by his own administration’s coronavirus task force. REOPEN OUR COUNTRY! While US testing numbers have been improving, coronavirus deaths in the country are still between 1,000 and 2,000 most days, meaning the country is on track to hit 100,000 coronavirus deaths before the end of the month. One of the reasons the coronavirus outbreak has been so bad in the US is because the country fell way short on testing in February and March, allowing the coronavirus to spread across the country in a largely undetected manner. When Trump compares America’s raw testing numbers favorably with other countries, he leaves out the crucial context that governments in South Korea, Germany, and elsewhere were able to get the coronavirus under control early because they had more testing capacity during a critical period. That’s not to say that Trump shouldn’t share good news about increases in testing capacity with the American public. But it’s worth noting that even in cases when the truth would suffice, he can’t help himself from unleashing a blizzard of false and misleading claims. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.  It’s hard to believe that sometime before February, when news of the novel coronavirus began to garner public attention in the US, most Americans couldn’t identify Dr. Anthony Fauci from a lineup of austere male physicians. Fast-forward just a month or two and the 79-year-old’s bespectacled face can be found plastered on all sorts of customizable merchandise — T-shirts, mugs, cotton face masks, socks, bobbleheads, prayer candles. Fauci, the longtime director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, has established a near-ubiquitous media presence in no time at all, becoming the subject of glowing magazine profiles (“How Anthony Fauci Became America’s Doctor”), late-night talk show appearances, online thirst (#FauciFanClub), and, of course, kitschy fan-made merchandise. On e-commerce sites like Etsy, Redbubble, and Amazon, the keyword “Fauci” currently displays thousands of results, with all sorts of pro-Fauci slogans (#TeamFauci, Fauci Gang, I Heart Dr. Fauci). Out of the context of this pandemic, you would think the man was running for president. The cult of Fauci and its corresponding tchotchkes serve a purpose, much in the way that special counsel Robert Mueller (and the “It’s Mueller Time” tees) morphed into a political motif during the impeachment of President Donald Trump. A post shared by FUCKJERRY (@fuckjerry) on Mar 29, 2020 at 6:00pm PDT In the midst of a pandemic with no end in sight, people appear desperate for a figurehead, and believing in the soft-spoken and measured Fauci, it seems, is akin to believing in science. It means recognizing that America’s political leadership has failed to substantially curb the spread of the disease, and that the way forward is to trust the scientists and the experts — even if they don’t yet have the answers to some of our most pressing questions. “His comforting and intelligent demeanor has helped to lessen our national anxiety,” reads a petition signed by more than 26,000 people to designate Fauci as People magazine’s Sexiest Man Alive in 2020. “He speaks truth to power, a strength few have at this time.”  In these tumultuous times, Fauci has somehow managed to capture America’s imagination, but his old colleagues say he’s always had a magnetic personality. He was so charismatic that romance novelist Sally Quinn wrote a character inspired by Fauci after meeting him at a dinner party in the ’90s. When 65 percent of Americans feel that the White House has responded too slowly to the threat of Covid-19, it seems natural, then, to turn to the physician who has been hypervigilant in his public warnings, one who has decades of experience battling epidemics from the HIV/AIDS crisis to the swine flu. And so Fauci, like most political figures aggrandized by the internet, has been meme-ified and elevated into this larger-than-life hero who “speaks truth to power,” when in reality, he’s just doing his job. There’s a lot of misleading information out there. Thanks to Dr. Fauci and all of the other scientists, medical professionals, and experts educating the public based on facts, science, and truth. We appreciate it! pic.twitter.com/NbpZM6YwfD However, fellow expert Dr. Deborah Birx has hardly received the star treatment Fauci’s been given in the press and on the internet. Despite Birx spending decades researching HIV/AIDS and serving as a US Army physician, her scarves and press briefing outfits, rather than her professional accomplishments, have more frequently been the subject of media coverage. The pro-Fauci shirts, stickers, and slogans are an all-in-one visual display of performance, politics, and consumerism; Americans have long been obsessed with collecting political paraphernalia and merchandise, but in quarantine, it’s quite clear how these items serve little practical purpose other than self-expression. Plus, the Fauci merch collectors — like Katy Perry and Orlando Bloom in their Fauci Gang hoodies — are probably only able to showcase this gear on social media and Zoom.  Many companies have taken advantage of this proclivity for screen-printed apparel. While popular sites like Redbubble or CustomInk primarily sell user-generated merch, others have employed algorithms to create items with specific phrases that appeal to customers, based on data marketers have gathered. That means, as my colleague Rebecca Jennings previously reported, “for every possible political viewpoint, implausible hope, or conspiracy theory, there will be a way for merch sellers to capitalize on it.” Some purveyors of Fauci merch do promise to donate some profits to charity or emergency response funds, but purchasing an item means potentially putting workers at risk — to create it, package it, and deliver it, as opposed to donating directly to your nonprofit of choice. In quarantine, however, Americans with disposable income are giving in to their online shopping impulses out of boredom or as a feel-good remedy, and the plentiful options of Fauci merch available — and their charitable intentions — likely feed into people’s consumerist desires. A post shared by DATA BASED FASHION (@databasedfashion) on May 6, 2020 at 5:00pm PDT “As a seller, I feel like people want to buy T-shirts that promote the truth and to stand with who they believe in,” Justin Sharp, the founder of Arkansas Tees, told me. Sharp released a “Fauci Fan Club” tee (no affiliation with the @FauciFan Twitter account) sometime in early April, and the design quickly became the top-selling shirt on his Etsy shop. It was surprising, he admitted, that the item “hasn’t stopped selling since day one,” although he said before its release, several of his friends had approached him about a Fauci tee. Sharp sells on average about 10 to 15 Fauci shirts a day, and he has noticed that “if there’s any kind of battle between Trump or Fauci online,” he experiences a small bump in orders.  Casual clothing became a notable vehicle for political expression in the lead-up to and aftermath of the 2016 election, when bright red Make America Great Again hats, all-caps Nasty Woman tees, and pink pussyhats became a visual shorthand for politics. As someone who refuses to wear graphic tees in public, it pains me to admit that most Americans — regardless of their political leanings and economic status — are corny. We take pride in wearing hacky tag lines or garish emblems that seemingly portray our values, whether on a $6 mass-produced political tee or a $380 hand-stitched sweater. And in pandemic times, when supply chains are strained and mail carriers are slammed, you have to wonder: Is this item really worth it?  “That’s absolutely true on Etsy,” Sharp told me, adding that he only uses the site to promote shirts with more general slogans. Before the success of his Fauci design, his Nasty Woman shirt was his bestselling item. “I don’t show my Etsy that much love other than during heavy political moments. People’s interests change and they become less passionate about certain designs,” he said. If Sharp’s theory holds true, then interest in Fauci merch will likely subside in a post-pandemic America. However, the timeline for an effective coronavirus vaccine isn’t entirely clear, which means Fauci could stay relevant for months, if not years. For the most part, pandemic merchandise isn’t as clearly political as, say, “resistance” apparel after 2016; pro-Fauci items are “a memento of a certain moment,” according to The Cut’s fashion news writer Emilia Petrarca. It “allows us to repackage big ideas in ways that are eye-catching and easily digestible and fast.” Years from now, when Covid-19 (hopefully) becomes a pandemic of the past, most Americans will probably recall Fauci as one of the key experts who played a role in the US’s coronavirus response. In our stressful and uncertain reality, it might be comforting to lionize Fauci as our one true savior, rather than recognize that successfully flattening the curve depends on actions from many sources, most out of Fauci’s control: the White House, governors, state legislators, local officials, and even civilians like you and me.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.     A few months ago, I had dinner with a friend who argued that it was time to rethink Donald Trump’s presidency. After all, the economy was fine, we hadn’t ended up in a nuclear war, and the tough posture toward China was paying some trade dividends. Maybe the madman routine was working. Maybe it really was just a routine, and Trump was managing the presidency well enough. Wasn’t it time for critics like me to rethink their most dire warnings? Wasn’t it time to admit we’d gotten him wrong? There were, even then, obvious rebuttals, and I made some of them. The lethal mismanagement of the Hurricane Maria response, for instance. But there was a power to the argument. The worst hadn’t happened. Didn’t that require a reckoning? And then the novel coronavirus came, and President Trump did nothing for week after week, month after month. We sit, still, in the void where a plan should be, forced to choose between endless lockdown and reckless reopening because the federal government has not charted a middle path. Instead, we wake to presidential tweets demanding the “liberation” of states, and laugh to keep from crying when the most powerful man in the world suggests we study the injection of disinfectants. Trump has let disaster metastasize into calamity. The feared collision of global crisis and presidential recklessness has come, and it is not close to over.  There is a lesson here, one of particular consequence in an election year. In politics, we evaluate leaders on the clearest of metrics: what did or didn’t happen. Unemployment rose. The bill failed. The war began. We grasp for certainty, and understandably so. In a post-truth age, it is hard enough to discuss reality; it is maddening to try to debate hypotheticals. But much of any presidency takes place in the murky realm of risk. Imagine that there are 10 horrible events that could befall the country in a president’s term, each with a 1 in 40 chance of happening. If a president acts in such a way that they all become much likelier — say, a 1 in 10 chance — he may never be blamed for it, because none of them may happen, or because the one that does falls during his successor’s term. But in taking calamity from reasonably unlikely to reasonably likely, he will have done the country terrible harm.  The logic works in reverse, too. A president who assiduously works to reduce risk may never be rewarded for their effort because the outcome will be a calamity that never occurred, a disaster we never felt. We punish only the most undeniable of failures and routinely miss the most profound successes. “No one votes for anyone in government on whether they reduce pandemic risk from 0.9 percent to 0.1 percent in a decade,” says Holden Karnofsky, CEO of the Open Philanthropy Project. “That may be the most important thing an official does, but it’s not how they get elected.” Of late, I’ve been thinking back to 2017, when Trump began a war of tweets with North Korea, the world’s most irrational nuclear regime. “Just heard Foreign Minister of North Korea speak at U.N.,” Trump wrote. “If he echoes thoughts of Little Rocket Man, they won’t be around much longer!”  Trump’s behavior stunned even Republican allies. Sen. Bob Corker (R-TN), then the chair of the Foreign Relations Committee, warned that the president was treating his office like “a reality show” and setting the country “on the path to World War III.” But World War III didn’t happen. Trump and Kim Jong Un deescalated. They met in person and sent each other what Trump later called “beautiful letters.” The fears of the moment dissolved. Those who warned of catastrophe were dismissed as alarmist. But were we alarmist? Or did Trump take the possibility of nuclear war from, say, 1 in 100 to 1 in 50?  Moments like this dot Trump’s presidency. His withdrawal from the Iran nuclear deal dissolved the only structure holding Iran back from the pursuit of nuclear weapons. What’s followed has been not just a rise in tensions but a rise in bloodshed, culminating with Trump’s decision to do what both President George W. Bush and President Barack Obama chose not to do and assassinate Iranian military leader Qassem Soleimani. The end of that story is as yet unwritten, but possibilities range from Trump’s gamble paying off to Iran triggering a nuclear arms race — and perhaps eventually nuclear war — in the Middle East.  Trump’s withdrawal from the Paris climate accord, alongside his routine dismissals of the NATO alliance, similarly force us to imagine the future probabilistically. In both cases, Trump says he is simply being a tough negotiator, forcing the better deals America deserves. In both cases, unimaginable calamity may — or may not — result. The verdict will not come by Election Day. We will have to judge the risks Trump has shunted onto future generations.  Of the many risks that Trump amplified through lack of preparation, reckless policymaking, or simple inattention, a pandemic is the one that came due while he was still president. But it is not the only one lurking, nor is it somehow a charm against other disasters befalling us. Moreover, the coronavirus itself raises the risk of geopolitical crises, of financial crises, of disasters both expected and unexpected, manifesting.  Trump, in his daily rhetoric and erratic mismanagement, is placing big, dangerous bets, but he will not cover the losses if they go wrong: It’s America, and perhaps the world, that will pay, in both lives and money.  The federal government’s primary job is risk management. If that sounds strange to you, just follow the money. More than 50 percent of the federal budget is devoted directly to social insurance programs like Social Security, Medicare, or Medicaid — programs that insure Americans against the risks of illness, old age, and financial disaster. Another 16 percent goes to defense spending, which, in theory, protects us from the risks posed by other countries and terrorist networks. Together, safety net programs and military spending account for almost three-quarters of federal spending.  The US government is an insurance conglomerate protected by a large, standing army.  But the work doesn’t end there. Dig into the remainder of the budget and you find the government devoting itself to the management of more complex and exotic risks, in departments and programs that few Americans ever hear about. As Michael Lewis writes in his excellent book The Fifth Risk, risk management suffuses the entire federal bureaucracy in ways that are dizzying to try to appreciate in full: Some of the risks were easy to imagine: a financial crisis, a hurricane, a terrorist attack. Most weren’t: the risk, say, that some prescription drug proves to be both so addictive and so accessible that each year it kills more Americans than were killed in action by the peak of the Vietnam War. Many of the risks that fell into the government’s lap felt so remote as to be unreal: that a cyberattack left half the country without electricity, or that some airborne virus wiped out millions, or that economic inequality reached the point where it triggered a violent revolution. Maybe the least visible risks were of things not happening that, with better government, might have happened. A cure for cancer, for instance. The only way to manage that much risk effectively is to manage the government effectively. But Trump has never pretended to do that, or to want to do that. This can sometimes be mistaken for conservative ideology, but it’s more properly understood as disinterest.  Trump likes being the protagonist in the international drama that is America. He doesn’t want to make sure the world’s most massive, complex, and sprawling bureaucracy is well-run. He has shown little interest in nurturing the parts of the federal government that spend their time worrying about risk. His proposed budgets are thick with cuts to those departments, his proposed appointees often manifestly incompetent, his comments marinated in disrespect for the institution he oversees.  Former New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, who originally ran Trump’s transition team, relayed to Lewis a telling comment Trump made about the pre-administration planning, which he considered a waste of time. “Chris,” he said, “you and I are so smart that we can leave the victory party two hours early and do the transition ourselves.” Each day, the president of the United States receives the President’s Daily Brief: a classified report prepared by US intelligence agencies warning of gathering threats around the globe. US intelligence agencies warned Trump of the dangers of the novel coronavirus in more than a dozen of these briefings in January and February. But Trump “routinely skips reading the PDB and has at times shown little patience for even the oral summary he takes two or three times per week,” reported the Post. Two problems build amid this kind of executive impatience. First, the president is unaware of the nation’s constantly evolving risk structure. Second, the bureaucracy he, in theory, manages receives the constant message that the president doesn’t want to be bothered with bad news and does not value the parts of the government that produce it, nor the people who force him to face it.  It is, in fact, worse than that. “The way to keep your job is to out-loyal everyone else, which means you have to tolerate quackery,” Anthony Scaramucci, who served (very) briefly as White House head of communications, told the Financial Times. “You have to flatter him in public and flatter him in private. Above all, you must never make him feel ignorant.” In March, speaking at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention headquarters, Trump unintentionally revealed how much time his underlings spend praising him, and how fully he absorbs their compliments. “Every one of these doctors said, ‘How do you know so much about this?’” Trump boasted. “Maybe I have a natural ability. Maybe I should have done that instead of running for president.” To state the obvious, this is not a management style that will lead to complex problems being surfaced and solved. In 2014, after the Ebola epidemic, the Obama administration realized the federal government was unprepared for pandemics, both natural and engineered. And so they built a new team into the National Security Council: the Directorate for Global Health Security and Biodefense. Beth Cameron was its first leader, and she explains that it was designed to ensure not just a constant focus on the threat, but a bureaucratic structure, and a set of interagency relationships, that were constantly being exercised so coordination could happen fast when speed was most needed.  “Having that in place is really important,” Cameron says, “because it’s in anticipation of a truly catastrophic or existential threat. It is the ability to detect it early. And then it’s the ability to respond efficiently and to practice that at all levels of government.”  That way, when the crisis does come, the government knows how to react, knows who needs to be in the meetings, knows where the power and authority and expertise lie. It can focus on responding to the threat rather than building the structure needed to respond to the threat. The Trump administration dissolved that office in 2018 as part of John Bolton’s reorganization of the National Security Council. The leader of the team, Rear Adm. Timothy Ziemer, was pushed out. The decision attracted criticism at the time, but the White House defended the call. “In a world of limited resources, you have to pick and choose,” one administration official told the Washington Post. The administration has never explained how or why it chose to deemphasize pandemic risk, nor which threats it decided to prioritize instead.  So neither Trump nor his administration was focused on Covid-19 in the early days, when it would have mattered most. “I think that it’s possible if we’d taken this threat more seriously in mid- to late January, that we could be in a situation where we are containing coronavirus as opposed to having to suppress it,” Cameron says. I don’t want to overstate the consequence of that one decision: It is possible to imagine an administration that eliminated the office but remained focused, through other agencies or processes, on pandemic risk. But in this case, the dissolution of the office reflected the interests of the executive, and the evidence is everywhere. The administration responded exactly as you’d expect an administration that had shuttered its pandemic response operation to act — which is to say, it mostly did not act.  “When the president stands on top of a table and says, ‘This is super important, super urgent, everyone must do this,’ the government works moderately effectively,” Ron Klain, who managed the Obama administration’s Ebola response, told me. “That’s the best case. When the president is standing up and saying, ‘I don’t want to hear about it, I don’t want to know about it, this doesn’t really exist,’ well, then you’re definitely not going to get effective work from the government.” In his book The Precipice, Oxford philosopher Toby Ord considers the manifold ways humanity could die or destroy itself — the “existential” risks. He considers asteroids and supervolcanoes, stellar explosions and nuclear wars, pandemic disease and artificial intelligence. Surveying the data and building in his own estimates, Ord concludes that there’s a 1 in 6 chance humankind, or at least human civilization, will be annihilated in the next century.  Among the threats, one factor dominates: other human beings. Ord believes there’s only a 1 in 1,000 chance that a natural disaster — say, an asteroid or a supervolcano — will wipe humanity from the timeline. The likelier outcome is that humanity will annihilate itself, either accidentally or deliberately. It is the chances of a virus bioengineered for lethality, of artificial intelligence that erases us malevolently or casually, of nuclear war or runaway climate change rendering Earth uninhabitable, that drive the risk, in Ord’s view, to 1 in 6. Ord’s estimates are arguable. Perhaps the true probability is 1 in 12, or 1 in 3, or 1 in 50. But it is not zero. And Ord is, purposely, ignoring horrifying outcomes that don’t result in humanity’s extinction. A nuclear war that kills 50 million people does not fit his definition of existential risk. Nor does a bioweapon that kills 200 million, or a violent climate disaster that displaces billions. But the chance of any, or all, of these is inarguably higher.  Trump raises the risk of virtually every threat on Ord’s list. In some cases, he does so directly: in withdrawing America from the Paris climate accord and turning the Environmental Protection Agency over to oil industry executives, he has directly increased the risk of runaway climate change. In refusing to renew the New START treaty with Russia and dissolving the Iran nuclear deal, he has directly increased the likelihood of nuclear proliferation. In dismantling the government infrastructure meant to protect us from biological and natural pandemics, he has increased America’s vulnerability to pandemics — as we are seeing. But the most important argument Ord makes is this: Risks, even across vastly different spheres, are correlated. There are forces, events, and people that simultaneously raise — or lower — the risk of runaway climate change, nuclear war, pandemics, and reckless AI research. The simplest way to raise all of them at once, Ord suggests, would be a “great-power war.” Take a war between the US and China. It would raise the chances of nuclear launches, engineered bioweapons, and massive cyberattacks. And even if it never got to that point, the increase in hostilities would impede the cooperation needed to slow or stop climate change, or to regulate the development of artificial intelligence. And yet, increasing hostilities with China has been the hallmark of Trump’s foreign policy. Even prior to the coronavirus, the US-China relationship was “at the worst point since the forging of the relationship in 1972,” says Evan Osnos, who covers China for the New Yorker. Now the situation is much worse.  The Trump administration’s initial response to the coronavirus, and the one of which it remains most proud, was closing travel to and from China. It is possible that policy bought us time, but it was time we wasted. The coronavirus made its way to the US from Europe, and the Trump administration turned to blaming China. The president began calling it the “Chinese virus.” His administration stalled a United Nations Security Council resolution on the coronavirus because it didn’t pin sufficient blame on China for the virus’s origins. China has responded in kind, suggesting the US military carried the coronavirus into the country and expelling US journalists.  During a recent interview on Fox Business, Trump said of President Xi Jinping, “I just, right now, I don’t want to speak to him,” and threatened to “cut off the whole relationship.”  It is important not to pretend the US-China relationship is easy, nor that China has been, itself, a good actor amid the coronavirus (or even more broadly). But we are thinking here in terms of catastrophic risk, and it is clear that the deterioration of the US-China relationship worsened global pandemic risk. “Ask yourself: What would’ve happened if we’d had more constructive conversations with China over the past few years?” says Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT). “Would they have been more willing to share information on coronavirus early? I don’t know the answer to that question. But we created a relationship that was purely antagonistic.”  Reasonable people can, and do, disagree on ideal China strategy. But in this case, there has been no strategy at all. An administration that wanted to confront China successfully would strengthen America’s other alliances, build US influence in Asia, reinforce our commitments in Europe, invest in retaining the world’s respect and trust. Trump has done none of that. Instead, has surrounded himself with professional China antagonists, like Peter Navarro, ratcheted up tensions continually, and made a hobby out of alienating and unnerving traditional allies. Now, in a moment that demands global cooperation, the relationship is in collapse, and America’s international capital is at a low ebb.  “We increasingly feel caught between a reckless China and a feckless America that no longer seems to care about its allies,” Michael Fullilove, head of Australia’s largest think-tank, told the Financial Times.  The rising tensions between the US and China worsen almost every existential or catastrophic threat facing the US. Coronavirus could have been a warning, a signal of how quickly catastrophe can overwhelm us in the absence of cooperation. Instead, it’s been used to pump more hostility, more enmity, more volatility into the most important bilateral relationship in the world. That is a political choice Trump has made, a risk he is running on behalf of future generations.  “I know we talk about trust all the time as the missing ingredient, but it matters when it comes to international politics,” Osnos says. “The big blinking risk is that there is not an assumption on the Chinese and the US sides that the other one basically has the same interest, which is global stability. There is a real feeling that the other one is seeking to hurt.” In normal times, the worst risks we face slip easily from our minds. We think of the threats we know, the ones we faced the year before and the year before that and the year before that. This is called “availability bias,” and it is natural: We think more about the dangers we’ve seen before than the ones we haven’t. Yet the worst risks are, by their nature, rare — if they came due constantly, humanity would be ash. As a result, we conflate the unlikely and the impossible. This pandemic, if nothing else, should shatter that conflation. It is hard to pretend the worst can’t happen when you haven’t been able to enter a store or see your parents for six weeks. And let’s be clear: coronavirus is not the worst that can happen. The H5N1 virus, for instance, has a mortality rate of 60 percent, and scientists have proven that it can mutate to become “as easily transmissible as the seasonal flu.”  Even scarier is the possibility of human-engineered pandemics. As bad as the coronavirus is, Bill Gates told me, “it’s not anywhere near bioterrorism — smallpox or another pathogen that was intentionally picked for a high fatality rate as well as delayed symptoms and a high infectious rate.”  We play for the highest of stakes. We must do what we can to improve our odds.  No one bears a heavier burden in that respect than the US president. But Trump is reckless with his charge. That reflects, perhaps, his own life experience. He has taken tremendous risks, and if they have led him to the edge of ignominy and bankruptcy, they have also led him to the presidency.  But he has always played with other people’s money and other people’s lives. “The president was probably in a position to make riskier decisions in life because he was fabulously rich from birth,” says Murphy. “But it’s also true he has had a reputation for risk not backed up by reality. His name is on properties he doesn’t own. We think of him as taking risk in professional life, but a lot of what he does is lend his name to buildings with risks taken by others. He’s built an image as a risk taker, but it’s not clear how much risk he’s taken.” In electing him president, however, we have taken a tremendous risk, and it isn’t paying off. Right now, the Trump administration is flailing in its health and economic response to a pandemic ravaging our society. The country’s chief risk officer failed, largely because the country hired someone who didn’t want to do that job. Maybe, next time, we should hire someone who does.  Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today. Health and Human Services Secretary Alex Azar spoke in optimistic terms about quickly reopening the US economy on CNN Sunday. And he did so while downplaying the severity of the coronavirus fatality rate nationally, seeming to suggest that demographics — rather than policy choices — are behind confirmed US coronavirus-related deaths approaching 90,000. But his positive gloss on the administration’s coronavirus response appears to be at odds with recent polling indicating that an overwhelming majority of Americans — including those who have lost their jobs or taken pay cuts due to stay-at-home measures — are concerned that states will lift social distancing restrictions too quickly. In an interview with CNN’s Jake Tapper, Azar said, “Thanks to the president’s historic response efforts here .... we are in a position to be able to reopen now.” “We have got to get this economy and our people out and about, working, going to school again, because there are serious health consequences to what we’ve been going through,” he said. However, his confidence about a swift return to normalcy — and the ability of state and local leaders to oversee that process competently — is not shared by most of the American public. A Pew Research Center poll taken from April 25 to May 5 (with a 1.4 percentage point margin of error) shows that 68 percent of all adults are concerned state governments will lift stay-at-home restrictions too quickly.   Strikingly, even among people who have been laid off or have taken a pay cut, the percentage of people with that concern is identical — 68 percent — which indicates concerns about the virus are serious even among those facing direct economic consequences from the coronavirus-spurred recession. (Among those who had not been laid off or taken a pay cut, the percentage concerned was one point higher: 69 percent.) These results also suggest it’s not just government shutdowns of businesses that are keeping people home and away from businesses, but fear of the virus itself.  Azar also answered questions from Tapper about the fatality rate in an eyebrow-raising manner, suggesting that communities of color are a key reason that the US has the highest number of reported casualties from coronavirus in the world.  When Tapper initially asked Azar to explain why the virus is “worse for us than it is for anyone else,” referring to the number of Americans who are dead, Azar first responded by pointing out that the US’s mortality rate as a percentage of reported cases was not exceptionally high.  HHS Secretary Alex Azar says that the high number coronavirus mortalities in the United States is due to "greater risk profiles," in certain communities and says the American response to the virus has been "historic" #CNNSOTU pic.twitter.com/0plz9pWekO But when Tapper pressed him further, and emphasized that the overall number of deaths in the US is the highest in the world, Azar said this could be explained by ethnic demographics. “Unfortunately the American population is a very diverse, and, it is, it is a population with significant unhealthy comorbidities that do make many individuals in our communities, in particular African American, minority communities, particularly at risk here, because of significant underlying disease, health disparities, and disease comorbidities,” Azar said. “That is an unfortunate legacy in our health care system that we certainly do need to address,” Azar added. Azar is right that public health inequities are contributing to disproportionate casualties among communities of color. But pointing to that as the primary reason the US has surpassed every other country in the world in terms of coronavirus-related deaths is a troubling dodge: it seems to imply that racial minorities are to blame for their deaths rather than the federal government. The more immediate and larger explanation for the US’s exceptional number of deaths is the disorganized and anti-scientific response by the federal government to the pandemic. But even setting that aside, the fact that many communities of color do have worse health outcomes is a function of longstanding socioeconomic marginalization and uneven access to nutrition, health care, and a healthy environment. In other words, Azar’s formulation could be flipped: it’s not people of color driving up America’s casualties, but America that is driving up people of color’s casualties. Support Vox’s explanatory journalism Every day at Vox, we aim to answer your most important questions and provide you, and our audience around the world, with information that has the power to save lives. Our mission has never been more vital than it is in this moment: to empower you through understanding. Vox’s work is reaching more people than ever, but our distinctive brand of explanatory journalism takes resources — particularly during a pandemic and an economic downturn. Your financial contribution will not constitute a donation, but it will enable our staff to continue to offer free articles, videos, and podcasts at the quality and volume that this moment requires. Please consider making a contribution to Vox today.    As the epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic shifts to Latin America, so too has the use of COVID-19 as a pretext for police repression. “We’re seeing that COVID-19, like other pandemics before it, magnifies structural discrimination. And sadly, it’s often the most marginalized that are the first targets,” says Louise Tillotson, co-author of a new Amnesty International report on the abuse. We also go to San Salvador to speak with journalist Jorge Cuéllar. AMY GOODMAN: This is Democracy Now!, democracynow.org, The Quarantine Report. I’m Amy Goodman. As the epicenter of the coronavirus pandemic shifts to Latin America, so too does the use of COVID-19 as a pretext for police repression. A new report by Amnesty International details the increasing use of arbitrary, punitive, violent attacks in Latin America and the Caribbean as governments enforce coronavirus lockdowns and restrictions. In El Salvador, hundreds of people detained in government facilities, allegedly aimed at curbing the spread of the coronavirus, have protested to demand to be freed and be given the results of their COVID-19 tests. This is a group of people who say they’ve been held in one of San Salvador’s quarantine detention centers for over 45 days. This footage was published last week by a Central American human rights organization. SALVADORAN DETAINEE: [translated] We are people who are detained illegally for 45 days. We are asking authorities to free us. We have been tested for the coronavirus four times and tested negative all four times. But the authorities still say there is a COVID-19-positive person among us, which is completely false. We demand answers of how it is possible there is a positive case among us, after being detained illegally for 45 days. AMY GOODMAN: Well, for more, we’re going to San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador, where we’re joined by Jorge Cuéllar, assistant professor of Latin American, Latino and Caribbean studies at Dartmouth College. He traveled to El Salvador in late February to continue research for his book, now on lockdown in the capital, San Salvador, with his parents. His recent article for ReVista: Harvard Review of Latin America is headlined “El Salvador’s Two Pandemics: Maximum Insecurity.” Also with us, in Mexico City, is Louise Tillotson, researcher for Amnesty International Americas, co-author of their new report titled “Authorities must protect people from COVID-19 instead of resorting to repressive measures.” Jorge Cuéllar, let’s begin with you. Describe what’s happening in El Salvador. JORGE CUÉLLAR: Well, thank you for inviting me to the program, Amy. What we’re seeing here in San Salvador, and El Salvador, more broadly, is the use of the pandemic in order to keep people in their homes, enforce a militarized lockdown and to ensure this kind of — the nonspreading of the coronavirus. What’s very strange about what’s going on is that the president has offered very little clarity and transparent information as to what’s happening in the quarantines, as the clip that you shared just mentioned. There’s things going on there. People are receiving poor treatment, with unhygienic conditions, with broken restrooms, for example, and in overcrowded conditions, that are creating very tense situations within the quarantines, that have even led to hunger strikes and protests by individuals. AMY GOODMAN: I want to turn to another clip of a group of men who say they’ve been illegally detained at one of San Salvador’s so-called containment centers for over 45 days. This footage was published also by the Central American human rights organization, one of the men in the group speaking of the conditions inside. SALVADORAN DETAINEE: [translated] We don’t have supplies, which we have been asking for for days, supplies like water, alcohol, gel, soap for the bathroom and for personal hygiene. We want to reinforce that the food provided by the government arrives here already rotten, causing stomach problems among those of us who are detained here. AMY GOODMAN: So, Jorge Cuéllar, if you can talk, overall, about the government and its use of COVID-19, how it’s using it as a pretext for political repression? JORGE CUÉLLAR: So, the story of the quarantine really begins back in February, where President Nayib Bukele stormed the national — the Legislative Assembly in order to push for an anti-crime bill called the Territorial Control Plan. And this was one of the first instances when the government started to antagonize other institutions of government and create a sort of situation where unilateral decision-making became sort of the norm. And when the coronavirus sort of takes hold in Central America, Bukele uses this moment in order to sort of double down on those things that he had been pushing for prior. So, within the situation of the pandemic, these different sanitary measures that he’s taken in order to safeguard the lives of Salvadoran people have come with the increasing number of military and police forces on the ground, that have created a series of checkpoints all over the country, as well as kind of creating a certain climate of intimidation for people who are seeking to do their daily errands, to go to the pharmacy, to do their grocery runs, with this kind of idea, given the history of the country and the tense situation among security forces and the general population, that they run the risk of going to, of being sent to one of these quarantines, that, as those clips also mention, are in complete disrepair. And then there’s a likelier chance that one will be infected by the coronavirus within these containment centers than just staying and remaining home. AMY GOODMAN: Louise — JORGE CUÉLLAR: So, it’s this kind of — yeah, go ahead. AMY GOODMAN: Let me bring Louise Tillotson into the conversation, one of the researchers on this new Amnesty International report called “Authorities must protect people from COVID-19 instead of resorting to repressive measures.” As you look at what’s happening in Latin America, talk about what you’re seeing, not only in El Salvador, but around the region. LOUISE TILLOTSON: Yeah, thank you. At Amnesty International, we started documenting incidents of repression in the context of COVID-19, with our digital verification team and country researchers, just a few days after the lockdowns were put in place across the region. So, in a seven-week period, we documented some 60 instances of repression in a number of countries. We saw four worrying trends. In some countries, we’ve seen detention being used massively as a form to enforce lockdowns. So, in places like the Dominican Republic, to date, we’ve seen some 60,000 people detained. The videos show us that people are simply rounded up and put in the back of police trucks without physical distancing measures. We are not clear what happens to them when they’re detained, whether they have access to a lawyer nor the other safeguards one would need to see usually when people are being detained. We also saw many videos of humiliating and degrading treatment by the police. One of the things that started to emerge in the videos we saw from across the region was the police punishing people with these humiliating tactics of sort of getting them to do jumping jacks and force group exercise, and sometimes using Tasers on them. We also saw indications of excess use of force by the police for people that were protesting for access to food and other basic needs. So, places like Venezuela, we saw Indigenous communities protesting in need of food, and repression being used against them. And as we’re also hearing and in the videos that you showed, in many countries, in El Salvador, in Venezuela, but also in other Central American countries and in Paraguay, we’re seeing this phenomenon of mandatory quarantines in inhumane conditions, as you describe, where people don’t have basic sanitation and people are not being tested. So, all the videos that we looked at indicate to us that people that are living in poverty, homeless people, migrants and refugees are much more likely to be impacted by these punitive measures. And so we’re seeing that COVID-19, like other pandemics before it, magnifies structural discrimination. And sadly, it’s often the most marginalized that are the first targets of these punitive responses. AMY GOODMAN: And, Louise Tillotson, where you are, in Mexico City, in Mexico, what has been the response of AMLO, the president, of Andrés Manuel López Obrador? LOUISE TILLOTSON: Here in Mexico, we’ve seen a softer lockdown than in other parts of the region, in the sense that we haven’t seen mass deployment of police and military to enforce it. We have seen some incidents of repression that are concerning, but our main focus has been on the issue of violence against women. Of course, there’s another epidemic in Latin America, and that holds true here in Mexico, and that’s violence against women. So, just in March, before lockdowns or stay-at-home orders were put in place, tens of thousands of women here in Mexico took to the streets demanding that the authorities do more around femicides, do more around domestic violence. And then, what we’ve seen since the stay-at-home orders have been in place is the number of calls to hotlines for domestic violence spiked significantly. We haven’t seen leadership from the president on this issue. We’ve called on the authorities in these difficult times to make sure that they provide enough resources to protect survivors from gender-based violence. AMY GOODMAN: I wanted to go back to Professor Cuéllar. The Salvadoran president, Bukele, last month authorized police and military to use lethal force against alleged gang members, following a spate of homicides allegedly linked to gang activity. Authorities said more than 50 people were murdered in a single weekend, after imprisoned suspected gang members allegedly ordered the killings from behind bars. Shocking images, many of which were shared on Bukele’s own Twitter account, show prisoners crammed together, with only some wearing face masks, as prisons enforce — and we’re going to show a photograph; it’s unbelievable — around-the-clock lockdown on suspected gang members, which includes putting metal sheets over prison bars and housing prisoners from rival gangs in the same overcrowded cells. You have these images of like a thousand men with each of them in the legs of the one before. And we’re going to show that image again. If you could respond to this, the video? JORGE CUÉLLAR: Yeah, that image and those videos of that day are instructive as to what’s happening in the country, where there is a kind of security initiative that’s taking place during the coronavirus pandemic. And what we see in these images is that there’s clearly no way that social distancing can happen within the decrepit and dungeon-like prison system in El Salvador. And these men, like you notice, have very little protection on. But these images, what they did, with how they functioned in society, is that they demonstrated to the country that, indeed, the security initiatives that Bukele has set into motion have been effective in curtailing the violence against gangs, though what we see with this kind of homicide spike that happened in late April was that the territorial control that the government thinks that they’ve achieved is actually quite, quite fragile and perhaps not true. This ongoing kind of tension between gangs and the state is something that has also been historically present in different administrations, that have often used images of gang member humiliation to push this idea that punitive measures are the only option to correct the most undesirable elements of Salvadoran society. But what we see here is this kind of overwhelming dehumanization of these people, who are now under this idea that putting them together in the same cells and shutting them off from even seeing sunlight, as the center — Osiris Luna, the director of the penal system, mentioned, is really not going to solve the problem in the long term. AMY GOODMAN: Louise Tillotson, as the epicenter of the global pandemic shifts from the United States to Latin America, what are you calling for? What is Amnesty International calling for, on the authorities, around the issue of police repression, using COVID-19 as a pretext? LOUISE TILLOTSON: Yeah. We’re concerned by this sort of creeping repression that we’re seeing. Of course, in international human rights law, countries can take measures to protect public health. But sadly, in a region where we saw excessive force by the police consistently in 2019, including during states of emergency, used as a way to repress dissent, we’re worried. Governments have extraordinary powers in the current context. Of course, COVID-19 presents us with huge challenges. But measures that governments take, including mandatory quarantines and enforcements of lockdowns, need to be necessary and proportionate, because beyond the fact that these measures can be repressive and violate a number of human rights, they also stand to undermine prevention efforts. So, when people are detained en masse, like we’ve seen in the Dominican Republic, or put in these obligatory, mandatory quarantines, like we’ve seen in El Salvador and Venezuela and Paraguay, where they can’t physically distance, that’s counterproductive to all our efforts. So we’ve launched a campaign called Repression Is Not Protection, and we’ll be monitoring states to ensure that they don’t overreach or abuse their powers and continue repressing in the name of COVID. AMY GOODMAN: Louise Tillotson, we want to thank you for being with us, Amnesty International Americas. We’ll link to your report, “Authorities must protect people from COVID-19 instead of resorting to repressive measures.” And, Professor Jorge Cuéllar, thanks so much for joining us from El Salvador. We’ll link to your article, “El Salvador’s Two Pandemics: Maximum Insecurity.” This is Democracy Now! When we come back, President Trump has just issued an executive order, after Twitter deletes one of his tweets and now has flagged another, saying it’s promoting violence — they didn’t delete it, but they said that his tweet was promoting misinformation. Stay with us.The U.S. Labor Department reported another 2.1 million workers filed for unemployment benefits over the last week, bringing the toll of job losses since coronavirus lockdowns began in mid-March to a staggering 40.7 million. One in four U.S. workers has lost their job in just 10 weeks. The Institute for Policy Studies reports that during the same period the combined wealth of U.S. billionaires soared by $485 billion.In Pennsylvania, a Democratic state legislator has accused some of his Republican colleagues of covering up their COVID-19 status and potentially putting other lawmakers at risk. A video of state Representative Brian Sims talking about the situation has gone viral. Rep. Brian Sims: “First of all, Mike Turzai, the speaker of the House, needs to resign, and any member of leadership that has known what was going on. Any member of Republican leadership that knew that members were testing positive, that other members were being quarantined, and did not tell those of us who were exposed to those members, needs to be investigated by the attorney general. And I think that there needs to be prosecutions.”In immigration news, advocates across the country are continuing demands to release all people from Immigration and Customs Enforcement jails as confirmed coronavirus cases inside facilities in the U.S. near 1,400. Immigrant rights advocates led protests outside immigration jails in California and Washington state Thursday. In Burlington, Massachusetts, advocates replaced the ICE flag at the agency’s Boston Field Office with a new flag that read ”ICE Kills. Free Them All.” Another national day of action is planned for today.A 30-year-old undocumented Mexican immigrant who sued Immigration and Customs Enforcement two weeks ago and was later quickly deported by the agency has officially been declared missing. Héctor García Mendoza was part of a class-action lawsuit demanding the immediate release of all immigrants held at the Elizabeth Contract Detention Facility in New Jersey, where prisoners and staff have tested positive for COVID-19. Gothamist reports that four days later and without notice, García Mendoza was transferred to Laredo, Texas, where he was then escorted into the notoriously dangerous border town of Nuevo Laredo, Mexico. García Mendoza reportedly hasn’t reached out to his family in Mexico or the U.S. His lawyers have contacted shelters in Mexico and immigrant advocacy groups in Texas, but no one has reportedly seen or heard from him. His family is also concerned for García Mendoza’s health, as in the days leading up to his removal, he complained of chest pain and shortness of breath but didn’t receive any medical attention from ICE. Mendoza’s removal came despite a federal judge’s order blocking the deportation. Advocates believe his expedited deportation is retaliation for the lawsuit against ICE. García Mendoza had been living in the U.S. for 10 years.In Iowa, Tyson Foods says it will halt operations at its Storm Lake meat processing plant after 555 employees — or more than 20% of the workforce — tested positive for the coronavirus. Buena Vista County, where the plant is located, has the highest per capita infection rate of COVID-19 in Iowa. In California, over 200 workers at eight Los Angeles-area meat and food processing plants have tested positive for COVID-19. John Grant, president of United Food and Commercial Workers Local 770, which represents the meatpackers, called on Smithfield Foods to close its Farmer John plant near downtown L.A. John Grant: “The outbreak is over 10% of the workforce, and it’s dangerous. And the problem with this is that it’s invisible, insidious and deadly. And so, what you do is, when a shark’s in the water, you pull everybody out of the water, and you make an assessment of what’s going on.”Brazil registered a record number of COVID-19 cases Thursday, with more than 1,000 deaths in just 24 hours. Brazil is second only to the United States in infections and deaths, as far-right President Jair Bolsonaro has sought throughout the pandemic to undermine remain-at-home measures taken by state and local governments. Despite this week’s surge in COVID-19 cases, the mayor of São Paulo — the Western Hemisphere’s largest city — is allowing nonessential businesses, including offices, shopping malls and car dealerships, to reopen beginning June 1.In Haiti, local social justice and human rights groups are warning that hundreds of prisoners could be at risk of dying of COVID-19 as infections are quickly spreading inside the country’s prisons. The Miami Herald reports at least 11 prisoners at the National Penitentiary in Port-au-Prince have already tested positive, and many others are presenting symptoms such as fevers. But Haitian human rights groups believe the number of infections is far higher as prisons are overcrowded, with scarce food supplies or essential medication, and up to 80 prisoners are often crammed shoulder to shoulder inside filthy cells without ventilation. The United States has also faced criticism for deporting Haitians who had tested positive for the coronavirus.On Monday — Memorial Day — George Floyd was begging for his life as Minneapolis Police Officer Derek Chauvin pinned him to the pavement with his knee on his neck. “Please. Please. I can’t breathe, officer. I cannot breathe,” Floyd gasped while handcuffed. Onlookers demanded Chauvin relent, but he continued to drive his knee into Floyd’s neck. A devastating, ten-minute video recorded this slow-motion murder, breath by ebbing breath. Finally, Floyd’s limp body is roughly rolled onto a stretcher, loaded into an ambulance and taken to the hospital, where he was pronounced dead. Outrage spread as the video went viral. George’s brother Philonise Floyd told CNN, “Everybody loved my brother…They didn’t have to do that to him.” Minnesota Attorney General Keith Ellison, said in a statement, “His life was important. It had value…We will seek justice and we will find it.” Minneapolis Mayor Jacob Frey added, “Being Black in America should not be a death sentence.” Frey has called for Chauvin to be arrested, and Floyd’s family wants all four officers charged with murder. Reverend Bernice King, one of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.’s children, tweeted a photo of Chauvin kneeling on Floyd’s neck, juxtaposed with a photo of Colin Kapernick, the star quarterback banned from the NFL for taking a knee during the national anthem, protesting police violence and racial injustice. “If you’re unbothered or mildly bothered by the 1st knee, but outraged by the 2nd, then, in my father’s words, you’re 'more devoted to order than to justice.' And more passionate about an anthem that supposedly symbolizes freedom than you are about a Black man’s freedom to live,” Bernice King tweeted. As U.S. COVID-19 deaths pass 100,000, disproportionately impacting communities of color, state-sanctioned murder and violence against people of color by police continues, seemingly unabated. Ahmaud Arbery was shot dead while jogging in Georgia on February 23rd, by Travis McMichael and his father, retired police officer Gregory McMichael. On March 13th, Breonna Taylor, a 26 year-old emergency medical technician, was shot eight times and killed by Louisville, Kentucky police after they burst into her home in the middle of the night, entering the wrong apartment while looking for a suspect who was already in custody. Thankfully, we needn’t add Christian Cooper’s name to that tragic list. Cooper, who is African American, was bird watching in New York’s Central Park on Memorial Day, when he respectfully asked another person to abide by park rules and leash her dog. She adamantly refused, prompting him to record their interaction. She called 911, telling Cooper, “I’m going to tell them that there is an African American man threatening my life.” Christian Cooper sent the video to his sister, who posted it to social media, where it took off, quickly rising to 42 million views. Someone identified the woman as Amy Cooper (no relation to Christian), and, as a result of the backlash, she was fired from her job and the dog shelter took back her dog. Ibram X. Kendi, founding director of the Antiracist Research and Policy Center at American University, put their interaction in historical context on the Democracy Now! news hour: “What Amy Cooper did is typically the beginning of racist terror…oftentimes, cops actually believe that this white woman is being threatened by this so-called superpredator of an African American male. Too often, it leads to that unarmed victim ultimately becoming harmed or even killed.” A similar fabricated exchange led to the torture and lynching of 14 year-old Emmet Till in 1955. Professor Kendi launched The COVID Racial Data Tracker, documenting the disproportionate lethality of the pandemic in communities of color. “Latino Americans and African Americans and Native Americans in particular are disproportionately being infected and dying. It took many grassroots folks demanding racial data to even see this, because the states were refusing to do it,” Kendi explained. “What’s predictive of Black infection and death rates is access to health insurance — also air and water pollution, employment status,” he added, using the data to debunk the argument that people of color suffer more COVID-19 infections due simply to underlying health conditions. African Americans account for 13% of our population, but at least 25% of our 100,000 COVID-19 deaths. The same disproportionate death rate prevails among the 5,000 Americans killed by police since 2015; African Americans are twice as likely to be killed by police than are whites. Police violence is a leading cause of death for young men of color. The pandemic lays bare what cell phone and body camera videos have increasingly exposed and communities of color have long known: racism is alive and well in the United States, and it is deadly.The death toll from COVID-19 in the United States has passed 100,000, just three months after the U.S. recorded its first deaths from the novel coronavirus that emerged in China late last year. With just over 4% of the world’s population, the United States has recorded roughly one-third of all coronavirus cases, averaging over 1,100 deaths per day since March. As bad as that figure is, a New York Times review of excess deaths suggests the true U.S. death toll is likely over 125,000. Throughout the month of February, as the coronavirus spread largely undetected throughout the United States, President Trump repeatedly downplayed the threat of the virus and claimed it was going to “go away.” President Donald Trump: “We have done an incredible job. We’re going to continue. It’s going to disappear one day. It’s like a miracle.” On Wednesday, President Trump flew to Florida to watch NASA’s planned launch of a new SpaceX spacecraft. The launch was aborted due to bad weather. Throughout the day, Trump made no mention of the grim milestone of 100,000 deaths — no written statement honoring those who have died, no condolences offered to families, and not even a tweet acknowledging the six-figure death toll.