The multitrillion-dollar patchwork of federal and state relief programs has not kept bills from piling up or prevented long lines at food banks. But it has mitigated the damage. Now the expiration of those programs represents a cliff that many Americans and the economy are hurtling toward. The $1,200 checks are long gone, at least for those who needed them most, with little imminent prospect for a second round. The lending program that helped millions of small businesses keep workers on the payroll will wind down if Congress does not extend it. Eviction moratoriums that are keeping people in their homes are expiring in many cities. And the $600 per week in extra unemployment benefits that have allowed tens of millions of laid-off workers to pay rent and buy groceries will expire at the end of July. President Trump and other Republicans have played down the need for more spending, saying the solution is for states to reopen businesses and allow companies to bring people back to work. So despite pleas from economists across the political spectrum — including Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair — any federal action is likely to be limited. To some Republican lawmakers, extra unemployment benefits and other assistance made sense when businesses were shut down and the government was discouraging people from leaving home. But as the economy reopens, they say, the benefits could impede the recovery by providing an incentive not to return to work. Many economists feel those fears are overblown. Generous benefits might be a deterrent to work in normal times, they argue, but these are hardly normal times. Even the most optimistic forecasters expect the unemployment rate to be well above 10 percent when the extra benefits expire, meaning there will be far more jobless workers than available jobs. President Trump on Thursday signed an executive order to curtail the legal protections that shield social media companies from liability for the content posted on their platforms. The move came just hours after Twitter added new fact-checking labels to hundreds of tweets, Kate Conger and Mike Isaac reported, escalating the social media network’s confrontation with Mr. Trump. Twitter on Tuesday had appended fact-checking labels for the first time to two of Mr. Trump’s tweets about mail-in ballots, rebutting their accuracy. In response, Mr. Trump accused his favorite social media network of stifling speech and declared that he would put a stop to the interference. White House officials drafted an executive order that would make it easier for federal regulators to argue that companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter are suppressing free speech when they move to suspend users or delete posts. “They’ve had unchecked power to censure, restrict, edit, shape, hide, alter virtually any form of communication between private citizens or large public audiences,” Mr. Trump said as he signed the order on Thursday. American Airlines and Delta Air Lines are offering buyouts to employees as they prepare for a rebound in demand for air travel that most industry expect will take years to materialize. “Delta will have to be a smaller airline as we adjust to reduced demand and the need for distancing and safety during travel,” Delta’s chief executive, Ed Bastian, told employees in a memo on Wednesday. “A smaller Delta unfortunately means fewer people will be required.” Delta is offering two programs — an early retirement option and a general buyout package — to most employees except for pilots, whose union is still in talks with management, Mr. Bastian said. The email did not say how much of its work force the airline was seeking to pare. The American program, also announced on Wednesday, applies to management and support staff, which the airline hopes to cut by about 30 percent, or about 5,000 workers. Going into the crisis, American had 130,000 employees and Delta had 90,000; about 40,000 workers at each have taken voluntary leave or early retirement. Most airline jobs are protected into the fall as a condition of the CARES Act, which provided $50 billion to passenger airlines, half of it earmarked to pay employees through September. An early rally in the stock market Thursday faded late in the day after President Trump said he would hold a news conference about China amid rising tensions between the world’s two largest economies. The S&P 500 turned negative after earlier rising as much as 1 percent. Before the reversal, stocks had been set for a third day of gains this week, a rally that reflected optimism about prospects for an economic rebound. Mr. Trump’s announcement of a Friday news conference came as the United States intensified pressure on China over Hong Kong. China’s legislature on Thursday approved a plan that would broaden many of the mainland’s security practices to the semiautonomous city. The Trump administration signaled Wednesday that it was likely to end some or all of the U.S. government’s special trade and economic relations with Hong Kong because of the move. Tension between Washington and Beijing, which are currently negotiating a trade deal, has been one of the few factors that has managed to deter bullish investors who have looked past the coronavirus pandemic’s immense human and economic toll, and instead have focused on signs of a recovery as they bid stocks higher. Earlier Thursday, investors were undeterred by the U.S. Labor Department’s weekly report on unemployment claims, which showed that the surge of layoffs, though lessening, had not abated. More than 2 million U.S. workers filed jobless claims last week, bringing the tally since mid-March, when the coronavirus pandemic took hold, to over 40 million. Nordstrom, the top-performing department store in the United States, said on Thursday that its net sales fell 40 percent to $2 billion in the first quarter, and that it posted a net loss of $521 million. The retailer closed stores on March 17 and started reopening in early May. It said it now has about 40 percent of its locations open. Nordstrom has been working to preserve cash and said this month that it planned to permanently close 16 of its 116 full-line stores and its three Jeffrey boutiques, and to conduct a corporate restructuring that would result in savings of $150 million. On Thursday, it said it ended the quarter with about $1.4 billion in cash.The Seattle-based company operates nearly 250 off-price Nordstrom Rack stores, which compete with chains like with T.J. Maxx. The company said that digital sales accounted for more than half of its total net sales during the quarter. Last year, online sales made up about one-third of the company’s business. Nordstrom said it plans to hold its annual “Anniversary Sale” in August rather than July. Before the coronavirus pandemic, the TV networks were expecting a strong 2020. The presidential election and Tokyo Olympics would keep people watching, and companies would spend more than usual on commercial time. But with the Summer Games postponed and campaign rallies on lockdown, television advertising revenue is likely to drop 12 percent this year, according to a projection by the research firm MoffettNathanson. Networks will lose out on $25.5 billion in spending, according to a report released on Thursday by the WARC research group. Viewership is not the problem now that millions of homebound people have limited entertainment options. But the economic fallout of the pandemic has caused companies to slash TV ad budgets by more than 40 percent, according to the research firm Kantar. In response, networks have offered commercial time at double-digit discounts. Many companies have cut back on the big-budget commercial productions out of necessity, with filming largely shut down. In the first weeks of lockdown, new commercials were cobbled together out of old footage. More recently, the tone has shifted, with commercials focused on a return to normalcy and praise for essential workers. The Treasury Department said on Thursday that it is setting aside $10 billion in funds from a $660 billion small business lending program to be used only by a group of lenders that focus specifically on disadvantaged communities. The money, which Congress allocated for a coronavirus response effort known as the Paycheck Protection Program, will go to loans made by community development financial institutions. These special lenders, many of which are nonprofits, work in poor communities and often provide capital to minority-owned businesses that otherwise could not get loans. The announcement follows weeks of pressure from lawmakers, including Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, who have been worried that minority-owned business owners were being shut out of the lending program. A spokesman for Mr. Schumer said that the senator had held numerous one-on-one phone calls with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to discuss the matter. “I want to thank Secretary Mnuchin for heeding our calls to set aside a pool of funding specifically designated for lending by CDFIs,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement. He said he and other lawmakers are now pushing for a separate pool of money to be reserved only for use in the program by minority-run banks. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Another 2.1 million unemployment claims were filed last week, the Labor Department reported Thursday, pushing the total past 40 million — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March. The report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless filings dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million, but the level is still far above historic highs. The latest claims may be not only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through a backlog. And overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to measure the layoffs precisely. Under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, Congress approved an expanded palette of jobless benefits that included freelancers, self-employed and gig workers and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But many states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the program into effect, and those eligible may not yet be fully reflected. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the Labor Department’s weekly report. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. Even now, three states have not put pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. The Trump administration will not issue a midyear update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition amid the uncertainty of a pandemic recession, officials confirmed on Thursday. The decision, first reported by The Washington Post, will spare the administration from having to reveal its internal projections for how deeply the recession will damage economic growth and how long the pain of high unemployment will persist. When the administration last published official projections in February, it forecast economic growth of 3.1 percent from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth quarter of 2020, and growth rates at or around 3 percent for the ensuing decade. It forecast an unemployment rate of 3.5 percent for the year. The virus has rendered those projections obsolete. Unemployment could hit 20 percent in June, White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett told CNN this week. The Congressional Budget Office said in April that it expects the economy will contract by 5.6 percent this year and end with unemployment above 11 percent. The White House is required by law to issue both an annual budget and a midyear update to it, called a “mid-session review.” Updating economic projections in the mid-session review is optional, but it is a practice that administrations — including President Trump’s — have widely followed since the review was mandated by Congress in 1970. A senior administration official defended the decision not to publish updated forecasts, saying the economic uncertainty caused by the virus “would produce a less instructive forecast.” The official, who declined to be identified, also said the White House was under no legal obligation to release the revised forecast. The staggering unemployment figures — devastating as they are — do not fully capture the degree to which the coronavirus has disrupted professional life across the country. Since March, when the crisis began to shut businesses en masse, a generation of professionals has seen careers enter a state of suspended animation. Hiring has dried up, advancement has ceased, job searches have been put on hold and new ventures are in jeopardy. As a result, even well-connected high earners are suddenly in unfamiliar territory. “There is deep uncertainty,” said Alisa Cohn, an executive coach who works with companies including Google and Pfizer. “We’re not just in a holding pattern. We’re on our way somewhere new, but we don’t know what it looks like.” In March, Hasti Nazem, 35, left a start-up she helped found. Two months later, the job market has imploded, promising leads have dried up and she is stuck in limbo. She is mining her network for introductions, but is still without a full-time job. “I’m mostly having Zoom calls with strangers,” she said. Costco Wholesale said on Thursday that its net sales rose 7.3 percent to $36.5 billion in its quarter ending May 10 and that it posted a net profit of $838 million, as the pandemic prompted customers to stock up on goods. The warehouse chain, which has more than 500 U.S. locations, said its income took a hit from a $283 million pretax charge “from incremental wage and sanitation costs related to Covid-19.” J.C. Penney, the 118-year-old retailer that filed for bankruptcy this month, said on Thursday that it has reopened 304 of its stores, roughly one-third, and plans to have almost 500 stores open by June 3. The chain said that it was offering curbside pickup at its opened stores and special shopping hours for “at-risk customers” on Wednesdays and Fridays. The British low-price airline easyJet said on Thursday that it planned to reduce staff by up to 30 percent and that it expected to fly in the July-September period at nearly 30 percent of the capacity a year earlier. When flights restart, staff and passengers will be required to wear masks and, at least initially, no onboard food service will be offered, the company said. It wasn’t a total blackout, but for one minute on Wednesday night, a cluster of billboards in the northern section of Times Square went dark. The shut-off was designed to pressure insurance companies to cover pandemic-related losses incurred by businesses. The effort was coordinated by the Business Interruption Group, which was founded by celebrity chefs including Wolfgang Puck and Thomas Keller along with a Louisiana lawyer who has helped sue several insurers over the scope of their policies during the coronavirus crisis. The activist investor Carl Icahn sold his 55 million-share stake in the car rental giant Hertz, in what he described in a securities filing on Wednesday as a “significant loss.” The Hertz stock had traded at $15 per share for months before spiking in February and then crashing, resulting in a bankruptcy filing last week. Mr. Icahn sold the shares at $0.72 each. Nissan said on Thursday that it would close plants in Spain and Indonesia and cut global production by 20 percent as it seeks to remake itself into a smaller, more efficient automaker, an announcement that comes as it reported its first annual loss in 11 years. Reporting was contributed by Ben Casselman, Patricia Cohen, Kate Conger, Maggie Haberman, Niraj Chokshi, Ben Dooley, Sapna Maheshwari, Geneva Abdul, Mohammed Hadi, Emily Flitter, Jim Tankersley, David Gelles, David Yaffe-Bellany, Tiffany Hsu, Carlos Tejada, Katie Robertson and Gregory Schmidt.It was the end of March, and Josh Fiske, a urologist from Livingston, N.J., was in the hospital fighting an uphill battle against the coronavirus. Just a week earlier, he had easily jogged a five-mile route around his neighborhood. But his body was failing him now. His oxygen levels dipped dangerously low, and his fever rocketed to a worrying 104 degrees. Shifting his body in bed exhausted him. Walking a few steps felt like “hiking in thin air.” Opening a bottle of iced tea was “a huge task.” Fiske kept fighting, though, and eventually, with the help of his doctors, he turned a corner. Yet even as he did, even as he seemed assured of avoiding the worst outcomes of the virus, a different sort of anxiety consumed him. “I started to think, ‘Am I going to be able to run again? Am I going to be able to walk the golf course?’” said Fiske, 46, who does a marathon or half-marathon every year. “These are things I love to do.” The coronavirus has infected millions of people around the world. Athletes tend to view themselves as perhaps better equipped than the general population to avoid the worst consequences of the disease the virus causes, Covid-19. Yet interviews with athletes who have contracted the virus — from professionals to college athletes to weekend hobbyists — revealed their surprise at the potency of its symptoms, struggles to reestablish workout regimens, lingering battles with lung issues and muscle weakness, and unsettling bouts of anxiety about whether they would be able to match their physical peaks. And with sports leagues around the world scrambling to restart play, more athletes could soon be taking on a significant amount of risk. “It definitely shook me up a bit — it was very surreal, you know?” Von Miller, a linebacker for the Denver Broncos who contracted the virus, said in an interview. “My biggest takeaway from this experience is that no matter how great of shape you are in physically, no matter what your age is, that you’re not immune from things like this.” Miller, who has had asthma his whole life, said he was left shaken up by shortness of breath and coughing when he tried to sleep. He said he felt himself “fatiguing faster” when he first tried working out again in his home gym, but that now he was training “full-on” again. Experts warn that the virus does not discriminate. That was the lesson Andrew Boselli, an offensive lineman at Florida State, learned as members of his family — including his father, Tony, 47, a former N.F.L. lineman — began showing symptoms in March. “I knew I was young and healthy,” said Boselli, 22, who moved home to Jacksonville, Fla., after the university closed its doors. “I play Division 1 football, and I’ve been training my butt off all winter and spring. I thought I had no worries. I wasn’t going to get it.” That bullish attitude faded days later, when he awoke feeling sluggish and short of breath. That night, his body temperature climbed to 104. “It was the sickest I’ve ever felt,” said Boselli, who continued to feel shortness of breath and fatigue for about week and a half. In Italy, Paulo Dybala, an Argentine player with Juventus, described his own unnerving experience dealing with respiratory symptoms. “I would try to train and was short of breath after five or 10 minutes,” Dybala said in an interview with the Argentine Football Association, “and we realized something was not right.” Panagis Galiatsatos, a pulmonary physician and assistant professor at Johns Hopkins, said that, like much about the disease, the long-term consequences for athletes who contract it are not fully understood. Athletes, though, represent interesting case studies for doctors, given their generally good baseline health and nuanced awareness of their own bodies. “Patients who are athletes, I love them, because they will pick up subtle changes sometimes way before even the tests identify a disease,” Galiatsatos said. Galiatsatos singled out three complications from Covid-19 that could be of particular concern to athletes. First, coronavirus patients, like anyone with a serious respiratory infection, were at risk for long-term lung issues. He often saw patients “who three months ago had a bad virus and still can’t get their breathing back to normal.” “Sometimes a bad virus creates an airway disease similar to an asthma,” he said. “They can ravage the lungs, where the lungs were rebuilt, but not well, and patients are stuck with an asthmalike reactive airway disease situation.” Another complication that Galiatsatos considered particularly concerning to athletes, and one that experts were still trying to wrap their heads around, was the high incidence of blood clots that doctors were seeing in coronavirus patients. People diagnosed with blood clots, and prescribed blood thinners, are typically discouraged from participating in contact sports. Finally, Galiatsatos said people unfortunate enough to be placed in intensive care could deal with “I.C.U. acquired weakness.” Patients placed on ventilators and confined to a bed often lost between 2 and 10 percent of their muscle mass per day, he said. Ben O’Donnell, a triathlete who lives in Onoka County, Minn., lost 45 pounds during a four-week hospital stay during which he was placed on a ventilator and a short-term  life support machine. O’Donnell, 38, a former college football player who completed an Ironman race a couple of years ago and was planning on doing another this fall, said he was pulled back from the brink of death after struggling with dangerously low levels of oxygen and kidney and liver failure in the intensive care unit. In mid-February, in anticipation of ramping up his training, O’Donnell had completed a two-day, comprehensive physical exam and received a clean bill of health. Doctors believe he contracted the virus five days later. Back at home after his harrowing month in the hospital, O’Donnell has set his sights on competing in an Ironman race in Arizona this fall. He acknowledged it was a lofty goal. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “They’re not sure if I’ll ever get full lung capacity back,” he said. “I may or may not.” Had he not contracted the virus, O’Donnell, an executive at a chemical company, would be doing three runs, three swims and three bicycle workouts per week at this point in his training cycle. But the virus derailed his life plans. After returning home, he needed a walker just to go out to the mailbox at the end of the driveway. In his first attempt to exercise, two days after he left the hospital, he walked for seven minutes at a speed of 1.2 miles per hour using supplemental oxygen. He has been trying to add a minute of time, and a bit of speed, each day. O’Donnell said he was struggling with “a fair amount of doubt” about his ability to get back in shape for the race. But he has motivated himself with the secondary goal of raising money for coronavirus relief, and he has been repeating the same mantra ever since he was struggling in his hospital bed: “Don’t stop. Don’t quit. Keep moving forward.” This mentality has helped other athletes who have been hit with serious symptoms. The 29 days Tsang Yee-ting spent in the hospital were the most she had been away from a karate mat since being introduced to the sport at age 6. A member of the Hong Kong national team, Tsang, 27, contracted the coronavirus in March while preparing to qualify for the Summer Olympics. For the next month, she battled a range of symptoms, the worst a searing pain that engulfed the lower half of her body. Walking was a struggle. Lying down offered no relief. Fighting a virus that doctors were still only learning about, “all sorts of thoughts” about her body and about her future spiraled through her mind, she said. “Of course I was worried,” Tsang said. “Karate is my life.” But even as the virus and isolation from her family levied an “emotional toll” on her, Tsang resolved to stay as active as possible to keep herself sane. She acquired elastic bands and, on days when her body felt strong enough, completed mini-workouts in the tight confines of her hospital room. “Battling the virus was like training for a competition,” said Tsang, who said she now felt normal again and has been training with her teammates over video. Fiske, the urologist, has been working, very slowly, to get back into shape after his weeklong I.C.U. stay in March. Fiske said he found himself relying on the same mental calisthenics he might have used to get through a punishing long-distance run — “when you’re having a tough time, and you decide to do another mile or two to see if you can break through it” — to stave off negative thoughts about his recovery. Since returning home, his focus has been on regaining lung strength. He could not walk up the stairs without becoming “totally gassed.” He could not hold a conversation. But it pained him to think that he might not be able to run, to golf or to exercise with his two teenage sons. So he has persisted with breathing exercises and laboring jogs through his neighborhood. Recently, he was able to finish his old five-mile route — albeit at a different pace. “They’re slow,” he said of the miles. “But they’re there.”TOKYO — As the world tries to get a handle on the coronavirus and emerge from paralyzing lockdowns, public health officials have repeated a mantra: “test, test, test.” But Japan went its own way, limiting tests to only the most severe cases as other countries raced to screen as many people as possible. Medical experts worried that the approach would blind the country to the spread of infection, allowing cases to explode and swamping hospitals. It hasn’t happened. Japan — the grayest country in the world and a popular tourist destination with large, crowded cities — has one of the lowest mortality rates from Covid-19 among major nations. The medical system has not been overwhelmed. And the government never forced businesses to close, although many chose to. This week, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared Japan’s battle against the outbreak a resounding success, taking the country off an emergency footing — a sort of “lockdown lite” that lasted only a month and a half. “By doing things in a uniquely Japanese way, we were able to almost completely end this wave of infection,” Mr. Abe said, adding that what he called the “Japan model” offered a path out of the global pandemic. It’s still unclear, though, exactly what accounts for Japan’s achievement and whether other countries can take lessons from its approach. Critics say Japan undercounted coronavirus deaths. And some warn that further waves of infection could undermine the government’s self-congratulatory pronouncements. Instead of testing widely to understand and limit the virus’s spread through the general population, Japan has focused on quickly containing small outbreaks through contact tracing. Instead of dictating strict constraints on daily life, it has focused on educating people about measures like social distancing and gently prodding them to follow along. Theories for the country’s relatively low mortality rate run the gamut from cultural attributes — widespread mask wearing, a practice of regular hand washing, a near absence of physical greetings like hugs and handshakes — to just plain luck. A combination of many other factors, including government measures and changes in behavior among a public that feels strong pressure to follow the rules, could also be at work. Individual actions “may seem small or mundane,” said Keiji Fukuda, an epidemiologist who directs the School of Public Health at the University of Hong Kong. But, he added, “the cumulative impact of all of those efforts across the entire country to really implement some kind of distancing” may have been substantial. Whatever the formula, Japan has so far succeeded in keeping deaths low. The country has recorded fewer than 900 deaths even as the United States and European countries have reported tens of thousands. Epidemiologists say widespread testing for the virus is important because it allows officials to isolate those who test positive, and to track trends in infection rates to help determine when it is safe to reopen schools, businesses and other places where people congregate. Researchers at Harvard have said the goal should be to test nearly everyone who has at least mild flulike symptoms, as well as an average of 10 contacts for each person who tests positive. Countries like South Korea and China that faced fast-growing outbreaks early in the pandemic quickly ramped up testing.  China performed more than three times as many tests in Wuhan in a single day than those Japan has conducted nationwide since Feb. 18 — about 455,000 tests on around 278,000 people. Japan initially told people who suspected they were infected with the virus not to seek help unless they had experienced a fever for four days, or two days if they were over 65. Even some people with seemingly severe symptoms were refused, provoking theories that the government was trying to hide the true extent of the problem. Medical experts said the guideline was intended to conserve hospital resources. A national law on infectious diseases mandated that anyone who tested positive, even those who were asymptomatic, had to be placed in one of the country’s few isolation wards, creating a strong disincentive for doctors to test patients with milder symptoms. The Japanese government also said early on that test kits must be rationed because they were in short supply. That argument has since faded, however, as Japan has never used even half of its testing capacity on any given day, and it has increased its testing capacity to just over 24,000 a day. Japan has since eased its rules to allow those who test positive but are asymptomatic to stay in hotels. It is preparing to begin limited testing for antibodies, hoping to get a better grasp of the number of people who have been infected. It also plans to introduce a smartphone app to help with contact tracing. Despite the constrained testing for the virus, the rate of positive results has dropped below 1 percent, a fact that the government’s expert panel on the virus says demonstrates that current testing levels are sufficient. But a group of prominent Japanese academics, businesspeople and other figures has called on the government to take a much bolder step: build a capacity of 10 million tests a day and offer testing to anyone who wants it. Consecutive negative results, the group argues, could allow people to fully resume social and economic activities. As the country has seemingly defied the odds, many public health experts, including some in the government, have warned against drawing any definite conclusions from Japan’s experience. They caution that Japan is not in the clear yet, and that a second or third wave of infections could strike at any time. As more data on deaths from this year becomes available — there are indications that Tokyo has undercounted dozens of coronavirus deaths — the picture may not look quite as good. Some say Japan may have a large hidden population of asymptomatic cases. Shigeru Omi, the deputy head of the government’s expert panel on the coronavirus, told lawmakers that the real number of infections could be as much as 10 or 20 times as high as currently believed. Japan has reported fewer than 17,000 cases, versus more than 1.7 million in the United States. Norio Sugaya, an infectious diseases expert at Keiyu Hospital in Yokohama, noted that Japan’s mortality rate, while vastly lower than those in hard-hit countries like Spain or Britain, is one of the worst in Asia. In February, an outbreak of the virus aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess left officials scrambling. The response was widely seen as a disaster, but health experts turned it into a learning opportunity. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Epidemiologists and public health experts used the data from the ship to help develop a framework for stopping the virus’s spread in Japan. The approach emphasized reducing people’s exposure to the conditions that led the pathogen to spread on the ship. A public education campaign urged people to avoid the “Three C’s” — closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places and close contact. On TV talk shows, hosts took a “no question is too stupid” approach to talking about the virus, assuaging viewers’ anxiety and stressing the basic science of prevention: wash your hands, wear a mask, keep your distance from others. At the same time, community health centers raced to investigate clusters using a monitoring system that had been developed to trace cases of influenza and tuberculosis.  Another key factor may have been Mr. Abe’s decision to close schools in late February, well before almost any other country. The decision was hugely unpopular, but it appears to have provoked an almost instantaneous change in behavior, according to polling conducted by researchers at Hiroshima University. The day after the announcement, the percentage of people who were avoiding crowded places nearly doubled, rising to almost 60 percent. By mid-March, it was over 75, the study found. In April, as cases began to spike, Mr. Abe declared a state of emergency. Businesses were requested to close or reduce their hours. People were asked to make only necessary trips. There were no penalties, but many complied anyway. Makoto Sasho, 50, decided to close his grilled eel restaurant in the Meguro neighborhood of Tokyo and focus on delivery and carryout, despite assurances from the government that businesses like his could continue table service. “We conformed to society’s expectations of us,” he said, adding that “when I thought about the future, I knew we absolutely could not be responsible for a cluster.” As Japan now begins to reopen, some experts fear that people will begin to let down their guard. In a speech on Monday night, Mr. Abe emphasized that the end of the state of emergency did not mean a return to normal life. “What we need to aim for,” he said, “is establishing a new normal.” Mr. Sasho said that his customers were clamoring for him to reopen, but that he was not sure he was ready. “It’s a new way of life,” he said. “Maybe I’ll just stick with delivery and takeout.” Motoko Rich contributed reporting.WASHINGTON — There is widespread agreement that the United States economy will soon begin to recover from coronavirus lockdowns. The big debate is whether that rebound will resemble a V, a W, an L or a Nike Swoosh. Increasingly, economists and analysts are penciling in another glyph: a question mark. Forecasters often label their expectations for a post-recession rebound with letters — a “V” suggests a rapid recovery, a “W” a double-dip, and so on — but that’s hard to do this time around. As all 50 states begin to open up and consumers trickle out of their homes, the path ahead is wildly uncertain, making prognostication dicey. Second-wave virus outbreaks, changes in consumer behavior or a wave of unexpected business closures could reshape the future. That has left economists unsure how quick or smooth a rebound the U.S. economy will undergo, prompting many to offer a range of scenarios instead of declarative forecasts. It isn’t just Wall Street forecasters eschewing the alphabet in favor of a range of what-if’s. From the Federal Reserve to the White House, analysts have suggested that posing confident prognostications is probably more misleading than helpful. John C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said during an appearance last week that it is important for policymakers to prepare for every eventuality, rather than focus on one type of recovery. “We’ve had discussions all my career about V-shaped recoveries, L-shaped, U-shaped,” Mr. Williams said “One thing I’ve learned is, don’t get into that letter game.” Larry Kudlow, director of the White House National Economic Council, said at an event sponsored by The Washington Post that he shares President Trump’s expectation for a rapid bounceback, but suggested that there are wide ranges around those estimates. “It’s really hard to model a virus, or a pandemic, the likes of which we haven’t seen in 100 years,” Mr. Kudlow said. “You can have your own Vs; there’s Vs, there are lesser Vs,” Mr. Kudlow said. “There are combos of Us and Vs.” Cognizant of that uncertainty, the White House confirmed it will not even issue an update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition. Here are the possible shapes that economists are discussing and the caveats that have forecasters writing their predictions in pencil. Since economists know that economic activity slowed sharply during the first half of 2020, the best possible outcome is a swift recovery, making for a “V” shape in which the economy is back to its 2019 output level within a few quarters. Unfortunately, economists say that projection is probably a pipe dream. In a note entitled “V Is for Very Unlikely,” Michael Feroli, J.P. Morgan’s chief U.S. economist, described the trajectory as one in which the economy “is turned off and then on, like a light switch.” Because economic variables like unemployment and output often face a lingering drag after a one-time shock, that sort of outcome is pretty dubious, he said. Lower business capital spending and state and local budget cuts are likely to weigh on growth for some time, alongside other factors, making it hard for the economy to get right back on track. It is also worth noting that a sharp rebound in growth rate is distinct from a return to the previous level of economic output. For example, the economy is broadly expected to show a fast rate of growth in the third quarter, given the record contraction in the second quarter. But overall output will remain lower than it was pre-coronavirus for some time, most economists think. “The initial bounce may feel pretty robust,” said Michelle Meyer, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Her team recently revised up its third quarter growth forecast; they see a 7 percent output gain following a 40 percent plunge in the second quarter. While stimulus checks may help spending, that is not going to make up for corporate insolvency and lost jobs. Full recovery could take until the end of 2022, she said. “There’s quite a lot of residual damage,” she said. Just as only strident optimists expect a perfect “V,” only outright pessimists are projecting an L, in which growth remains at or near the very-low levels it almost certainly hit during the second quarter. The economy is already showing a partial rebound, suggesting that such a formation is unlikely. Mortgage applications have stabilized after sharp declines, consumer confidence is recovering slightly and while initial jobless claims remain elevated, they are slowing. The car industry is hopeful that auto sales are in for a rebound in June. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Real-time trackers show a muted bounce, with a daily J.P. Morgan credit card series showing a slow but fairly steady uptick starting from mid-April. Google mobility data suggest that people are moving around more and visiting parks, TD Securities said in a research note. The pickup in areas that drive growth — retail, restaurants, and move theaters — has been more restrained. “None of the states show a sudden snapback,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief U.S. macro strategist at TD Securities, noting that some places are further along the path to official reopening. While the nascent recovery seems to preclude an “L,” he said, the limited data so far jibe with the idea that the recovery will be more gradual than the collapse. That brings us to a scenario that is still on the table: a W-shaped recovery. It could be that the economy will partly bounce back before plunging again amid a second wave of infections as states reopen and people face renewed exposure to the coronavirus, or if the disease stages a comeback this autumn. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. While economists generally say that a “W” remains entirely possible, they aren’t willing to make it their most-likely forecast because it hinges on two total unknowns: whether there is another spike in infections, and whether states will shut down again if that happens. Analysts who venture a guess increasingly favor a nonletter shape as their base-case: the checkmark. The Congressional Budget Office’s baseline expectation suggests that growth will contract slightly in the first quarter and sharply in the second quarter before making a gradual rebound starting in the quarter that stretches from the start of July to the end of September. The budget office doesn’t label the shape, because the climb back will be slower than the drop. The trajectory looks like a checkmark on a graph. There are big uncertainties around that forecast. Additional waves of infection, variations in consumer behavior, and the timeline for a vaccine are all wild cards that could change the path ahead. A host of risks could lead to worse outcomes while a vaccine breakthrough or unexpected government support for the economy could improve the trajectory. If a quicker recovery takes hold, the rebound could look more like a “swoosh” as growth improves slowly before accelerating. But if more infections occur and a vaccine remains elusive, the economy could also face a “wave” recovery of repeating peaks and troughs as states continually reopen and then pull back. “We’re all prefacing what we say with: We’re not epidemiologists,” said Mr. O’Sullivan, explaining that the range of possible economic outcomes is unusually wide because it turns so much on what happens with public health. Because it’s a new coronavirus, and a totally unusual shock to the economy, nobody’s guess for what comes next is especially reliable. Even the Fed’s economists, never shy to to set out a forecast, have sounded uncertain. Minutes from the central bank’s late-April meeting show that staff offered a baseline forecast in which shutdowns gradually ease and growth resumes into the second half of the year, but warned that “a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast.” Fed policymakers, for their part, “discussed several alternative scenarios with regard to the behavior of economic activity in the medium term that all seemed about equally likely,” according to the minutes. Among them were predictions that the country experienced additional outbreaks and shutdowns (a “W” or a wave), and more optimistic situations in which social distancing measures were successfully relaxed (a check or a swoosh). Richard Clarida, the Fed’s vice chairman, said last week that it could take until early autumn to get more clarity on where the economy is headed. To put it bluntly, as Ian Shepherdson at Pantheon Macroeconomics did in a recent research note, “the timing of a full recovery is unknowable.” Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.Longer-term analyses of the coronavirus pandemic emphasize that there is a good chance that it will fade within a year or two, especially if a vaccine or effective treatment appears. I hope that’s true. But even if it is, I’m worried that the economy may not return to normal within that time frame. Big events like a pandemic have the potential to leave behind a trail of disruption. They can create social discord, reduce people’s willingness to spend and take risks, destroy business momentum and shake confidence in the value of investments. But episodes as far-reaching as this one are scarce, widely spaced in time, and so different in circumstances that statisticians cannot easily compare them systematically. The best we can do is examine some case studies. The so-called Spanish flu, the influenza epidemic that started in 1918, which ultimately cost 675,000 American lives and millions around the world, is a reasonable place to start. While we know a great deal about that era, we don’t know enough to shed much light on current circumstances. There was a recession in the United States from August 1918 to March 1919, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, but not a deep one. Searching the newspapers of the time, one finds surprisingly little concern about the possible ill effects of the influenza on the economy, perhaps because the more-dominant narrative concerned the impact of World War I, which ended on November 11, 1918. Yet a recent study by Robert Barro of Harvard University and his associates suggests that the epidemic along with the decline in production associated with the war led to a protracted decline in G.D.P. growth in affected countries from 1918 through 1920. In short, that period provides little comfort. Perhaps more relevant to the current crisis is the Great Depression of 1929 to 1940, the biggest economic slowdown of modern history. From 1931 to 1940, the annual unemployment rate in the United States never fell below 12 percent. (In April this year, unemployment shot up to 14.7 percent.) The conventional story is that the 1929 crash was the result of a stock market bubble in the 1920s. The Cyclically Adjusted Price Earnings Ratio, a stock valuation measure that I helped develop, reached 32.6 in 1929 (compared with 31.0 in January 2020). The Depression started in 1929 after a 23 percent crash in the Dow Jones industrial average over two days, Oct. 28 and 29. It created global social unrest around the world and the downturn only ended with World War II. In 1929 many people expected the stock market to bounce right back and that decline was short-lived, in one sense: The market rose almost half the way back to its 1929 peak by April 1930. But it fell sharply again, and the crash set in motion a train of powerful narratives that resemble some of the popular notions that are circulating today. Much as President Trump dismissed the seriousness of the Covid-19 pandemic in its early days, President Herbert Hoover made optimistic forecasts that proved to be wrong. Much as people fret these days about extreme polarization between Democrats and Republicans, so too were people of that era concerned about extreme political divisiveness. After losing the 1932 election to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, for example, President Hoover, by then a lame duck, called F.D.R.’s plans a “march to Moscow.” Much as people today have experienced long lines and empty shelves at supermarkets, in the Great Depression people fretted about long lines and empty cash registers at banks. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. There are other troubling parallels: Fear of long-term unemployment and a never-ending depression was rampant back then, leading people to restrain spending, thus prolonging the downturn. This may not happen now, but it is a danger. Much as now, in the Great Depression people were very focused on maintaining a “fair wage” in the face of economic distress. But this led to nationwide resistance to nominal wage cuts for anyone, even when retail prices were falling rapidly. This appears to have had the unintended result of inducing employers, who could not afford to keep everyone working at their former wages, to lay off many people. The economists Harold L. Cole of the University of Pennsylvania and Lee E. Ohanian, of U.C.L.A., have shown that this may explain some of the extreme duration of Great Depression unemployment. Another development back then may have resonance today. Faced with widespread poverty, even people with money voluntarily embraced austerity, saying they no longer needed to “keep up with the Joneses.” Their reduction in consumption helps to explain the severity and duration of the Depression. If contemporary culture shifts in a similar way, it could limit the economy’s ability to bounce back. A series of concerns like these — some with echoes of the Great Depression, some newly forming and associated directly with worries about disease and infection — will be on millions of people’s minds long after the economy reopens. Such social narratives will affect their thinking on how to spend and invest, whether to go out to eat or attend sporting events, on whom to vote for, and whether to travel: multitudes of decisions, big and small, that determine the course of the economy. It is too early to tell which narratives will prevail and what path the economy will take after this pandemic subsides. Limited case studies will take us only so far. But we shouldn’t be surprised if we see post-pandemic economic weakness over the next decade. Robert J. Shiller is Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “ is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.The stock market has been erratic, real estate is hurting, bond yields are painfully low and dividends are shrinking. In the coronavirus recession, most financial assets have been disturbingly volatile. But one widely held financial asset, perhaps the most important one for the vast majority of Americans, has performed splendidly: their stake in Social Security. It hasn’t merely been a solid support for millions of people in a difficult time. While the income-producing power of so many other assets has been sapped by economic weakness and low interest rates, Social Security payments have held steady. And thanks to those rock-bottom interest rates, the market value of the Social Security income stream has soared in a measurable way. You may not think of Social Security as a personal asset, like a bank account, a portfolio of stocks and bonds or a house. But Social Security retirement benefits are a kind of annuity, as I’ll explain, and annuities have a definite market value. Considered this way, Social Security’s value has been rising. Even if you aren’t receiving payments now, you have a stake in the asset, and it is in your interest to protect it. “The most important financial asset for most Americans by far is Social Security,” said William J. Bernstein, a financial adviser and author on financial subjects. “We are in a retirement crisis, and the only foreseeable answer is Social Security.” Perhaps if more people understood the impressive, countercyclical performance of their share in Social Security, there would be more clamor to protect it. But critical as the benefits are proving to be in this crisis, as in so many others, the entire Social Security system faces a cash shortfall down the road, and it needs help from Congress. The pandemic has complicated these long-term issues, which can be resolved only in Washington. First, consider the good news. In the coronavirus crisis, Social Security has succeeded in doing just what it was designed to do: keeping old people, disabled people and their dependents out of dire poverty, and providing a retirement cushion for nearly everyone else. About 178 million working people of all ages are covered by Social Security, government statistics show. Even if those people are not eligible for benefits now, they will be entitled to them later. Plenty of people are already getting them, however: About 65 million Americans will receive more than $1 trillion this year. That includes nine out of 10 of those 65 and older, as well as millions of disabled people, dependents and survivors. With more than 100,000 Covid-19 deaths in America and millions of people financially desperate, a program that supplies regular income to so many can surely be said to be more valuable than ever. But I concede that is a subjective judgment. The program has also risen in value in a measurable way that may not be intuitively obvious. This is a little wonky, so bear with me. Financial markets put a price on almost everything, and they can provide an approximate cash value for Social Security, too. Your benefits, now or in the future, accrue gradually, over years of work and paying taxes into the Social Security system. But as I pointed out recently, low interest rates have reduced bond yields and made commercial annuities extremely expensive. With the help of Dale Kintzel, a former Social Security economist who studied its pricing in a 2017 paper, I’ve checked the market values of annuities and compared them with Social Security. Those federal retirement benefits are essentially annuities: bonds wrapped in insurance. So-called single-premium immediate annuities — in which an insurance company will provide you with income,  in exchange for a sum of cash — can’t do everything Social Security does, but they come close. Mr. Kintzel has used annuities to approximate the cash value of Social Security benefits. Those values are startlingly high. Mr. Kintzel found that for the average 65-year-old man, who last year received a retirement benefit of $1,375 a month, an annuity supplying that lifetime cash flow would cost at least $459,866 — 13 percent more than a comparable annuity in 2014. For a 65-year-old woman, the average monthly benefit was $1,102 last year. A comparable commercial annuity, Mr. Kintzel said, would cost $368,562. These figures are based on data from immediateannuities.com, which tracks annuity prices. These are just average amounts and would be much bigger — perhaps as much as $1 million — for high-income people who delay claiming benefits until they are 70, my own calculations suggest. Note that all of these estimates understate the value of Social Security, which provides disability benefits and supplemental income in addition to basic retirement benefits. And these estimates don’t take into account the effects of the further decline in interest rates since the beginning of this year, which have reduced income streams from many assets, but not for Social Security. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Perhaps the best thing about Social Security is that unlike a stock portfolio, it can be counted on, Mr. Kintzel said. “It is backed by the government, and so it’s virtually risk-free, or it should be. I’ve always thought that Social Security is one thing that everybody can agree on. It’s a good thing.” Yet Social Security continues to have an odd problem. Although its stability has been among its greatest virtues, it remains underfunded. I pointed out a year ago that Social Security benefit payouts were greater than the system’s revenues. That is still true. To receive all of the benefits you have been promised, a reluctant Congress will need to fix Social Security, which is likely to dip into the principal of its trust funds for the first time this year. Interest payments from the trust funds have made up the gap, allowing full benefits until now. Without help from Congress, these trust funds, are likely to be exhausted within 15 years — and perhaps sooner. If that were to happen, benefits would be cut, perhaps to 79 percent of the promised levels, Social Security estimates. In an online conference in late April, Stephen C. Goss, Social Security’s chief actuary, said that the current recession would almost certainly reduce the system’s payroll tax receipts and could lead to trust fund depletion by 2033 or even sooner. Precise estimates are impossible now, with the economy shrinking so rapidly, he said. “All bets are off, and we will just have to see what happens, because we really don’t know whether we’ll be back to normal,” Mr. Goss said. As a matter of basic math, Social Security needs more revenue or lower expenses. But I think this recession suggests that increasing revenue is the way to go, because Social Security benefits have been so crucial. If they were to be cut, even bigger rescue programs would be needed from other sources. Far better to maintain and improve Social Security, which works automatically and well. Last year, I said that the most important thing you could probably do to improve your personal finances was to make sure that Congress took action to bolster the program’s funding. That’s even truer today, when its benefits are more valuable, and more badly needed.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “ is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.More than 40 million people — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March, the government reported on Thursday, an astounding tally that rivals the bleakest years of the Great Depression. The latest additions — the 2.1 million people who filed state unemployment claims last week — may not be only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through some of the choking backlog. “We’re still catching up,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said of the newest claims. “The lags have been long.” The Labor Department report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless claims, on a seasonally adjusted basis, dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million — but the level is still far above any other historical highs. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times At the same time, overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to precisely measure the number of layoffs caused by the pandemic — and in devising a policy response. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Shelter-in-place orders and business restrictions have been lifting across the country, and there is evidence in the report that some workers are being called back: The number of people receiving state jobless benefits dropped by roughly 3.8 million to 21.1 million for the week ended May 16. But as Ms. Swonk noted, “it’s not enough to offset the extraordinary economic devastation and job losses associated with Covid-19.” And while rehiring certainly accounts for a chunk of that decline, workers who had exhausted their weekly state benefits would also be reflected. Reopenings remain bumpy and incomplete, and flare-ups of the coronavirus continue to disrupt business. On Tuesday, Ford Motor temporarily halted production at the Kansas City assembly plant in Missouri to deep clean after an employee tested positive for the virus. Two other Ford plants — in Chicago and Dearborn, Mich. — were also temporarily closed. In Thursday’s report, the department offered two sets of figures. One includes the more than 40 million people who have applied for state benefits and is seasonally adjusted. The other includes those who applied under the new federal emergency program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and is not seasonally adjusted. So far, more than 10 million have applied. Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, part of an expanded palette of jobless benefits passed by Congress two months ago, is meant to help freelancers, gig workers, the self-employed and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But several economists suspect that there is a lot of double counting and warn against simply adding figures from the two programs together. Some states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the pandemic program into effect. Initially, many people were mistakenly told they were ineligible. Others were instructed to apply for state benefits first and be rejected before applying for the federal benefits. That confused application process has caused potentially millions of laid-off workers to be counted twice. States are also weeding out duplicate applications from frustrated filers who had trouble getting through or did not receive any response after weeks of waiting. Then there are the mistakes. A data entry slip-up caused Massachusetts to pump up the number of federal claims by nearly a million last week. The previous week, a similar flub in Connecticut mistakenly inflated its total by a quarter of a million. “It’s unclear if states are including duplicate claims due to error, fraud or the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program,” said Ernie Tedeschi, a policy economist at Evercore ISI in Washington. But that is not all. That system is also probably missing millions of other laid-off workers. As of Tuesday, three states had not put the pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the claims numbers. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. As for regular unemployment benefits, states draw up their own rules and administer benefits. The result is that in some places, like Florida, Texas and Arizona, only a small fraction of jobless workers are receiving benefits, while other states offer much broader coverage. The way “initial claims” are counted may also vary by state, with some excluding claims that have not been processed. Laurie Yadoff, a lawyer at Coast to Coast Legal Aid of South Florida, said she had about 100 clients who qualify for regular state benefits but have had trouble filing. Many are poor and older, with limited or no access to the internet. “A lot of them fall into the regular state benefit program, and a lot of them are straightforward, and a lot of them are still not getting money,” she said. Even when Ms. Yadoff has been able to get someone on the phone, the person at the other end often doesn’t know the answer. “People are desperate and frustrated,” she said. “They don’t know what to do.” Monitoring withdrawals from the Treasury Department, Mr. Tedeschi of Evercore estimated that by early May, roughly three-quarters of those eligible for benefits had started to receive them. Allison Hester, who is 50 and lives in Little Rock, Ark., applied for unemployment after being laid off from her job in content marketing at a window cleaning supply company in March, but was never able to get through. “I tried on and off for a month, but our system was so overwhelmed.” She returned to her job this month. “It feels good, but I don’t feel secure anymore,” Ms. Hester said. “I don’t take anything for granted.” Nelson D. Schwartz and Tiffany Hsu contributed reporting.This article was reported and written in collaboration with The Markup, a nonprofit newsroom investigating technology’s effects on society. Burglary and domestic assault in Minnesota. Selling meth and jumping bail in Kentucky. Driving without insurance in Arkansas. Disorderly conduct. Theft. Lying to a police officer. Unspecified “crimes.” Too many narcotics charges to count. That’s what the landlord for an apartment in St. Helens, Ore., saw when he ran a background check for Samantha Johnson, a prospective tenant, in 2018. But none of the charges were hers. The growing data economy and the rise of American rentership since the 2008 financial crisis have fueled a rapid expansion of the tenant screening industry, now valued at $1 billion. The companies produce cheap and fast — but not necessarily accurate — reports for an estimated nine out of 10 landlords across the country. The automated background check for Ms. Johnson cast a wide net, looking for negative information from criminal databases even in states where she had never lived and pulling in records for women whose middle names, races and dates of birth didn’t match her own. It combined criminal records from five other women: four Samantha Johnsons and a woman who had used the name as an alias, even though the screening report said she was an “active inmate” in a Kentucky jail at the time. “You can totally tell we’re not the same person at all,” said Ms. Johnson, who eventually got the apartment after she convinced the landlord she wasn’t a criminal. It was not the first time she had been the victim of incorrect automated screening reports. It wouldn’t be the last, either. The reports can be created in a few seconds, using searches based on partial names or incomplete dates of birth. Tenants generally have no choice but to submit to the screenings and typically pay an application fee for the privilege. Automated reports are usually delivered to landlords without a human ever glancing at the results to see if they contain obvious mistakes, according to court records and interviews. A review of hundreds of federal lawsuits filed against screening companies over the past 10 years shows how hasty, sloppy matches can lead to reports that wrongly label people deadbeats, criminals or sex offenders. Among those who say they were wrongly maligned: Davone Jackson, who was denied low-income housing in Tennessee after the screening company RealPage reported that he had twice been convicted of trafficking in heroin in Kentucky and was on Wisconsin’s sex offender registry. In fact, those records belonged to an Eric Jackson and a James Jackson. After the denial, Davone Jackson said, he and his 9-year-old daughter were forced to live in a small motel room for nearly a year. Glenn Patrick Thompson Sr. and Glenn Patrick Thompson Jr., who said they had been left homeless near Seattle after a tenant screening company called On-Site, which is now part of RealPage, told two different landlords that the father and son had been previously evicted. In fact, the eviction was for a Patricia Thompson, who was not related to them. William Hall Jr., who lost out on a duplex in his small town in Georgia after TransUnion Rental Screening Solutions said he had sexually abused a minor. The criminal record belonged to a William Hall who was 30 years older and possibly dead. Mr. Hall said the landlord had stopped returning his telephone calls after receiving the incorrect report. Mr. Hall’s suit is pending; the others were settled for undisclosed sums. The screening process happens so quickly and the competition for apartments can be so fierce that prospective renters don’t always know why they were turned down, much less whether an incorrect background report was the cause. Some screening companies don’t even provide the underlying records to landlords, instead producing a color-coded “risk” score or a thumbs-up or thumbs-down lease recommendation. Screening company employees have stated in lawsuits that they err on the side of including any possible match, rather than excluding possible errors. The owner of one screening company criticized his industry, saying his peers can do better. “We can figure out how to match a record,” said Matt Visser, chief executive of Victig Screening Solutions, whose Utah company sells 10,000 to 20,000 tenant and employment screening reports a month. He said his company verified negative findings. “It requires a human element,” he said. “When we are performing any of these reports, it is a fairly monumental moment in someone’s life,” he added. “You just have to give a crap.” Large background firms, including RealPage, CoreLogic and TransUnion, declined interview requests for this article. They referred specific questions to a trade group, the Consumer Data Industry Association. Noting the millions of tenant background reports produced each year, the group denied that any systemic problems existed and accused consumer lawyers of being myopic. “If I sat in a cardiologist’s office all day, all I would see is people with heart problems,” said Eric Ellman, the association’s senior vice president for public policy and legal affairs. He acknowledged that it hadn’t developed any standards for screening accuracy but said the companies had their own policies. In responses to lawsuits, tenant screening companies say renters dispute fewer than 1 percent of reports. But it’s impossible to know the actual error rate because tenants may not always know to complain. With about half of the nation’s 43 million rentals turning over every year, even an error rate of 1 percent could upend the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Regulators have taken action against a few companies for slipshod tenant screenings; the Fair Credit Reporting Act requires background screeners to “follow reasonable procedures to assure maximum possible accuracy.” But rejected tenants continue to complain about the same careless practices by companies that regulators had called out, interviews and federal lawsuits show. Ms. Johnson has lost count of the times she has been turned down for housing or work because of incorrect background reports. Since 2016, she has sued six tenant screening companies for incorrect reports. All of them have settled. When she moved out of the apartment in St. Helens and applied to rent a house, the background report was 112 pages long. By then Ms. Johnson knew the drill: Find out where the report came from, call the screening company, fax in a copy of her ID and start the dispute process. “I’ve tried to figure out if there’s something I can do, to stop that from happening,” she said. “But I don’t think that there really is, because there’s just so many background companies out there — and they’re not doing their jobs.” Tenant screening was once confined to a simple credit check with the three major credit bureaus and a few phone calls to references, but it was revolutionized by the advent of cheap or even free, easily available electronic court records. These include criminal records from across the country, sex-offender registries, terrorism watch lists and housing court records. Easy access to the troves of data has also made it possible for anyone with a computer to become a background screener: About 2,000 companies offer the service, but that’s only an estimate. Tenant screeners don’t have to register with any government agency. People can complain about faulty background reports to the Federal Trade Commission or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau — or sue. But regulators have not limited tenant screening as much as other kinds of background checks. Regulators forced credit bureaus to follow standards for matching records to a person, and the kinds of records the bureaus can legally report are limited. Rules for employment screening, which some of the tenant-screening firms provide, require employers to share the negative report with a rejected applicant. None of those restrictions applies to tenant screening. Federal law requires landlords only to tell tenants if they were turned down because of a negative report and who produced it. Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, screening companies have 30 days to respond to tenants’ requests for corrections. By then, a landlord may have given the apartment away. “It’s just crazy that you can’t get immediate results,” said Andrew Guzzo, a consumer lawyer who has filed more than 100 federal lawsuits against background screeners and other consumer reporting agencies. “There’s not many worse imaginable consumer financial services related impacts that you could have, more than an inaccurate tenant screening that costs you the ability to rent an apartment.” Tenants can’t get ahead of the problem by checking their background reports in advance because too many companies provide the service. “You can’t just go to one place and request your free annual report,” said Ariel Nelson, author of a 52-page National Consumer Law Center report on screening errors. A handful of cities have begun to regulate tenant screening by limiting a landlord’s ability to reject an applicant for old criminal convictions or evictions. Courts have also begun to take notice; a panel of federal judges recently consolidated seven lawsuits about errors in TransUnion’s tenant screening reports. Screening companies put the onus for accuracy on landlords, telling them right in the reports that they should double-check them. Steven Schachtman, a longtime Minneapolis landlord and property manager who oversees about 10,000 rentals and uses screening firms, said it was difficult for a landlord to check the reports to ensure they matched their applicants. “That is why we are hiring them,” he said. “I assume they have matched everything up.” One CoreLogic employee said during a deposition for a federal lawsuit that she considered a background report “accurate” if it correctly reported what was in public records. A common method that screening companies use to increase hits, court records show, is a so-called wild-card search, which gathers different names that start with the same few letters. Terrence Enright’s experience, described in his federal lawsuit against National Tenant Network, shows how it works. When he applied for an apartment in Chicago in 2014, the company searched for “Enright, Ter*” and “Terrence, Enr*.” But the company also searched for misspelled versions, including “Enwright, Ter*” and found a match: an eviction for a Teri Enwright in California, one of what Mr. Enright said were three evictions mistakenly attributed to him, which resulted in his being denied the apartment. His lawsuit was settled out of court. Screening companies could use more careful methods to reduce incorrect reports, such as excluding eviction records for addresses that don’t appear on a person’s credit report. Or reporting only records that match full names and other data, such as complete dates of birth. But they often don’t, tenants and consumer attorneys say, and the errors can have an outsize effect on people with common names — particularly members of minority groups, which tend to have fewer unique last names. For example, more than 12 million Latinos nationwide share just 26 surnames, according to the census. Marco Fernandez is suing RentGrow, another screening firm, after it included information in his report about another person named Mario Fernandez Santana. Mr. Fernandez lives in Maryland works for an elite military cybercommand strike force and has a top-secret security clearance. The other man is on a federal watch list for suspected terrorists or drug traffickers, lives in Mexico and has a different date of birth, according to the lawsuit. “These matching algorithms treat Hispanic names just like a mix-and-match,” said Mr. Fernandez’s attorney, E. Michelle Drake. RentGrow declined to explain why the company included the other man’s record in Mr. Fernandez’s report, but said in a statement that it had “promptly resolved all concerns in his favor.” Mr. Fernandez was able to get into the apartment he wanted. While disputing the report, however, Mr. Fernandez said he discovered that RentGrow had incorrectly reported the same federal watch list information to a landlord four years earlier, according to the lawsuit. He said he was not informed at the time. Hector Hernandez took CoreLogic to court after the company mixed him up with an accused drug smuggler, Hector Hernandez-Garcia, causing him, his wife and their newborn son to be temporarily homeless in the Washington, D.C., suburbs. “I kept telling them: ‘You got the wrong guy. I’m telling you, that’s not me,’” Mr. Hernandez, who works for a pest control company, said in an interview. CoreLogic settled the lawsuit. In a deposition for another federal lawsuit, a CoreLogic employee said independently verifying reports like these before sending them out “would be an overwhelming task.” It’s certainly more expensive: Court filings in a federal lawsuit show that RealPage pays one data broker 22 cents for each criminal record by buying data in bulk. The company typically charges landlords $12 per report. If there’s a dispute, the data broker would charge RealPage $7 to hand-check a record, according to the contract, shrinking RealPage’s profits — but not eliminating them. That lawsuit claims RealPage produced 11,000 inaccurate renter background reports between 2014 and 2019 using “abbreviated” criminal records, which are cheaper than a full record check, bought from an affiliate of Backgroundchecks.com. The records don’t include details of the resolution or complete dates of birth, so are more likely to lead to incorrect reports. In a statement, RealPage said that “the screening that gave rise to this case occurred years ago” and that the company “has long since made changes to its criminal matching logic that would prevent this record from returning for the plaintiff in that case.” It would not elaborate on those changes. Federal regulators have fined both RealPage and Backgroundchecks.com. Backgroundchecks.com and an affiliated company were fined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2015 over employment screenings. Among other things, the agency said the company had failed to look for patterns in customer disputes that would identify root causes of inaccuracies, such as court jurisdictions with unreliable data, error-prone procedures or employees who are particularly sloppy. In 2018, the Federal Trade Commission fined RealPage $3 million for using wild-card searches; the company did not have to admit wrongdoing. The company brings in about $48 million annually from tenant background screenings, according to court filings. Despite the federal action, RealPage continues to employ a name-matching program that tolerates a significant amount of imprecision, according to federal lawsuits. For instance, according to a lawsuit by Leon Howard, RealPage included criminal records for a Lonnie Howard and eviction records for a Linnea Howard in his background report when he applied for a rental in Georgia in 2019. Lonnie Howard’s date of birth was different than Leon Howard’s, and the report included a photo of the offender, according to the lawsuit, which RealPage settled for an undisclosed sum. Most hurt are people living on the edge, especially those who made it to the top of long wait lists for a housing voucher or a public housing unit only to lose out because of faulty background checks. Sandra Smith waited more than a year for a spot in public housing in her hometown, Jacksonville, Fla. After a divorce, she had been staying with friends and her mother. Unemployed while recovering from health problems, Ms. Smith was relieved she’d finally be able to move back out of her teenage bedroom. “I’m 55,” she said. “Having my own space is something I haven’t had in a long time, and I felt like I was ready for that.” But the housing authority turned her down after a background check reported a 2013 eviction for a different Sandra Smith. “Everything was a runaround,” she said. “No one had any more anything to show me — why they were so convinced that this was me.” Agency officials said she had been denied because of the screening, which is their policy. “It would’ve taken them two to three minutes to investigate this,” said Adam Thoresen, a Jacksonville Area Legal Aid lawyer whom Ms. Smith turned to for help. The signature on the lease agreement, which was attached to the online eviction records, wasn’t the same as his client’s, he said. The lease listed multiple children — but his client has only one child, an adult in his 30s, and the names didn’t match. “This is really simple stuff,” Mr. Thoresen said. It took Ms. Smith a year and a half to get her denial overturned. She is still dealing with the paperwork and hasn’t gotten an apartment. Maddy Varner and Surya Mattu contributed reporting.Hoping to take advantage of wreckage in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, investors are preparing to snap up commercial real estate at rock-bottom prices. Long before states and cities closed businesses and issued stay-at-home orders, many real estate funds were stockpiling cash and waiting for a buyer’s market. Some have raised billions of dollars in the last several weeks. As a result, Blackstone Group, Kayne Anderson Capital Advisors, Starwood Capital Group and other investment firms are sitting on roughly $300 billion of equity ready for deployment, said Douglas M. Weill, a founder of Hodes Weill & Associates, a global real estate capital advisory firm in New York. By comparison, property sales totaled $570.6 billion in 2019, according to Real Capital Analytics, a commercial real estate researcher that tracks deals of $2.5 million and up. “It’s a staggering amount of dry powder,” Mr. Weill said. “Institutional investors are defensively looking after their own portfolios, but they’re beginning to look around for opportunities.” This is the second time in the last dozen years that investors have anticipated an onslaught of big property discounts; the 2008 financial crisis also fueled a surge of distressed funds. Yet many that ramped up during the Great Recession fizzled because the expected depth and breadth of distress never materialized. Will this time be different? Just like the last crisis, when government intervention, loan modifications and other measures “kicked the can down the road” until real estate values rebounded, lenders and regulators hope to buy time using similar measures, including injecting trillions of dollars into the financial system. In many cases, lenders are trying to accommodate borrower requests to suspend loan payments for 60 to 90 days with an eye toward making long-term modifications later, said Jay M. Sakalo, a lawyer in Miami who specializes in financial restructuring. As of April, more than 5,000 borrowers, representing 17 percent of $583.8 billion in commercial mortgage-backed securities, had asked to explore forbearance or other relief, according to credit rating firm Fitch Ratings. Unlike loans held by banks and insurance companies, commercial mortgage-backed securities are pools of real estate loans that are carved up by risk and sold to investors. “The idea is that if we can press pause, we’ll do less damage than telling borrowers, ‘You have to pay, no matter what,’” said Joe McBride, head of commercial real estate finance for Trepp, a research firm in New York. “There’s not a lot of upside to mass foreclosures.” States and cities did not shut down economic activity during the financial crisis, however, and most tenants still paid rent. But that’s not the case this time. Some 38.6 million people have filed unemployment claims, according to a Labor Department report released Thursday, and millions of small businesses and restaurants are expected to permanently close. The retail and hospitality industries are suffering the most. For example, Macerich, a shopping center owner based in Santa Monica, Calif., collected 26 percent of its April rent, it said in its latest financial report. Early rent collections for May dropped to 18 percent. And although hotel occupancy has rebounded in recent weeks, it was still roughly 56 percent lower in mid-May than a year earlier, according to STR, a hospitality research organization in Hendersonville, Tenn. The situation is one that tenants and landlords likely never anticipated, and for many businesses, the ability to survive remains a question. Barton Perreira, a high-end eyewear brand based in Irvine, Calif., whose products will be featured in the next Bond movie, recently reopened its stores in Aspen, Colo.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Nashville on a limited basis, but its New York location remains closed, said Bill Barton, a founder. He acknowledged that landlords were in a tough spot, and anticipated a reduction in foot traffic for the next six to eight months, compounding financial challenges caused by the closings. “I think tenants need to decide whether they want to tough it out, and landlords need to decide whether they want to keep a particular store,” Mr. Barton said. “But at the end of the day, if we can’t get help from landlords, it’s difficult to say that we’ll keep going.” As of mid-May, loan servicers representing 70 percent of the commercial mortgage-backed securities reported that 19.3 percent of hotel loans and 10 percent of retail loans were more than 30 days late, according to Trepp. The end of grace periods could significantly increase those percentages, Trepp noted. On average, the value of lodging properties slid 16 percent over the last three months, while the value of malls dropped 25 percent and strip retail fell 15 percent, according to Green Street Advisors, a commercial real estate research and advisory firm in Newport Beach, Calif. Commercial real estate values over all fell an average of 10 percent in that period, Green Street found. 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 Source: Green Street Advisors By Karl Russell Some property owners that do not have the ability to withstand a downturn are already looking to sell. But given the widespread anticipation of continued erosion in property values, few willing buyers are in the market, experts say. Every commercial property owner has its specific problems, but mom-and-pop landlords that own a handful of apartment buildings, retail centers or other assets are in a much more compromised position, said Sanford D. Sigal, president and chief executive of NewMark Merrill, a shopping center owner and manager in Woodland Hills, Calif. “Very few small owners are equipped for this type of market,” said Mr. Sigal, who expected to collect about 57 percent of his May rent from tenants across some 70 properties in California, Colorado and Illinois. “I’ve seen more deals in the past week that were worth looking at than I did in the entire prior year.” Some borrowers seeking relief from lenders are seeing mixed results. Legacy Development, which owns shopping centers primarily in the Midwest and Southeast, has not received rent from any of its 432 tenants since the beginning of April, said Dan Lowe, managing partner for the firm, which is based in Kansas City, Mo. Legacy Development’s bank and life insurance company lenders have displayed a willingness to work with the company, he said. A loan servicer of commercial mortgage-backed securities has been less accommodating. “I’m guessing that a lot of opportunities for distress will result from C.M.B.S. borrowers who couldn’t get relief,” Mr. Lowe said. Mr. Sigal said that he, too, had found bank and life insurance lenders accommodative. He stopped borrowing from lenders in the commercial mortgage-backed securities market because of difficulty working with servicers during the last downturn, he added. Still, no amount of temporary relief or permanent loan restructuring will save all properties, particularly those just scraping by before the pandemic. Plus, because of virus fears, even retail and entertainment properties that performed well before the crisis are likely to experience less traffic for weeks, if not months, after reopening, said Brian Stoffers, global president of debt and structured finance for CBRE, a real estate services firm. “It’s going to take a while for real estate’s problems to completely manifest themselves,” he said. “This has been caused by a health crisis that could have life-changing impacts on some properties.” Indeed, how the virus is shaping consumer and business attitudes toward commercial real estate should be a question uppermost in the minds of distressed buyers, said Carlos A.G. Vigon, a commercial real estate investor in Los Angeles. Coming out of the last downturn, investors that found deeply discounted properties profited by simply riding the recovery, said Mr. Vigon, who last year started PaxCap Investors to focus on opportunistic deals. Buyers in this new real estate cycle must calculate potential costs to redesign or upgrade properties to fit new societal and health norms. “This is not a problem that will be fixed only by highly available, low-cost capital,” said Mr. Vigon, who has $300 million in equity to spend. “This is a different kind of dislocation. It’s greater, and it’s deeper.”Getting infected with Covid-19 is a frightening, isolating experience. But as more people endure it, the community of survivors is growing — and with them comes better guidance. My husband and I got sick from the coronavirus in late March. We had so-called mild cases, meaning only that we weren’t hospitalized: In fact, we were sicker than we had ever been. Because we could breathe fine, we knew we weren’t supposed to go to the hospital. But what were we supposed to do? The standard advice — rest, fluids and fever reducers — was and is essential, but at times it felt inadequate to the severity of the illness. As we recovered, I spoke with many friends, colleagues and internet strangers going through similar ordeals. Here is some collective wisdom on how to manage noncritical cases of Covid-19. First, of course, you need to be confident that your illness can be managed at home. Most cases of Covid-19 can be. But if you develop any symptoms on this list, including trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, an inability to wake or stay awake and/or bluish lips or face, seek emergency care. Some people will have relatively mild symptoms at first and then become more seriously ill. These patients are likely to develop shortness of breath four to eight days after their first symptoms, and “that’s really where people should start paying attention,” said Dr. Pieter Cohen, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School and an internist at the Cambridge Health Alliance who was co-author of an article about the progression of Covid-19 symptoms. If the shortness of breath worsens from day to day, Dr. Cohen said, that’s a sign to call your doctor. Less commonly, patients with low oxygen levels may experience dizziness or lightheadedness instead of shortness of breath, so keep an eye out for that too. Otherwise, read on. If you’re reading this while healthy, buy basic supplies now, including a thermometer, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, and rehydration drinks like Pedialyte. A pulse oximeter can sometimes be helpful, both in flagging severe illness and in reassuring you of the opposite, my colleague Dana Goldstein says: If you feel short of breath but your oxygen level is normal, you may be able to avoid the hospital. (You should still contact your doctor.) If you’re sick and don’t have supplies, see if a friend can pick them up for you, or if a grocery store or bodega will deliver. (Tip well!) Either way, avoid contact: Whether it’s a friend or a delivery person, have the bag left outside your door, and don’t open the door until the delivery person is gone. Over-the-counter drugs may not be enough. In particular, the coughing and nausea caused by Covid-19 can be severe enough to warrant prescription medication. For my husband and me, benzonatate (for the cough) and promethazine (for the nausea) were lifesavers. Some colleagues were prescribed codeine-based cough medicine or Zofran. If you feel you might need them, ask your doctor about medications sooner rather than later. Don’t wait until you’re doubled over coughing or can’t keep anything down. If you don’t have a primary care doctor, some urgent care clinics offer virtual appointments, and some pharmacies offer prescription delivery. Dry air can exacerbate some symptoms such as coughing and chest tightness. If you have a humidifier, use it. If not, a hot shower works. Several readers reported that they felt better when they lay on their stomach. A woman in Britain whose partner was sick for several weeks told me that a particular breathing exercise helped him: You take a deep breath, hold it for 5 seconds and release. Do that 5 times, then on the 6th time on the release, cough hard. Do that cycle twice, then lie on your front and take slightly deeper breaths for 10 minutes. Try to do it a couple of times a day. In some cases, your doctor may also prescribe an albuterol inhaler to reduce your cough and ease your breathing. As soon as you get sick, start a detailed log. Every time you take your temperature — do it several times a day, at consistent times — log it. Every time you take a pill, log it. Every time you eat or drink, log it. If one symptom resolves or a new one develops, log it. As my colleague Eliza Shapiro noted in a Twitter thread worth reading in full, this creates a detailed record to take along if you end up needing medical attention. It also helps you stay on top of your care. Can I take more cough medicine yet? How long have I had this fever? Is it a little lower than it was yesterday? You won’t be able to keep these things straight while shivering in bed, but a spreadsheet can. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Having Covid-19 is intensely stressful. It’s not unusual to feel depressed or anxious, or to have panic attacks. Don’t be embarrassed to talk to your doctor about your mental health — it’s just as important as your physical health. Derek Norman, a news assistant at The Times, says that in the worst moments of his illness, when he felt short of breath and panicky, he would sit upright, focus on breathing steadily and picture a vivid memory. I’d close my eyes and picture the exact details of a scene I had once experienced, and I’d completely immerse myself in that memory. Something like sitting at an outdoor cafe in Morocco. I’d try to recall the sounds of street life and the dry desert air on my skin, or the smell of the spices, hookah and exhaust swirling in the air. Very, very specific details that I look back fondly on. I’d continue to slowly breathe through it. Tim Herrera, our Smarter Living editor, emphasized fresh air. That can be hard to come by safely when you’re contagious, but even if you live in a crowded area with no private outdoor space, it can help to open a window. It’s also OK to not be OK. You don’t have to handle this “well,” whatever that means. You just have to get through each day. So go ahead and cry, binge Netflix, do a jigsaw puzzle, reread the entire “Animorphs” series — whatever gets you through the day. Some people have mild symptoms for the first few days and then suddenly get sicker. Some have fevers that go up and down repeatedly. Some are sick for two weeks straight, then have a few symptom-free days, then relapse. Some have lingering symptoms for months. This is both maddening and very common. Give yourself as much time to rest as your job and financial situation will allow. For me and for several colleagues, that meant nearly three weeks of sick time. Since tweeting about my experience last month, I’ve received many emails from people in the “this will never end” phase. I share the same screenshot with all of them: a text I sent to a friend on April 5. “Why do I even bother giving good news when it’s only going to last a few hours?” I wrote. “I’m just so tired of this. I don’t know how to keep dealing with it.” Every day, more people will hit that wall — and every day, more people will find their way past it. They will feel alone, but they won’t be. Sarah Maslin Nir contributed reporting.Did you get a new dog during the coronavirus lockdown? Or has your long-time four-legged companion gotten used to having you home? “Dogs are highly social, which is why we get along with them so well,” said Patricia B. McConnell, certified applied animal behaviorist and author of “The Other End of the Leash: Why We Do What We Do Around Dogs.” “If all the sudden, they go from ‘everybody home all the time’ to ‘nobody home all day long,’ it can lead to some serious behavioral problems.” This can mean accidents in the house, chewing on the furniture when you are away, or worse. Want to avoid that? Here’s how to transition to a new normal, for both of you. The members of your household probably haven’t left the house for an extended period of time for what, weeks? Months? The 17 years this quarantine has felt like? So, start transitioning as cities and states reopen by leaving a little bit at a time. But not for too long. Start “unbelievably slow,” said Dr. McConnell. Leave a handful of treats on the ground and, while the dog is eating them, “everybody walks out the door,” she said. Come back in five seconds. Next time, leave for 10 seconds, then walk to the mailbox and back, then take a longer walk or a long drive. Make sure you are mimicking the routine you’ll have when you go back to work: Get your wallet and keys, leave through the door you’ll go through. This way, the dog gets used to the cues that mean you are leaving — and coming back in through the same spot. Make sure your dog is left in a safe space that it knows — and don’t lock it in a room that’s unfamiliar. That safe space might be a crate, though not all dogs like being in a crate. (My first dog, a Jack Russell terrier, loved her crate; the dog I have now, a cattle dog mix, couldn’t be bothered.) Other dogs are just fine being left to lie wherever in the house they want. The best space for your dog may not be one with a view either, said Sarah Wilson, dog trainer and author of “My Smart Puppy: Fun, Effective and Easy Puppy Training,” especially if your dog barks a lot. “When they’re screaming out the window at everyone who’s going by, their brains are flooded with all of this confusing and upsetting brain chemistry, which doesn’t go away on its own instantly,” she said. “It’s not a game for them when they’re barking hysterically out the window.” If a crate doesn’t work for that dog, it may work to use a baby gate to keep it in a room it likes, but without access to a window. If your dog has gotten used to walks every four or five hours, what’s going to happen when that’s not an easy option? Can you come home to walk the dog? Will you hire a dog walker, or take your dog to a doggie daycare? Dr. McConnell suggests you figure out how you’re going to engage your dogs’ brain if the level of physical exercise you are currently providing it is not an option. You can teach them new tricks, or try new walking routes, which engages their brains because dogs will work to analyze new smells. “Even if it’s just once or twice a week, pop your dog in the car and go somewhere different,” said Dr. McConnell. Dogs with separation anxiety may go to the bathroom in the house, or chew or rip up things that are not their toys. But don’t punish the dog when you come home, said Katherine A. Houpt, professor emeritus of behavior medicine at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, because dogs will forget what they did and by then they will “no longer associate punishment with the action.” Your dog may also get clingy and follow you around the house, pace when it thinks you’re leaving or drool. That also means the dog is experiencing separation anxiety and you need to work a little bit more to help it. If you are frustrated or feel like nothing is working, reach out for help. Call your veterinarian to make sure that nothing is physically wrong with your dog. If it is behavioral, then your veterinarian may recommend calling a dog trainer or animal behaviorist. Dr. McConnell said to look for a certified applied animal behaviorist or a certified professional dog trainer. Trainers should use positive reinforcement instead of force and coercion. Your veterinarian may also recommend anti-anxiety medication for your dog, if the anxiety persists despite making the recommended changes. You may also consider anti-anxiety medications if your dog’s behavior is causing harm even if it’s not destructive — such as if your dog’s barking is annoying your neighbors to an extreme degree.As climbing temperatures herald summer’s return, cities and states around the United States are beginning the stilted process of reopening. In many places, that means a chance to return to the beach. Texas state beaches were ordered to reopen on May 1; now state beaches in Florida, Oregon and California are also starting to reopen. On the East Coast, New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Connecticut reopened state beaches over the Memorial Day weekend, though with limits on capacity and other measures. (Cities, counties and other municipalities may have different restrictions; New York City’s 14 miles of public beaches, for example, remain closed.) For those concerned about their safety during the coronavirus pandemic, the current consensus is that socially distant outdoor activities are some of the safer ways to re-engage with the world. “Outdoor settings, like beaches, are less likely to spread the virus than indoor settings,” said Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security. Professor Linsey Marr, an engineering professor at Virginia Tech who specializes in the airborne transmission of infectious diseases, agrees that a beach visit should be fine — as long as you are able to maintain social distancing. “The good news is that the virus dies off relatively quickly in direct sunlight,” she said. “There’s often some wind at the beach, which really helps disperse the virus particles in the air.” But no activity is going to be completely risk-free. “The steps you take are not going to be one-size-fits-all; it depends on your individual risk tolerance,” said Dr. Adalja. Here are five things to keep in mind when planning a beach day. Getting there Like most things in the time of Covid-19, rules governing beach access, use and safety change frequently and likely differ depending on your state, city and even your beach. “We’re in a very dynamic place right now in terms of beach access,” said Dr. Chad Nelsen, chief executive officer of Surfrider Foundation, a nonprofit organization that has been compiling resources and providing recommendations regarding water quality and beach safety with regards to Covid-19. The group also works with coastal communities on opening beaches safely. Start by learning the regulations of your area and your beach by accessing government websites for your city or county. And consider how far along your local area is in terms of reopening. “If your community is still in active mitigation mode, plan on being extra cautious,” said Kristine Stratton, president and chief executive officer of the National Recreation and Park Association, a nonprofit organization that recently published guidelines for phased re-openings of public spaces, including beaches. You should expect new rules this season. Picnicking might be allowed, or beach access may be for recreation only. Masks might be required and entries may be timed. Parking lots, public bathrooms and concession stands may or may not be open, or offer only limited access. Other resources to tap include websites for your local parks and recreation or public health department, the local beach manager or your local lifeguard department. The varied regulations are because of the diversity of beaches across the United States and the likelihood of crowds. “Local context matters,” Dr. Nelsen said. “The U.S. coastline is hugely varied in terms of its geography and population. You could go up to Oregon, or Northern California, and be at a beach all day alone. Urban beaches in Southern California or Miami are a different story.” Densely crowded beaches make maintaining six feet of distance more difficult, and increase the likelihood of more sustained exposure to the virus. You may need to navigate a crowded parking lot, or take a narrow path or stairway to access the sand. “Make an informed judgment: ‘Does it seem like the beach is on the busy side?’” Ms. Stratton said. “If you’re pulling up to a beach and the parking lot is full, our recommendation is that you find a less-populated spot.” Professor Marr suggests vetting beaches beforehand via a webcam, if possible, to assess the crowd. Safety at the shore Keeping your hands clean, avoiding touching your face and, of course, maintaining at least six feet of social distance are as paramount at the beach as they are anywhere else. “If it’s a crowded beach with people playing games, or parties mixing with other parties, there is always a risk of transmission,” said Dr. Adalja. “There will be people who think that risk is acceptable, others who don’t, especially at at-risk populations.” Surfrider’s current recommendations encourage beachgoers to “keep it moving.” The N.R.P.A. similarly recommends that, in these early days of reopening, it’s safer to plan on shorter, recreation-driven visits. “If you’re out swimming or paddling, walking or running, it’s going to be easier to avoid the packed towel-to-towel beach crowd,” Dr. Nelsen said. A recreation-only policy is currently in place in Los Angeles County; similar policies tend to prohibit beachgoers from bringing chairs, umbrellas, coolers, barbecues and other gear (again, check on the latest status at your local beach before going). Dr. Adalja agrees that being on the move is, over all, a safer proposition: “If people are running by each other, the virus can’t magically transport from one person to another,” he said, noting that the highest risk for exposure comes from spending anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes within six feet of another person. When you are in and near the water, there may be fewer lifeguards than usual, or none at all. “Many of our parks and rec agencies are already affecting budget cuts, there’s a real risk of not being able to staff beaches with required lifeguards,” Ms. Stratton said. “There may be continued beach closings, both out of concerns for public health, and because of limitations of staffing, recruiting and training.” Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. When lifeguards are present, keep in mind that you are not only exercising caution for your sake, but for theirs, too — fewer lifesaving situations means less exposure for them. “We’re trying to keep the lifeguards up in the stands as much as possible, and in a safe, socially distant place,” said Tom Gill, vice president of the United States Lifesaving Association. “The less they have to interact with the public, especially in an emergency situation, the safer everyone’s going to be.” While much about transmissibility of the coronavirus remains unclear, waterborne transmission appears to be less likely. As for other surfaces you might encounter at the beach, such as rental beach chairs and kayaks, or even beach toys, Ms. Stratton urges caution in all regards. “We strongly discourage sharing equipment outside of your household — throwing a Frisbee, or tossing a ball around,” she said. “Before you rent equipment, ask the question: was this item cleaned and disinfected in between uses? If not, the recommendation would be to not use equipment.” Your own chairs should not be an immediate risk factor — assuming six feet of social distancing can be maintained — as there is no evidence pointing to easy transmission in the sand. To be safe, clean your beach equipment with household disinfectants when you return home. And take your garbage home too. Single-use plastics have been on the rise, and beaches are taking the hit — after some in Florida reopened, nearly 12,000 pounds of trash were left behind according to news reports. But pandemics don’t render environmental concerns irrelevant. If there is no trash collection or it appears to be overwhelmed, take your trash home with you to dispose of accordingly. “Our municipalities are going to be incredibly challenged from a budget perspective,” Ms. Stratton said. “Rather than leave trash in receptacles that are overflowing, do your part and carry it out.” Public restrooms are a tough topic these days. They have high-touch, frequently shared surfaces, and some reports also cite a possibility of transmission via an aerosolized “toilet plume.” Recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for public restrooms include guidelines for regular cleaning and disinfection, operational toilets and well-stocked handwashing supplies. But beachgoers should check out facilities when they first arrive, to see if restrooms are clean and can allow for social distancing. “We, of course, are recommending that municipalities and parks and recreation maintain facilities, but beachgoers should not assume that that’s the case,” Ms. Stratton of the N.R.P.A. said. It’s always wise to bring hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes, wear a mask, close the lid of the toilet when you flush, if possible, and thoroughly wash your hands. The safest course: Keep your beach visit short enough that using public restrooms won’t be necessary — use the bathroom, and change into your swimsuit, before you leave home. Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.Every morning, Isaac Calpito sets the stage in the East Hampton living room of his friend Stephanie DiTullio. Mr. Calpito, 39, is dressed, often, in sparkling yoga tights and a tank top that show his muscles to good advantage. His main prop is an iPhone. At 11 a.m. sharp, accompanied by a new playlist chosen by Ms. DiTullio (a.k.a D.J. Steph), he turns on Instagram Live and welcomes thousands of housebound fitness buffs and at least one Real Housewife, all of whom tune in to take part in (or at least watch) Mr. Calpito’s Torch’d workout. For 45 minutes, the music pumps as he cycles through push-ups and squats, giving cheeky tough-love directions. At a time when it’s difficult to introduce a new product or a business, Torch’d has become, rather organically, the breakthrough workout of the stay-at-home era. Mr. Calpito has been leading the classes virtually since March 17. Last week, about 2,500 people tuned in every day. The video of each class remains accessible on Instagram for 24 hours, and he said an additional 17,500 people typically tune in during that time. (On three occasions, Mr. Calpito has broadcast on a split screen that showed the actress Vanessa Hudgens and Lisa Rinna, a star of “The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills,” doing their Torch’d workout. Each of those classes attracted about 8,000 live viewers. The last time Mr. Calpito featured Ms. Hudgens, more than 250,000 people watched during the 24-hour period.) The class is free, but Mr. Calpito asks that people taking it consider making a donation to No Kid Hungry, a charity that helps provide meals to children in need. So far, he has raised more than $200,000. After getting Torch’d, you're likely to wake up sore the next day. But Mr. Calpito’s constant monologue keeps exercisers coming back. “A lot of you are so preoccupied with whether to point or flex your toes,” he said during one session earlier this month. “Just move your damn leg, OK? Like, you’re not auditioning for American Ballet Theater. Those days are gone. Just torch that” rear end, he said. Alas, it’s difficult to quote Mr. Calpito’s mid-class soliloquy without running into a word that rhymes with “sass.” “This one’s for you, Taylor, and every boy who ever broke my heart,” he said recently, while doing tush-toning leg circles as a Taylor Swift song played. He cursed his exes, then continued his instruction: “Now carve out that real estate, baby!” There will also be the occasional wry, off-topic cultural observation (“When did all the gays get married? It’s so confusing to me”). The trainer coos over his poodle, named Davis after Bette, who prances into the frame from time to time, often wearing a red Gucci cardigan. “He’s a bit fancy. I try to keep him humble and remind him that his father grew up on food stamps,” said Mr. Calpito, who was raised by a family of humble means in Waimānalo, Hawaii, a small town on the island of Oahu. Davis preens as Mr. Calpito keeps his own legs suspended an inch off the ground for an excruciating amount of time and tells you that you should be doing the same. This is unlikely but the chaos keeps the eye on the screen and the cruncher or jumping-jacker from quitting altogether. Then there are the emojis and comments from bold-faced Instagram handles, cascading down the screen as Mr. Calpito calls out names. “Hey Vanessa Hudgens!” “What’s up, Michael Rapaport?” “Hey Christy Turlington!” “Hey Jessica Chastain, how’s your grandma?”(It’s a mystery how the constantly mentioned Lizzie Tisch is able to text so much while she’s purportedly in plank position.) Thus he manages to approximate the feel of sweating in a packed room alongside friends and strangers, some of whom might be rich and famous. Mr. Calpito’s success has been a long time coming, according to his friends and fans. “Isaac is one of the most entertaining people you will ever meet,” said Kelly Ripa, who has known him for 18 years and who last month gave him the “Live with Kelly and Ryan” bump when she told viewers that she’s been taking his Torch’d classes on Instagram. “I just think he’s tapped into the moment,” Ms. Ripa said in an interview. “He’s put the fun into working out and the community back into the lives of people. He’s made a great big alienated, desolate world feel very small, and all you need is your phone.” Ms. Rinna, so much a regular that Mr. Calpito has named an on-your-side-Rockette-leg-kick “the Rinna,” says she plans her mornings around Torch’d. “It gives me something to look forward to,” she said, adding that after 10 weeks, her derrière has never looked better. “I don’t like to work out by myself, I’m a class girl and at the end, I feel like I’ve just been to a boutique fitness class.” As a boy who loved dance and theater, Mr. Calpito was bullied, but kept at it, encouraged by his grandmother and mother. In 1998, just after graduating from high school, he booked a one-way flight for New York. He slept on the floors of friends’ dorm rooms, hit audition after audition and got his first big gig within six months, as part of the touring cast for “Mamma Mia.” In 2003, he joined the ensemble of the Broadway production. “Six years of eight shows a week,” he said. “It’s a tight-knit family on Broadway. I learned discipline, compassion and the importance of community.” He next was cast in the 2009 Broadway revival of “West Side Story.” The production was directed by Arthur Laurents, who wrote the book for the original musical back in the 1950s. “Arthur became a very important mentor for me,” Mr. Calpito said. “He kept me on track for bigger goals. He was a father figure.” It was during the production that Mr. Calpito created a floor-exercise circuit to give himself a full-body workout when he had no time to go to the gym. “I created this flow and this method that I knew would work for me, and I did it alone every day on the stage of the Palace Theater with my boom box with Madonna playing before performances,” he said. “Before long, other castmates started doing it with me.” After the show closed in 2011, Mr. Calpito moved to Los Angeles to work as a choreographer for pop stars like Ariana Grande and a fitness trainer for celebrities including Faye Dunaway. In 2015 he began working as a SoulCycle instructor in New York. He left the company in 2019 and has focused on private sessions and Torch’d since, leading classes at Art Basel. In mid-March, Ms. DiTullio contacted him and suggested he pack up his two dogs (the other has since died of old age) and shelter with her. “Days into the quar, I was wondering how I was going to connect with my clients so I offered the Torch’d workout as something as a one-off,” Mr. Calpito said. A few hundred people from all over the world tuned in. “It surpassed any of my expectations,” he said. So he kept going. Caryn Wall, 54 and sheltering at home in Virginia Beach with her husband and two teenage children, started doing Torch’d after hearing Ms. Ripa talk about it on TV. “Isaac’s doing every single move with you, he’s sweating just like you are, he has wonderful energy and the whole time you hear him calling names like Lisa Rinna and Aerin Lauder,” said Ms. Wall. “You feel like you’re in the class with them.” Mr. Calpito is working on an app that will offer his workouts, but through the summer he will continue to broadcast to Ms. Wall, Ms. Chastain, “my best friend’s Aunt Jan who lives in Jersey” and all the rest. “So many people have committed to coming to Torch’d every day,” he said. “And I am committed to them.”When you finally return to work after the lockdown, coronavirus might not be the only illness you need to worry about contracting at the office. Office buildings once filled with employees emptied out in many cities and states as shelter-in-place orders were issued. These structures, normally in constant use, have been closed off and shut down, and health risks might be accumulating in unseen ways. “The buildings aren’t designed to be left alone for months,” said Andrew Whelton, an associate professor of civil, environmental and ecological engineering at Purdue University. Dr. Whelton, other researchers and public health authorities have issued warnings about the plumbing in these buildings, where water may have gone stagnant in the pipes or even in individual taps and toilets. As lockdowns are lifted, bacteria that build up internally may cause health problems for returning workers if the problem is not properly addressed by facilities managers. Employees and guests at hotels, gyms and other kinds of buildings may also be at risk. The biggest worry is Legionella pneumophila. The bacteria can cause Legionnaires’ disease, a respiratory condition. It leads to death in about one in 10 cases, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine estimates that over 52,000 Americans suffer from the disease each year. A single small outbreak can sicken many people. During the water crisis that started in Flint, Mich., in 2014 after the city changed its water source and officials failed to inform the public of water quality problems, many people became sick. The crisis was linked to the deaths of 12 people from Legionnaires’ disease. After an outbreak at the North Carolina Mountain State Fair last September, 135 people contracted the disease and four died, according to the state’s department of health and human services. Investigators blamed a hot tub exhibit that sent Legionella through the air and was inhaled by passers-by. Most worrying, Legionnaires’ disease tends to affect people with compromised immune systems. “Covid patients and survivors could be more vulnerable to this, so when they go back to work we might be concerned about another infection,” said Caitlin Proctor, a postdoctoral fellow at Purdue who, along with Dr. Whelton conducted a study that has been accepted for publication in the journal AWWA Water Science examining risks from water stagnation during the coronavirus lockdown. Once forming in a building’s plumbing, Legionella can be dispersed through the air when toilets are flushed. Even turning on taps, as employees wash their hands to limit the spread of the coronavirus, can send water droplets into the air that carry Legionella. Typically, facilities managers reduce the risk of Legionella and other bacteria by pouring small amounts of disinfectant into a building’s water systems. But when the water is left stagnant for too long, the disinfectant disappears. “Even just after a weekend, disinfectant can be gone in some buildings and the water is vulnerable to contamination,” Dr. Whelton said. Facilities staff can also flush out old water and bring in a new and fresh supply. Or they can send a high dose of disinfectant through the building and raise temperatures to kill the microbes. Shutdowns in the U.S. began in mid-March, meaning some buildings have now been closed for two months. And the researchers say that the consequences of long-term water stagnation are relatively unknown. “We haven’t really done studies on monthslong stagnation,” said Dr. Proctor. “The ecological system may change. So while we’re looking at these organisms, maybe other organisms pop up.” William Rudin, C.E.O. and co-chairman of Rudin Management Company which manages 16 commercial office buildings in New York, said his staff is being careful and cautious in their approach to reopening. “Our engineers go through the building testing systems all the time,” he said. “That’s standard procedure.” [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] One problem for some property managers may be inconsistent and incomplete guidance from regulators and health authorities. Dr. Proctor and Dr. Whelton’s study assessed 21 sets of guidelines developed around the world since the pandemic began, including the C.D.C.’s and 11 from states and counties. Updated May 28, 2020 Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “Not all of the guidelines are created equal,” said Dr. Proctor. “The original C.D.C. guidelines only covered certain systems.” Because the effects of long-term water stagnation are so little understood, most of the guidelines are based on preventive measures and may not directly address reopening after long-term shutdowns. “They all go different ways,” said Michèle Prévost, a co-author of the study and the industrial chair of drinking water on the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. “It’s not ill-intended, there’s not that much evidence to guide our choices.” Unfortunately many of the public health officials who would normally be tackling these issues and getting information out are currently focused on responding to the spread of the coronavirus. “Health officials are overstretched and have conflicting information,” said David Dyjack, executive director of the National Environmental Health Association. “Health officials simply cannot keep up. Public health is being asked to do things it’s never had to do before.” Even if only a small portion of buildings have problems, with so many reopening at once, the researchers fear there will be more outbreaks than usual. “Not every building will have issues but based on what we know, enough of them probably will,” Dr. Proctor said.