The multitrillion-dollar patchwork of federal and state relief programs has not kept bills from piling up or prevented long lines at food banks. But it has mitigated the damage. Now the expiration of those programs represents a cliff that many Americans and the economy are hurtling toward. The $1,200 checks are long gone, at least for those who needed them most, with little imminent prospect for a second round. The lending program that helped millions of small businesses keep workers on the payroll will wind down if Congress does not extend it. Eviction moratoriums that are keeping people in their homes are expiring in many cities. And the $600 per week in extra unemployment benefits that have allowed tens of millions of laid-off workers to pay rent and buy groceries will expire at the end of July. President Trump and other Republicans have played down the need for more spending, saying the solution is for states to reopen businesses and allow companies to bring people back to work. So despite pleas from economists across the political spectrum — including Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair — any federal action is likely to be limited. To some Republican lawmakers, extra unemployment benefits and other assistance made sense when businesses were shut down and the government was discouraging people from leaving home. But as the economy reopens, they say, the benefits could impede the recovery by providing an incentive not to return to work. Many economists feel those fears are overblown. Generous benefits might be a deterrent to work in normal times, they argue, but these are hardly normal times. Even the most optimistic forecasters expect the unemployment rate to be well above 10 percent when the extra benefits expire, meaning there will be far more jobless workers than available jobs. President Trump on Thursday signed an executive order to curtail the legal protections that shield social media companies from liability for the content posted on their platforms. The move came just hours after Twitter added new fact-checking labels to hundreds of tweets, Kate Conger and Mike Isaac reported, escalating the social media network’s confrontation with Mr. Trump. Twitter on Tuesday had appended fact-checking labels for the first time to two of Mr. Trump’s tweets about mail-in ballots, rebutting their accuracy. In response, Mr. Trump accused his favorite social media network of stifling speech and declared that he would put a stop to the interference. White House officials drafted an executive order that would make it easier for federal regulators to argue that companies like Facebook, Google and Twitter are suppressing free speech when they move to suspend users or delete posts. “They’ve had unchecked power to censure, restrict, edit, shape, hide, alter virtually any form of communication between private citizens or large public audiences,” Mr. Trump said as he signed the order on Thursday. American Airlines and Delta Air Lines are offering buyouts to employees as they prepare for a rebound in demand for air travel that most industry expect will take years to materialize. “Delta will have to be a smaller airline as we adjust to reduced demand and the need for distancing and safety during travel,” Delta’s chief executive, Ed Bastian, told employees in a memo on Wednesday. “A smaller Delta unfortunately means fewer people will be required.” Delta is offering two programs — an early retirement option and a general buyout package — to most employees except for pilots, whose union is still in talks with management, Mr. Bastian said. The email did not say how much of its work force the airline was seeking to pare. The American program, also announced on Wednesday, applies to management and support staff, which the airline hopes to cut by about 30 percent, or about 5,000 workers. Going into the crisis, American had 130,000 employees and Delta had 90,000; about 40,000 workers at each have taken voluntary leave or early retirement. Most airline jobs are protected into the fall as a condition of the CARES Act, which provided $50 billion to passenger airlines, half of it earmarked to pay employees through September. An early rally in the stock market Thursday faded late in the day after President Trump said he would hold a news conference about China amid rising tensions between the world’s two largest economies. The S&P 500 turned negative after earlier rising as much as 1 percent. Before the reversal, stocks had been set for a third day of gains this week, a rally that reflected optimism about prospects for an economic rebound. Mr. Trump’s announcement of a Friday news conference came as the United States intensified pressure on China over Hong Kong. China’s legislature on Thursday approved a plan that would broaden many of the mainland’s security practices to the semiautonomous city. The Trump administration signaled Wednesday that it was likely to end some or all of the U.S. government’s special trade and economic relations with Hong Kong because of the move. Tension between Washington and Beijing, which are currently negotiating a trade deal, has been one of the few factors that has managed to deter bullish investors who have looked past the coronavirus pandemic’s immense human and economic toll, and instead have focused on signs of a recovery as they bid stocks higher. Earlier Thursday, investors were undeterred by the U.S. Labor Department’s weekly report on unemployment claims, which showed that the surge of layoffs, though lessening, had not abated. More than 2 million U.S. workers filed jobless claims last week, bringing the tally since mid-March, when the coronavirus pandemic took hold, to over 40 million. Nordstrom, the top-performing department store in the United States, said on Thursday that its net sales fell 40 percent to $2 billion in the first quarter, and that it posted a net loss of $521 million. The retailer closed stores on March 17 and started reopening in early May. It said it now has about 40 percent of its locations open. Nordstrom has been working to preserve cash and said this month that it planned to permanently close 16 of its 116 full-line stores and its three Jeffrey boutiques, and to conduct a corporate restructuring that would result in savings of $150 million. On Thursday, it said it ended the quarter with about $1.4 billion in cash.The Seattle-based company operates nearly 250 off-price Nordstrom Rack stores, which compete with chains like with T.J. Maxx. The company said that digital sales accounted for more than half of its total net sales during the quarter. Last year, online sales made up about one-third of the company’s business. Nordstrom said it plans to hold its annual “Anniversary Sale” in August rather than July. Before the coronavirus pandemic, the TV networks were expecting a strong 2020. The presidential election and Tokyo Olympics would keep people watching, and companies would spend more than usual on commercial time. But with the Summer Games postponed and campaign rallies on lockdown, television advertising revenue is likely to drop 12 percent this year, according to a projection by the research firm MoffettNathanson. Networks will lose out on $25.5 billion in spending, according to a report released on Thursday by the WARC research group. Viewership is not the problem now that millions of homebound people have limited entertainment options. But the economic fallout of the pandemic has caused companies to slash TV ad budgets by more than 40 percent, according to the research firm Kantar. In response, networks have offered commercial time at double-digit discounts. Many companies have cut back on the big-budget commercial productions out of necessity, with filming largely shut down. In the first weeks of lockdown, new commercials were cobbled together out of old footage. More recently, the tone has shifted, with commercials focused on a return to normalcy and praise for essential workers. The Treasury Department said on Thursday that it is setting aside $10 billion in funds from a $660 billion small business lending program to be used only by a group of lenders that focus specifically on disadvantaged communities. The money, which Congress allocated for a coronavirus response effort known as the Paycheck Protection Program, will go to loans made by community development financial institutions. These special lenders, many of which are nonprofits, work in poor communities and often provide capital to minority-owned businesses that otherwise could not get loans. The announcement follows weeks of pressure from lawmakers, including Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the minority leader, who have been worried that minority-owned business owners were being shut out of the lending program. A spokesman for Mr. Schumer said that the senator had held numerous one-on-one phone calls with Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin to discuss the matter. “I want to thank Secretary Mnuchin for heeding our calls to set aside a pool of funding specifically designated for lending by CDFIs,” Mr. Schumer said in a statement. He said he and other lawmakers are now pushing for a separate pool of money to be reserved only for use in the program by minority-run banks. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Another 2.1 million unemployment claims were filed last week, the Labor Department reported Thursday, pushing the total past 40 million — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March. The report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless filings dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million, but the level is still far above historic highs. The latest claims may be not only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through a backlog. And overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to measure the layoffs precisely. Under the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program, Congress approved an expanded palette of jobless benefits that included freelancers, self-employed and gig workers and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But many states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the program into effect, and those eligible may not yet be fully reflected. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the Labor Department’s weekly report. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. Even now, three states have not put pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. The Trump administration will not issue a midyear update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition amid the uncertainty of a pandemic recession, officials confirmed on Thursday. The decision, first reported by The Washington Post, will spare the administration from having to reveal its internal projections for how deeply the recession will damage economic growth and how long the pain of high unemployment will persist. When the administration last published official projections in February, it forecast economic growth of 3.1 percent from the fourth quarter of 2019 to the fourth quarter of 2020, and growth rates at or around 3 percent for the ensuing decade. It forecast an unemployment rate of 3.5 percent for the year. The virus has rendered those projections obsolete. Unemployment could hit 20 percent in June, White House economic adviser Kevin Hassett told CNN this week. The Congressional Budget Office said in April that it expects the economy will contract by 5.6 percent this year and end with unemployment above 11 percent. The White House is required by law to issue both an annual budget and a midyear update to it, called a “mid-session review.” Updating economic projections in the mid-session review is optional, but it is a practice that administrations — including President Trump’s — have widely followed since the review was mandated by Congress in 1970. A senior administration official defended the decision not to publish updated forecasts, saying the economic uncertainty caused by the virus “would produce a less instructive forecast.” The official, who declined to be identified, also said the White House was under no legal obligation to release the revised forecast. The staggering unemployment figures — devastating as they are — do not fully capture the degree to which the coronavirus has disrupted professional life across the country. Since March, when the crisis began to shut businesses en masse, a generation of professionals has seen careers enter a state of suspended animation. Hiring has dried up, advancement has ceased, job searches have been put on hold and new ventures are in jeopardy. As a result, even well-connected high earners are suddenly in unfamiliar territory. “There is deep uncertainty,” said Alisa Cohn, an executive coach who works with companies including Google and Pfizer. “We’re not just in a holding pattern. We’re on our way somewhere new, but we don’t know what it looks like.” In March, Hasti Nazem, 35, left a start-up she helped found. Two months later, the job market has imploded, promising leads have dried up and she is stuck in limbo. She is mining her network for introductions, but is still without a full-time job. “I’m mostly having Zoom calls with strangers,” she said. Costco Wholesale said on Thursday that its net sales rose 7.3 percent to $36.5 billion in its quarter ending May 10 and that it posted a net profit of $838 million, as the pandemic prompted customers to stock up on goods. The warehouse chain, which has more than 500 U.S. locations, said its income took a hit from a $283 million pretax charge “from incremental wage and sanitation costs related to Covid-19.” J.C. Penney, the 118-year-old retailer that filed for bankruptcy this month, said on Thursday that it has reopened 304 of its stores, roughly one-third, and plans to have almost 500 stores open by June 3. The chain said that it was offering curbside pickup at its opened stores and special shopping hours for “at-risk customers” on Wednesdays and Fridays. The British low-price airline easyJet said on Thursday that it planned to reduce staff by up to 30 percent and that it expected to fly in the July-September period at nearly 30 percent of the capacity a year earlier. When flights restart, staff and passengers will be required to wear masks and, at least initially, no onboard food service will be offered, the company said. It wasn’t a total blackout, but for one minute on Wednesday night, a cluster of billboards in the northern section of Times Square went dark. The shut-off was designed to pressure insurance companies to cover pandemic-related losses incurred by businesses. The effort was coordinated by the Business Interruption Group, which was founded by celebrity chefs including Wolfgang Puck and Thomas Keller along with a Louisiana lawyer who has helped sue several insurers over the scope of their policies during the coronavirus crisis. The activist investor Carl Icahn sold his 55 million-share stake in the car rental giant Hertz, in what he described in a securities filing on Wednesday as a “significant loss.” The Hertz stock had traded at $15 per share for months before spiking in February and then crashing, resulting in a bankruptcy filing last week. Mr. Icahn sold the shares at $0.72 each. Nissan said on Thursday that it would close plants in Spain and Indonesia and cut global production by 20 percent as it seeks to remake itself into a smaller, more efficient automaker, an announcement that comes as it reported its first annual loss in 11 years. Reporting was contributed by Ben Casselman, Patricia Cohen, Kate Conger, Maggie Haberman, Niraj Chokshi, Ben Dooley, Sapna Maheshwari, Geneva Abdul, Mohammed Hadi, Emily Flitter, Jim Tankersley, David Gelles, David Yaffe-Bellany, Tiffany Hsu, Carlos Tejada, Katie Robertson and Gregory Schmidt.In 1786, at the beginning of what became known as Shays’ Rebellion, armed rioters shut down courthouses across western and central Massachusetts to prevent judicial proceedings on unpaid debts. In New York City, the Continental Congress sat paralyzed by debates over whether the Articles of Confederation gave it the authority to suppress the uprising. One member of that body, James Madison, later reflected that Shays’ Rebellion helped galvanize the drive for today’s Constitution by underscoring the impotence of the national government under the Articles of Confederation. In 2020, a series of demonstrations by protesters carrying semiautomatic rifles shut down the Michigan Legislature. Aggrieved by public health restrictions resulting from the coronavirus pandemic, and egged on by President Trump’s wildly irresponsible calls to “liberate” states governed by Democrats, some entered the visitors’ gallery of the State Senate and yelled at its members. Others lined up outside the office of Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, who was already the target of death threats. The Legislature adjourned to avoid further armed protests, unable or unwilling to protect its members. A commission with authority over the Capitol grounds, which was itself operating under threats, decided simply to study rather than to end the state’s ludicrous policy of allowing firearms on the premises. Rhetorically, the Michigan protesters cloaked themselves in the liberties of the same Constitution that was framed to prevent exactly what they were doing. These protests, variations on which have happened in other states, reveal not only an erroneous interpretation of the Second Amendment but also a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of constitutional government. Constitutions exist to enable the peaceful resolution of disputes. The Michigan protesters have been compared to everything from terrorists to patriots to, in Mr. Trump’s inevitable words, “very good people.” Those who used weapons to inhibit the business of government are better understood as armed rebels. In this respect, they differ in both motive and objective from the protesters raging against police violence in Minneapolis and elsewhere. The tactics of both groups have unraveled. But the complaint against police violence is against officers of the state breaking the law, not lawfully making policy in the first place. The fact that the Michigan rebels did not have to fire a shot to disrupt the duly elected government of Michigan is irrelevant. Nor does it matter whether the fantasy they were playing out was Lexington and Concord or the Wild West. There is no reasonable claim that their weapons were necessary for self-defense — unless, that is, they planned to use them against law officers. The only reason to stand over a session of the State Senate wielding military-grade weapons is to intimidate its members, a goal in which the rebels succeeded. The problem is partly a misreading of the Second Amendment, whose purpose is not to maintain a low-grade revolutionary fever lest the government abuse its powers. Far from it: The reason for the Constitution was to prevent a resort to violence in politics. The Second Amendment’s primary goal, which the Supreme Court’s modern jurisprudence has written out of it, was to avert the need for a standing army, although it is also true that the founding generation believed a disarmed populace would encourage tyranny by making rebellion impossible. Regardless, the Michigan rebellion reveals something deeper. By its nature, a constitution cannot contain the means of its own disintegration. The Union victory in the Civil War confirmed Abraham Lincoln’s assertion in his first inaugural: “Perpetuity is implied, if not expressed, in the fundamental law of all national governments. It is safe to assert that no government proper, ever had a provision in its organic law for its own termination.” Lincoln’s deeper claim, building on the observations of the founding generation, was that the Constitution could not be destroyed “except by some action not provided for in the instrument itself.” The key insight, which deprives the Michigan rebels of the constitutional mantle in which they wrapped themselves, is this: Armed insurrection may be justified by the most unbearable tyranny. Whether social distancing measures during a pandemic qualify as oppression worthy of rebellion is a separate, and dubious, question. Lincoln’s point was that taking up arms against a constitutional government, regardless of its behavior, is inherently an extraconstitutional act. Madison understood this, too. In 1835, after South Carolina’s preposterous claim that it could nullify a federal tariff provoked a national political crisis, Madison offered a series of legitimate remedies for government abuse. The first, he wrote, was the constitutional system of checks and balances itself. Failing that, the abusive government could be unseated by election. The Constitution could also be amended. But the “final course” — revolution — “must be a subject of calculation in which the degree of its oppression, the means of resistance, the consequences of its failure, and consequences of its success must be the elements.” In other words, revolt inherently entails exiting the constitutional order, not claiming its protections. John Locke, whose rhetorical influence is evident in the Declaration of Independence, called rebellion “an appeal to heaven,” not a constitutional act. Locke acknowledged that, within the boundaries of civil society, “the majority have a right to act and conclude the rest.” That did not mean a majority or a government elected by it was always right. It simply meant that, in the end, the choices were to accept the constituted authority or to rebel against it. As Edmund Burke put it, “Men cannot enjoy the benefits of an uncivil and of a civil state together.” There is a competing tradition of American thought. Thomas Jefferson, serving as American minister to Paris, felt the Constitutional Convention had overreacted to Shays’ Rebellion: “The tree of liberty must be refreshed from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants,” he wrote in November 1787, as the proposed Constitution was pending before the states. “It is its natural manure.” Such a rebellion would be necessary, he offered, at least every 20 years. That is better poetry than political thought. Jefferson was stuck in a revolutionary mind-set when the nation whose independence he helped declare had moved on to the challenges of governing. Constitutions are formed precisely to avoid the kind of routine bloodshed Jefferson celebrated. Without public authority, Thomas Hobbes famously noted, life was “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.” Hobbes concluded that authoritarianism was the only alternative to anarchy. Anglo-American constitutionalism proceeded elsewhere. But Hobbes’s basic point that one must ultimately choose between the protection of civil society and the risk of rebellion maintains its lineage through Locke to Madison and Lincoln. The question in Michigan and other scenes of armed protests against coronavirus restrictions is not whether states have struck the proper balance between public health and other considerations. Nor is it even whether governments have exceeded their legitimate authority. The question the would-be rebels must answer is whether social-distancing measures are so tyrannical that they are willing to take the extraconstitutional step of rebellion. They can either claim or relinquish the Constitution’s protections. They cannot have both. Greg Weiner (@GregWeiner1) is a political scientist at Assumption College, a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute and the author of “The Political Constitution: The Case Against Judicial Supremacy.” The Times is committed to publishing a diversity of letters to the editor. We’d like to hear what you think about this or any of our articles. Here are some tips. And here’s our email: letters@nytimes.com. Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook, Twitter (@NYTopinion) and Instagram.WASHINGTON — A day before his visit in May to Michigan, where unemployment has climbed to 23 percent and flooding had grown severe enough to make national headlines, President Trump threatened to “hold up funding” for a state he almost certainly must carry to win re-election. The rationale behind this extraordinary warning and apparent act of self-sabotage? Two years after Michigan residents overwhelmingly approved no-excuse absentee voting, the secretary of state, Jocelyn Benson, a Democrat, said she would send absentee ballot applications to all voters. Mr. Trump, signaling a willingness to wield the power of the federal government on behalf of his political interest, claimed such a distribution of applications was a “rogue” and “illegal” act that would lead to mass voter fraud. Even before the coronavirus infected more than 56,000 residents and left it with the second-worst unemployment rate in the country, Michigan was shaping up to be the most difficult state for Mr. Trump to win a second time. Now his prospects there appear dimmer — in part because of his own conduct. Michigan amounts to a one-state case study on how Mr. Trump’s impulsiveness, inattention to detail and penchant for personal insults have eroded his political standing and diminished his chances to win re-election. In addition to his ultimatum over federal funding, Mr. Trump has ridiculed a half-dozen of the state’s female leaders, proposed cutting support for the Great Lakes and suggested a beloved former lawmaker from Michigan is in hell. Even as the state moved aggressively to contain the coronavirus outbreak, Mr. Trump encouraged the types of protests that broke out in Michigan against the economic lockdown. And on Friday, the Trump administration weighed in against Gov. Gretchen Whitmer, a Democrat who is among those being vetted as a potential running mate for Joseph R. Biden Jr., in a lawsuit brought by some Michigan businesses over the lockdown imposed by the governor to deal with the coronavirus pandemic. The Justice Department said it would support the suit, calling some of the constraints that Ms. Whitmer had imposed on the economy “arbitrary and irrational,” even though most of the restrictions have already been lifted. “He’s singularly focused on energizing his base,” said former Representative David Trott, a Republican from suburban Detroit who did not seek re-election two years ago in part because of discomfort with Mr. Trump. “It worked in 2016 for him, but if I was advising him I’d say, ‘Look, you had the perfect storm in 2016.’” But the president’s assault on Democrats in the state also illuminates how his threats to use the powers of his office on his campaign’s behalf often amount to little more than bluster, a bullying tactic that is not without short-term effect but in the end only unites and energizes his opponents. In Michigan’s case, the state continues to receive its share of stimulus money and supplies needed to combat the virus, and the president’s scorched-earth tactics have brought him no apparent political benefit. Every public poll in Michigan indicates the president is trailing in the state, and some Democrats believe it ultimately may not be very close there. “You don’t win Oakland County by aligning yourself with men toting guns at the State Capitol and threatening to withhold federal funding in the time of a pandemic,” said Lon Johnson, a former state Democratic chair, alluding to the affluent suburbs outside Detroit. Part of the president’s difficulties in the state are structural: Michigan is a Democratic-leaning state in federal elections, it has more black and college-educated voters than some other Midwestern battlegrounds and its manufacturing-heavy economy has been especially hard-hit by a virus that spreads in confined work areas. To be sure, he still retains an intense following, in Michigan and in every competitive state, and profound questions remain about how Mr. Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee, will stand up to the president’s anything-to-win tactics. Mr. Trump’s encouragement of demonstrators demanding faster action in reopening the economy in May helped spur on protesters in Michigan, some armed, leading at one point to the closing of the Capitol. Mr. Trump’s advisers have nudged him to focus on his success in pushing through the renegotiated trade pact with Mexico and Canada, which has benefits for the auto industry and, were he to make it more of an issue, could help him with working-class voters in Michigan. And they are hoping that the presence on the ballot in Michigan this year of John James, an African-American Republican who is running for a U.S. Senate seat, could peel away some black voters from Democrats. Indeed, Mr. Trump’s decision to include Mr. James at an ostensibly nonpolitical round table with black Michiganders at a Ford plant in May angered prominent state Democrats, according to Democratic officials. Michigan, however, offers a vivid illustration of how Mr. Trump can be his own worst political enemy. He delights in headline-grabbing and often menacing attacks but rarely follows through with the punishment he threatens, leaving him looking more like a peanut gallery heckler than a political force to be feared. That was true in the case of the clash in May. Hours after threatening to defund Michigan, Mr. Trump told reporters, “I don’t think it’s going to be necessary” and, speaking to the news media in the state the next day, said he was “not going to discuss” what funds he had in mind. Similarly, after insulting Ms. Whitmer as “half Whitmer” and “the woman in Michigan” while suggesting to Vice President Mike Pence that he ignore her calls entirely, Mr. Trump himself quietly telephoned her to ensure that a shipment of personal protective equipment had arrived in the state. This pattern of attack-and-retreat instills little fear in his adversaries, reinforces negative perceptions about him among voters (who often only hear of the threats) and hands Democrats fodder for their own reprisals. In an interview, Ms. Whitmer sought to turn Mr. Trump’s attacks to Democratic advantage, suggesting that the citizens of her state could be hurt because of Mr. Trump’s contempt for her. “Certainly, the concern that the people of Michigan might be punished because someone isn’t a fan of mine is an unfortunate concern that we have to have right now,” Ms. Whitmer said. Influential Michigan Republicans are growing alarmed by the president’s prospects and have taken steps to steer him away from what they acknowledge is his self-defeating conduct. Lee Chatfield, the speaker of the State House, said he would like to see a better partnership between the state and federal government in dealing with the coronavirus crisis. “I want both the governor and the president to be successful and I’ve made that very clear to him,” Mr. Chatfield said. “The closer we partner together and communicate, the more successful Michigan will be.” Representative Fred Upton, the longest-serving member of Michigan’s congressional delegation, has also sought to defuse tensions between Mr. Trump and Ms. Whitmer. “We don’t need finger jabbing because it’s only going to hurt people across the state,” Mr. Upton said. He and other Michigan Republicans have repeatedly urged the White House to focus on slowing the virus and rebuilding the economy but have been dismayed by his repeated return to taunts, insults and conspiracy theories. Mr. Upton said that after Mr. Trump continued to accuse the MSNBC anchor Joe Scarborough of killing a woman who worked for him when he was a Republican member of Congress, he sent a text message to Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff. “I said, ‘Maybe it sells in North Carolina, it doesn’t win Michigan,’” Mr. Upton recalled. Mr. Trump’s advisers recognize the importance of the state. That’s why they set up an event during his visit in May aimed at two Democratic-leaning constituencies, union workers and African-Americans. Among those at the Ford plant round-table with black community leaders was Karen Whitsett, a Democratic state lawmaker who contracted the coronavirus but has been shunned by her own party for appearing with Mr. Trump in April at the White House and echoing his endorsement of the antimalarial drug hydroxychloroquine. Ms. Whitsett said Mr. Trump had telephoned her after her visit to ask how she was doing, and how he could help her district, while his son-in-law, Jared Kushner, did the same after the meeting in Michigan. By contrast, she said she had never heard from Mr. Biden despite having endorsed his candidacy, and she is now uncertain whom she will vote for. Yet Mr. Trump has regularly undermined his broader outreach efforts. His attacks on former President Barack Obama, who won two decisive victories in the state, demeaning descriptions of women and immigrant communities and playing down of the coronavirus, which has disproportionately affected both African-Americans and older adults, “describes about 70 percent of Michigan’s population,” said Representative Dan Kildee, a Democrat from Flint. Mr. Trump seems to have almost gone out of his way to target high-profile Michigan women. In addition to his attacks on Ms. Whitmer and Ms. Benson, he has targeted the chief executive of General Motors, Mary T. Barra (“a mess”), Attorney General Dana Nessel (“wacky”), Representative Rashida Tlaib (who is of Palestinian descent and is part of “the squad,” who Mr. Trump said should “go back” to their native countries) and Representative Debbie Dingell. Mr. Trump has repeatedly sought to humiliate Ms. Dingell by insisting she did not fully appreciate his efforts to honor her husband, former Representative John D. Dingell, who died last year. And shortly before Christmas last year, at a rally in Michigan, the president mocked Ms. Dingell at length and suggested that Mr. Dingell might be “looking up.” His comments prompted bipartisan condemnation, including from Mr. Upton, who said he told the president he needed the sort of union autoworkers who formed the core of Mr. Dingell’s coalition. Ms. Dingell said Mr. Trump never apologized to her. Largely detached from the details of policymaking, he inflicted a wound on himself by proposing budgets that nearly eliminate federal spending on Great Lakes restoration, a bipartisan priority in the state. Mr. Trump reversed course once the state’s congressional delegation buttonholed him on the issue, but Democrats still have ready-made material on an issue dear to the heart of many Michiganders. A number of Michigan Republicans believe the president can still carry the state. Their faith stems in part from how he defied the odds, and some late polls, four years ago to become the first Republican to win Michigan in nearly three decades, even if it was by the smallest of margins: 10,704 votes out of 4.8 million votes cast. “He was underestimated in 2016 and he’s being underestimated now,” said John Truscott, a longtime Michigan Republican strategist. “The heavy pall of Covid over everything right now will be much different by the fall and how the country comes out of this will be a big determining factor.” How Mr. Trump is perceived to have led the country in the crisis, however, will be central. And if he does not change his divisive behavior, voters may render their own verdict as much on him as on the impact of the virus. “There is a tremendous hunger for honest differences of opinion that don’t devolve into personal attacks,” said Rich Studley, the chief of the Republican-leaning Michigan Chamber of Commerce. “We need bold and sincere, thoughtful and caring leadership. I don’t think only negative messages will play very well at all.” Jonathan Martin reported from Washington, and Kathleen Gray from Lansing, Mich., and Detroit. Maggie Haberman contributed reporting from New York.To the Editor: “Don’t Bail Out the States,” by Scott Walker (Op-Ed, May 21), ignores the fact that state and local budget shortfalls will exacerbate the nation’s unemployment situation and prolong the nation’s economic recovery. This isn’t just the view of America’s cities, towns and villages. The Fed chair, Jerome Powell, recently affirmed that “state and local government layoffs and lack of hiring did weigh on economic growth” during the last financial crisis. Without direct federal assistance, history is poised to repeat itself. Now more than ever, municipal governments need direct federal aid to stabilize local government operations, keep workers on the job, facilitate the reopening of America and jump start the national economic recovery. There is a growing bipartisan consensus that supporting local communities, which stand to lose over $360 billion in revenues over the next three years, is essential as our nation begins to reopen economies that have been devastated because of Covid-19 shutdowns. These shutdowns were bipartisan in nature, and the solution needs to be bipartisan as well. Joe BuscainoLos AngelesThe writer is president of the National League of Cities and president pro tempore of the Los Angeles City Council. To the Editor: Scott Walker’s reckless agenda would risk more lives, hurt kids and hamper our ability to open the economy. And his rosy picture of his record in Wisconsin doesn’t match reality. As governor, Mr. Walker decimated funding for public schools and colleges, cut health care, and tried to destroy unions in favor of big tax cuts for the rich and corporations. An Economic Policy Institute study found that states like Wisconsin that followed this strategy delayed their recovery from the Great Recession by four years. Federal aid to states, cities, towns and public schools is critical to protect the health, education, safety and essential services of our communities, to keep front-line workers on the job and to safely reopen our economy. A national poll by Hart Research shows that 84 percent of voters favor this kind of federal investment. About 40 million people are already unemployed. If we fail to provide states and cities with much-needed aid, they will be forced to lay off millions more, throwing the economy into a depression. Scott Walker’s agenda might be embraced by President Trump, Mitch McConnell and wealthy interests, but it would cripple communities and decimate any chance at recovery. Randi WeingartenNew YorkThe writer is president of the American Federation of Teachers.Patrick Kingsley, an international correspondent, and Laetitia Vancon, a photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles to explore the reopening of the European continent after coronavirus lockdowns. Read all their dispatches. PRAGUE — To attend her first play in more than two months, Marie Reslova, a prominent Czech theater critic, drove into Prague, headed to a large vegetable market, parked next to a convertible sports car and switched off her engine. Soon, actors from the Czech National Theater strode onto a platform a few yards from Ms. Reslova’s windshield. The play had begun. And she hadn’t even left her car. The Czech Republic enforced tighter restrictions than most European countries to combat the coronavirus pandemic. For several weeks, Czechs were barred even from jogging without a mask. Even after the government eased that restriction, masks were still mandatory in most other public contexts. But the country also loosened the lockdown earlier than most — and that has made it a laboratory for how arts and culture can adapt to a context in which some restrictions on social life have been lifted, while others remain in place. The drive-in theater at Prague’s vegetable market was an ambitious example. To circumvent restrictions on public gatherings, audience members watched plays, concerts and comedy from behind their steering wheels — in a monthlong program that ended with a variety act by the National Theater last Sunday evening, attended by Ms. Reslova. Across Europe, drive-ins have become a familiar means of circumventing pandemic restrictions. By default, cars keep their occupants socially distanced, leading even nightclub owners and priests to set up drive-in discos and churches. Though considered a gimmick at first, their proliferation suggests they could become a common feature of society at least until the development of vaccines and treatments for the coronavirus. But that will probably have ramifications for both the environment and the quality of cultural events. At times, the drive-in theater felt more like a traffic jam than a work of drama. When the audience members wanted to applaud, they honked their horns. When it started to drizzle, they flicked on their windshield wipers. And to hear the actors, they hooked their car speakers to a portable radio provided by the organizers. It was theater, but not quite as Ms. Reslova remembered it. Not that she minded — initially, at least. Before the lockdown, she watched three or four plays in person a week. During the lockdown, she had seen theater only on the internet. “I don’t have to watch this online!” she said cheerily through her car window, before the show started. The couple in the convertible beside her, a pair of marketing executives, were equally excited. But standing at the back, having sneaked in on foot, a Czech photographer was more circumspect. Delighted as he was that there was at least something to watch, David Konecny wondered how the performers would foster that sense of shared experience and connection that he feels is so central to live theater. Otherwise, Mr. Konecny feared, “it’s just people in their cars, sitting in their bubbles.” For the actors, the experience was a strange mix of exhilaration at performing again after a long pause — and eeriness. Peter Vancura, one of the performers that night, at first felt nervous stepping onstage, confronted not by faces and frowns, but the hoods of 30 cars. But then he noticed he could make out some people’s expressions through the windshield, and even see their smiles. “It’s not so bad!” he said backstage. “Not so unconnected.” The project was dreamed up in late March by Karel Kratochvil, an actor with a children’s theater company who couldn’t stand how the lockdown had laid waste to all forms of cultural life, including his own productions. Just as doctors care for people’s medical health, he felt a duty to care for people’s emotional well-being. “To me, an actor is not a job, it’s something higher,” Mr. Kratochvil said. “It means taking some responsibility for society.” To that end, Mr. Kratochvil initially put on his own one-man show, declaiming literary excerpts from a small boat moored under a famous medieval footbridge in central Prague. But only one person showed up, sending Mr. Kratochvil back to the drawing board. A few days later, he woke up with a brand-new idea. What if people could attend a drive-in play, just as they might see a film at a drive-in cinema? Mr. Kratochvil can’t actually drive, but that was just a detail. Within days he had founded “Art Parking,” a festival that ended up including both the drive-in theater and a drive-in cinema a few miles across town. Mr. Kratochvil invited several theaters to participate, from small independent outfits to the state-funded National Theater last Sunday night. There were also folk singers and classical violinists, rock guitarists and chanson singers. By the end of the month, 11,000 people had attended 28 performances. At first it was unclear whether the artists would need to speak or sing through masks, since they were working in public and the law technically required them to cover their mouths and noses. But at the first performance, the singer decided at the last minute to go without. The police did not intervene, and a precedent was set. For Tomas Dianiska, a comic playwright who performed his own play earlier in the festival, his show had been an important human experience, but not one he hopes will need to be repeated any time soon. “We came to the stage, and said ‘hello’ to these cars,” Mr. Dianiska remembered. “You can’t see the people — they’re using klaxons instead of laughing.” “Better than nothing,” he summarized. “A good experience to tell people about in the pub, but not for theater.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The artistic quality was varied, Mr. Kratochvil happily acknowledged. But that was beside the point, he said. The goal was to keep the cultural world ticking along and to maintain at least some form of human interaction, rather than to aim for virtuosity. “My thought was: We have to show how living art will never die,” he said. And since the lockdown eased significantly the morning after the festival ended — Czechs need no longer wear masks outdoors — the process had now served its purpose. “There’s no more need for this,” Mr. Kratochvil said. “And I’m glad about that.” And so it seemed was Ms. Reslova, who drove off disappointed. “Terrible,” said her companion, shouting through the car window as they left the car park following the performance. “That’s all we have to say.” Ms. Reslova later emailed to clarify that she had appreciated the concept of the festival itself, but not the National Theater’s variety show. While smaller theater groups had opted to perform entire plays, the National Theater’s submission was a messy collection of excerpts from various different plays — from Faust to Oedipus — and it didn’t really hang together, Ms. Reslova reckoned. But the couple in the convertible had a very different reaction, ecstatic to be back among other people at a cultural event. “It was a great pleasure,” said Jan Bezpalec, a marketing consultant. “Something that you just can’t get through the internet.” There was just one problem, he said. All the honking had taken its toll. His car battery was out of juice.Once more, the pronouncements arrived in a torrent, though this time they were about rebirth rather than cancellation. The N.B.A. was planning to start up again in late July. The N.H.L. announced a playoff tournament would take place through the summer. Major League Baseball was continuing negotiations with its players for a shortened season. The N.F.L. was moving toward opening training facilities. Soccer leagues for both men and women in North America were working toward finalizing plans for summer tournaments. Top-tier soccer leagues in England, Italy and Spain announced they would resume play in June. After months filled with pessimism, hesitation, quiet planning and uncertainty about whether major sports would happen again in 2020, nearly every sport was preparing to come back, provided that work agreements with players could be negotiated and that public health authorities raised no objections. Player representatives, league officials, lawyers and business consultants who work closely with them say the sudden shift resulted from a mix of dramatic changes few could foresee a month ago. There has been an increase in the availability of testing, which has allowed some of the leagues, like many other businesses, to secure all the kits they believe they need. There were also far more mundane developments. Lisa Baird, commissioner of the National Women’s Soccer League, said a final linchpin for her league’s plan was gaining approval from its insurance company. “Science has advanced,” Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, wrote Wednesday in an email. “We know more than what we did before, and just speaking personally, my expectation is that science will continue to progress forward with therapies, testing and vaccines. I’m actually more optimistic about a vaccine coming early than what others expect.” Not everyone is as bullish as Cuban about the prospects for a vaccine, with most experts saying one won’t be widely available until at least early next year. And while the coronavirus curve has flattened and testing has increased both nationally and in the hardest-hit areas, it remains below a level that some epidemiologists say is needed to help mitigate future outbreaks. But with reopening plans underway in all 50 states and with elected officials and the public anxious for business activity to resume, league officials had a growing sense that there would be minimal opposition if they moved ahead with plans. Also, people who work closely with the leagues and team owners said, the financial consequences of not returning, potentially billions of dollars in losses across the leagues, made trying to come back vital. “The economics of missing an entire season are just really, really bad,” said Irwin Raij, co-chairman of the sports law practice at O’Melveny & Myers, who is in constant contact with numerous team officials and owners. Finally, while certain players have expressed concerns about their safety, especially those with compromised immune systems, most are like any other furloughed worker who wants to return to work and get paid, even if that means doing so without the usual comforts of the job. “We are all going to have to be a little less judgmental,” said Alison Riske, a tennis player who participated in a four-player event last weekend on a private court in the backyard of an estate in Florida, without her usual support team. “We have to roll with the punches.” J.C. Tretter, the Cleveland Browns center who is president of the N.F.L. Players Association, said the desire to get back was strong, so long as it could happen safely. “We all love playing football,” Tretter said Friday from Cleveland. “We also love our teammates and our families.” Regardless of the dire financial consequences the leagues were facing, none would have been able to pursue plans to reopen without the promise of fast, widespread testing. For two months, league officials could not talk seriously about acquiring the necessary tests without giving the impression that their needs were more important than the general public’s. During the last two weeks, as testing became more widely available, even in the cities the virus has hit the hardest, such as New York, that concern has diminished. One top sports industry executive, who speaks regularly with the leaders of all the major sports, said the N.B.A. had already secured enough tests to screen all of the players as often as they want. An N.B.A. official, who asked not to be identified because the league’s comeback process is still evolving, confirmed that the testing hurdle had been largely cleared. Baird said she had finally felt comfortable moving forward when medical experts signed off on an N.W.S.L. plan to test players before they arrive for the tournament in Utah, again when they show up, and then at least weekly during the monthlong competition. Brian McCarthy, a spokesman for the N.F.L., said the league was still working on its testing process and securing the necessary kits. As the major leagues waited for the right moment, they watched NASCAR hold races, golf stage two charity events, European soccer return and tennis pull off a backyard round-robin. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. With the United States largely reopening in recent days, the governors of California and New York, the largest states to impose extensive stay-at-home orders, said they would consider sports events without fans, giving hope to league officials.  Even without the expense of having to stage games and pay players, teams need some revenue to cover fixed costs. Some owners have borrowed hundreds of millions of dollars to acquire their teams or to build stadiums. The Mets, for instance, pay roughly $50 million annually toward construction debt on Citi Field. Stan Kroenke, who owns the Los Angeles Rams, as well as the N.B.A. and N.H.L. teams in Denver, earlier this month borrowed an additional $500 million from the N.F.L.’s stadium fund, in part to finance the continuing construction of a football stadium in Inglewood, Calif., that is scheduled to open this year. According to people familiar with its plans, the N.F.L. is weighing a series of scenarios in which it plays with no fans, or with stadiums at varying levels of spectator capacity. McCarthy, the N.F.L. spokesman, said league was “preparing to play the 2020 N.F.L. season as scheduled and with increased protocols and safety measures for all players, personnel and attendees.” He said health was the league’s “primary focus.” Playing without fans would hardly be a panacea. Gate revenues, concessions and other money that fans spend at games account for roughly 25 percent of the N.F.L.’s $15 billion in revenue. Baseball collects about one-third of its $11 billion from the gate. But getting the games on television will generate at least some cash flow — and plenty of attention before fans decide to invest their passion and their disposable income elsewhere. “You can offset some losses, but this is about going beyond 2020,” Raij said. “They need to keep the fans engaged.”The stock market has been erratic, real estate is hurting, bond yields are painfully low and dividends are shrinking. In the coronavirus recession, most financial assets have been disturbingly volatile. But one widely held financial asset, perhaps the most important one for the vast majority of Americans, has performed splendidly: their stake in Social Security. It hasn’t merely been a solid support for millions of people in a difficult time. While the income-producing power of so many other assets has been sapped by economic weakness and low interest rates, Social Security payments have held steady. And thanks to those rock-bottom interest rates, the market value of the Social Security income stream has soared in a measurable way. You may not think of Social Security as a personal asset, like a bank account, a portfolio of stocks and bonds or a house. But Social Security retirement benefits are a kind of annuity, as I’ll explain, and annuities have a definite market value. Considered this way, Social Security’s value has been rising. Even if you aren’t receiving payments now, you have a stake in the asset, and it is in your interest to protect it. “The most important financial asset for most Americans by far is Social Security,” said William J. Bernstein, a financial adviser and author on financial subjects. “We are in a retirement crisis, and the only foreseeable answer is Social Security.” Perhaps if more people understood the impressive, countercyclical performance of their share in Social Security, there would be more clamor to protect it. But critical as the benefits are proving to be in this crisis, as in so many others, the entire Social Security system faces a cash shortfall down the road, and it needs help from Congress. The pandemic has complicated these long-term issues, which can be resolved only in Washington. First, consider the good news. In the coronavirus crisis, Social Security has succeeded in doing just what it was designed to do: keeping old people, disabled people and their dependents out of dire poverty, and providing a retirement cushion for nearly everyone else. About 178 million working people of all ages are covered by Social Security, government statistics show. Even if those people are not eligible for benefits now, they will be entitled to them later. Plenty of people are already getting them, however: About 65 million Americans will receive more than $1 trillion this year. That includes nine out of 10 of those 65 and older, as well as millions of disabled people, dependents and survivors. With more than 100,000 Covid-19 deaths in America and millions of people financially desperate, a program that supplies regular income to so many can surely be said to be more valuable than ever. But I concede that is a subjective judgment. The program has also risen in value in a measurable way that may not be intuitively obvious. This is a little wonky, so bear with me. Financial markets put a price on almost everything, and they can provide an approximate cash value for Social Security, too. Your benefits, now or in the future, accrue gradually, over years of work and paying taxes into the Social Security system. But as I pointed out recently, low interest rates have reduced bond yields and made commercial annuities extremely expensive. With the help of Dale Kintzel, a former Social Security economist who studied its pricing in a 2017 paper, I’ve checked the market values of annuities and compared them with Social Security. Those federal retirement benefits are essentially annuities: bonds wrapped in insurance. So-called single-premium immediate annuities — in which an insurance company will provide you with income,  in exchange for a sum of cash — can’t do everything Social Security does, but they come close. Mr. Kintzel has used annuities to approximate the cash value of Social Security benefits. Those values are startlingly high. Mr. Kintzel found that for the average 65-year-old man, who last year received a retirement benefit of $1,375 a month, an annuity supplying that lifetime cash flow would cost at least $459,866 — 13 percent more than a comparable annuity in 2014. For a 65-year-old woman, the average monthly benefit was $1,102 last year. A comparable commercial annuity, Mr. Kintzel said, would cost $368,562. These figures are based on data from immediateannuities.com, which tracks annuity prices. These are just average amounts and would be much bigger — perhaps as much as $1 million — for high-income people who delay claiming benefits until they are 70, my own calculations suggest. Note that all of these estimates understate the value of Social Security, which provides disability benefits and supplemental income in addition to basic retirement benefits. And these estimates don’t take into account the effects of the further decline in interest rates since the beginning of this year, which have reduced income streams from many assets, but not for Social Security. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Perhaps the best thing about Social Security is that unlike a stock portfolio, it can be counted on, Mr. Kintzel said. “It is backed by the government, and so it’s virtually risk-free, or it should be. I’ve always thought that Social Security is one thing that everybody can agree on. It’s a good thing.” Yet Social Security continues to have an odd problem. Although its stability has been among its greatest virtues, it remains underfunded. I pointed out a year ago that Social Security benefit payouts were greater than the system’s revenues. That is still true. To receive all of the benefits you have been promised, a reluctant Congress will need to fix Social Security, which is likely to dip into the principal of its trust funds for the first time this year. Interest payments from the trust funds have made up the gap, allowing full benefits until now. Without help from Congress, these trust funds, are likely to be exhausted within 15 years — and perhaps sooner. If that were to happen, benefits would be cut, perhaps to 79 percent of the promised levels, Social Security estimates. In an online conference in late April, Stephen C. Goss, Social Security’s chief actuary, said that the current recession would almost certainly reduce the system’s payroll tax receipts and could lead to trust fund depletion by 2033 or even sooner. Precise estimates are impossible now, with the economy shrinking so rapidly, he said. “All bets are off, and we will just have to see what happens, because we really don’t know whether we’ll be back to normal,” Mr. Goss said. As a matter of basic math, Social Security needs more revenue or lower expenses. But I think this recession suggests that increasing revenue is the way to go, because Social Security benefits have been so crucial. If they were to be cut, even bigger rescue programs would be needed from other sources. Far better to maintain and improve Social Security, which works automatically and well. Last year, I said that the most important thing you could probably do to improve your personal finances was to make sure that Congress took action to bolster the program’s funding. That’s even truer today, when its benefits are more valuable, and more badly needed.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.More than 40 million people — the equivalent of one out of every four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the coronavirus pandemic grabbed hold in mid-March, the government reported on Thursday, an astounding tally that rivals the bleakest years of the Great Depression. The latest additions — the 2.1 million people who filed state unemployment claims last week — may not be only a result of fresh layoffs, but also evidence that states are working their way through some of the choking backlog. “We’re still catching up,” Diane Swonk, chief economist at the accounting firm Grant Thornton, said of the newest claims. “The lags have been long.” The Labor Department report marks the eighth week in a row that new jobless claims, on a seasonally adjusted basis, dipped from the peak of almost 6.9 million — but the level is still far above any other historical highs. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times At the same time, overcounting in some places and undercounting in others makes it difficult to precisely measure the number of layoffs caused by the pandemic — and in devising a policy response. “When we think about what to do when benefits expire, it would be helpful to know how many people are actually getting them,” said Elizabeth Pancotti, a research assistant at the National Bureau of Economic Research. While the Labor Department reports may be the best source of information, she said, they offer an “incomplete picture.” Shelter-in-place orders and business restrictions have been lifting across the country, and there is evidence in the report that some workers are being called back: The number of people receiving state jobless benefits dropped by roughly 3.8 million to 21.1 million for the week ended May 16. But as Ms. Swonk noted, “it’s not enough to offset the extraordinary economic devastation and job losses associated with Covid-19.” And while rehiring certainly accounts for a chunk of that decline, workers who had exhausted their weekly state benefits would also be reflected. Reopenings remain bumpy and incomplete, and flare-ups of the coronavirus continue to disrupt business. On Tuesday, Ford Motor temporarily halted production at the Kansas City assembly plant in Missouri to deep clean after an employee tested positive for the virus. Two other Ford plants — in Chicago and Dearborn, Mich. — were also temporarily closed. In Thursday’s report, the department offered two sets of figures. One includes the more than 40 million people who have applied for state benefits and is seasonally adjusted. The other includes those who applied under the new federal emergency program called Pandemic Unemployment Assistance and is not seasonally adjusted. So far, more than 10 million have applied. Pandemic Unemployment Assistance, part of an expanded palette of jobless benefits passed by Congress two months ago, is meant to help freelancers, gig workers, the self-employed and others who would not normally qualify under state rules. But several economists suspect that there is a lot of double counting and warn against simply adding figures from the two programs together. Some states, flooded with applicants, were slow to put the pandemic program into effect. Initially, many people were mistakenly told they were ineligible. Others were instructed to apply for state benefits first and be rejected before applying for the federal benefits. That confused application process has caused potentially millions of laid-off workers to be counted twice. States are also weeding out duplicate applications from frustrated filers who had trouble getting through or did not receive any response after weeks of waiting. Then there are the mistakes. A data entry slip-up caused Massachusetts to pump up the number of federal claims by nearly a million last week. The previous week, a similar flub in Connecticut mistakenly inflated its total by a quarter of a million. “It’s unclear if states are including duplicate claims due to error, fraud or the Pandemic Unemployment Assistance program,” said Ernie Tedeschi, a policy economist at Evercore ISI in Washington. But that is not all. That system is also probably missing millions of other laid-off workers. As of Tuesday, three states had not put the pandemic unemployment insurance program into effect, and several others have yet to report any claims. Thirteen states have not started another federal emergency relief program, to provide an additional 13 weeks of benefits to workers who have exhausted their state benefits. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Laid-off workers who have not applied for benefits and those who have left the labor force entirely are not included in the claims numbers. Nor are any of the eight million undocumented workers who lost their jobs. They are not eligible for any benefits. Neither are new graduates just entering the labor force. Matthew Wilson, 24, who lost his barista job in Philadelphia, was turned down because he had been working in the state for less than a year. “It doesn’t make any sense — I moved, and now I’m magically not qualified for unemployment?” said Mr. Wilson, who relocated to Pennsylvania after graduating from Tufts University in Massachusetts last year. He appealed the decision and heard last week that his claim had been approved, but he hasn’t received any money. His partner, who also lost her job as a barista, has applied four times but has yet to collect benefits. As for regular unemployment benefits, states draw up their own rules and administer benefits. The result is that in some places, like Florida, Texas and Arizona, only a small fraction of jobless workers are receiving benefits, while other states offer much broader coverage. The way “initial claims” are counted may also vary by state, with some excluding claims that have not been processed. Laurie Yadoff, a lawyer at Coast to Coast Legal Aid of South Florida, said she had about 100 clients who qualify for regular state benefits but have had trouble filing. Many are poor and older, with limited or no access to the internet. “A lot of them fall into the regular state benefit program, and a lot of them are straightforward, and a lot of them are still not getting money,” she said. Even when Ms. Yadoff has been able to get someone on the phone, the person at the other end often doesn’t know the answer. “People are desperate and frustrated,” she said. “They don’t know what to do.” Monitoring withdrawals from the Treasury Department, Mr. Tedeschi of Evercore estimated that by early May, roughly three-quarters of those eligible for benefits had started to receive them. Allison Hester, who is 50 and lives in Little Rock, Ark., applied for unemployment after being laid off from her job in content marketing at a window cleaning supply company in March, but was never able to get through. “I tried on and off for a month, but our system was so overwhelmed.” She returned to her job this month. “It feels good, but I don’t feel secure anymore,” Ms. Hester said. “I don’t take anything for granted.” Nelson D. Schwartz and Tiffany Hsu contributed reporting.This article was reported and written in collaboration with The Markup, a nonprofit newsroom investigating technology’s effects on society. Burglary and domestic assault in Minnesota. Selling meth and jumping bail in Kentucky. Driving without insurance in Arkansas. Disorderly conduct. Theft. Lying to a police officer. Unspecified “crimes.” Too many narcotics charges to count. That’s what the landlord for an apartment in St. Helens, Ore., saw when he ran a background check for Samantha Johnson, a prospective tenant, in 2018. But none of the charges were hers. The growing data economy and the rise of American rentership since the 2008 financial crisis have fueled a rapid expansion of the tenant screening industry, now valued at $1 billion. The companies produce cheap and fast — but not necessarily accurate — reports for an estimated nine out of 10 landlords across the country. The automated background check for Ms. Johnson cast a wide net, looking for negative information from criminal databases even in states where she had never lived and pulling in records for women whose middle names, races and dates of birth didn’t match her own. It combined criminal records from five other women: four Samantha Johnsons and a woman who had used the name as an alias, even though the screening report said she was an “active inmate” in a Kentucky jail at the time. “You can totally tell we’re not the same person at all,” said Ms. Johnson, who eventually got the apartment after she convinced the landlord she wasn’t a criminal. It was not the first time she had been the victim of incorrect automated screening reports. It wouldn’t be the last, either. The reports can be created in a few seconds, using searches based on partial names or incomplete dates of birth. Tenants generally have no choice but to submit to the screenings and typically pay an application fee for the privilege. Automated reports are usually delivered to landlords without a human ever glancing at the results to see if they contain obvious mistakes, according to court records and interviews. A review of hundreds of federal lawsuits filed against screening companies over the past 10 years shows how hasty, sloppy matches can lead to reports that wrongly label people deadbeats, criminals or sex offenders. Among those who say they were wrongly maligned: Davone Jackson, who was denied low-income housing in Tennessee after the screening company RealPage reported that he had twice been convicted of trafficking in heroin in Kentucky and was on Wisconsin’s sex offender registry. In fact, those records belonged to an Eric Jackson and a James Jackson. After the denial, Davone Jackson said, he and his 9-year-old daughter were forced to live in a small motel room for nearly a year. Glenn Patrick Thompson Sr. and Glenn Patrick Thompson Jr., who said they had been left homeless near Seattle after a tenant screening company called On-Site, which is now part of RealPage, told two different landlords that the father and son had been previously evicted. In fact, the eviction was for a Patricia Thompson, who was not related to them. William Hall Jr., who lost out on a duplex in his small town in Georgia after TransUnion Rental Screening Solutions said he had sexually abused a minor. The criminal record belonged to a William Hall who was 30 years older and possibly dead. Mr. Hall said the landlord had stopped returning his telephone calls after receiving the incorrect report. Mr. Hall’s suit is pending; the others were settled for undisclosed sums. The screening process happens so quickly and the competition for apartments can be so fierce that prospective renters don’t always know why they were turned down, much less whether an incorrect background report was the cause. Some screening companies don’t even provide the underlying records to landlords, instead producing a color-coded “risk” score or a thumbs-up or thumbs-down lease recommendation. Screening company employees have stated in lawsuits that they err on the side of including any possible match, rather than excluding possible errors. The owner of one screening company criticized his industry, saying his peers can do better. “We can figure out how to match a record,” said Matt Visser, chief executive of Victig Screening Solutions, whose Utah company sells 10,000 to 20,000 tenant and employment screening reports a month. He said his company verified negative findings. “It requires a human element,” he said. “When we are performing any of these reports, it is a fairly monumental moment in someone’s life,” he added. “You just have to give a crap.” Large background firms, including RealPage, CoreLogic and TransUnion, declined interview requests for this article. They referred specific questions to a trade group, the Consumer Data Industry Association. Noting the millions of tenant background reports produced each year, the group denied that any systemic problems existed and accused consumer lawyers of being myopic. “If I sat in a cardiologist’s office all day, all I would see is people with heart problems,” said Eric Ellman, the association’s senior vice president for public policy and legal affairs. He acknowledged that it hadn’t developed any standards for screening accuracy but said the companies had their own policies. In responses to lawsuits, tenant screening companies say renters dispute fewer than 1 percent of reports. But it’s impossible to know the actual error rate because tenants may not always know to complain. With about half of the nation’s 43 million rentals turning over every year, even an error rate of 1 percent could upend the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Regulators have taken action against a few companies for slipshod tenant screenings; the Fair Credit Reporting Act requires background screeners to “follow reasonable procedures to assure maximum possible accuracy.” But rejected tenants continue to complain about the same careless practices by companies that regulators had called out, interviews and federal lawsuits show. Ms. Johnson has lost count of the times she has been turned down for housing or work because of incorrect background reports. Since 2016, she has sued six tenant screening companies for incorrect reports. All of them have settled. When she moved out of the apartment in St. Helens and applied to rent a house, the background report was 112 pages long. By then Ms. Johnson knew the drill: Find out where the report came from, call the screening company, fax in a copy of her ID and start the dispute process. “I’ve tried to figure out if there’s something I can do, to stop that from happening,” she said. “But I don’t think that there really is, because there’s just so many background companies out there — and they’re not doing their jobs.” Tenant screening was once confined to a simple credit check with the three major credit bureaus and a few phone calls to references, but it was revolutionized by the advent of cheap or even free, easily available electronic court records. These include criminal records from across the country, sex-offender registries, terrorism watch lists and housing court records. Easy access to the troves of data has also made it possible for anyone with a computer to become a background screener: About 2,000 companies offer the service, but that’s only an estimate. Tenant screeners don’t have to register with any government agency. People can complain about faulty background reports to the Federal Trade Commission or the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau — or sue. But regulators have not limited tenant screening as much as other kinds of background checks. Regulators forced credit bureaus to follow standards for matching records to a person, and the kinds of records the bureaus can legally report are limited. Rules for employment screening, which some of the tenant-screening firms provide, require employers to share the negative report with a rejected applicant. None of those restrictions applies to tenant screening. Federal law requires landlords only to tell tenants if they were turned down because of a negative report and who produced it. Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act, screening companies have 30 days to respond to tenants’ requests for corrections. By then, a landlord may have given the apartment away. “It’s just crazy that you can’t get immediate results,” said Andrew Guzzo, a consumer lawyer who has filed more than 100 federal lawsuits against background screeners and other consumer reporting agencies. “There’s not many worse imaginable consumer financial services related impacts that you could have, more than an inaccurate tenant screening that costs you the ability to rent an apartment.” Tenants can’t get ahead of the problem by checking their background reports in advance because too many companies provide the service. “You can’t just go to one place and request your free annual report,” said Ariel Nelson, author of a 52-page National Consumer Law Center report on screening errors. A handful of cities have begun to regulate tenant screening by limiting a landlord’s ability to reject an applicant for old criminal convictions or evictions. Courts have also begun to take notice; a panel of federal judges recently consolidated seven lawsuits about errors in TransUnion’s tenant screening reports. Screening companies put the onus for accuracy on landlords, telling them right in the reports that they should double-check them. Steven Schachtman, a longtime Minneapolis landlord and property manager who oversees about 10,000 rentals and uses screening firms, said it was difficult for a landlord to check the reports to ensure they matched their applicants. “That is why we are hiring them,” he said. “I assume they have matched everything up.” One CoreLogic employee said during a deposition for a federal lawsuit that she considered a background report “accurate” if it correctly reported what was in public records. A common method that screening companies use to increase hits, court records show, is a so-called wild-card search, which gathers different names that start with the same few letters. Terrence Enright’s experience, described in his federal lawsuit against National Tenant Network, shows how it works. When he applied for an apartment in Chicago in 2014, the company searched for “Enright, Ter*” and “Terrence, Enr*.” But the company also searched for misspelled versions, including “Enwright, Ter*” and found a match: an eviction for a Teri Enwright in California, one of what Mr. Enright said were three evictions mistakenly attributed to him, which resulted in his being denied the apartment. His lawsuit was settled out of court. Screening companies could use more careful methods to reduce incorrect reports, such as excluding eviction records for addresses that don’t appear on a person’s credit report. Or reporting only records that match full names and other data, such as complete dates of birth. But they often don’t, tenants and consumer attorneys say, and the errors can have an outsize effect on people with common names — particularly members of minority groups, which tend to have fewer unique last names. For example, more than 12 million Latinos nationwide share just 26 surnames, according to the census. Marco Fernandez is suing RentGrow, another screening firm, after it included information in his report about another person named Mario Fernandez Santana. Mr. Fernandez lives in Maryland works for an elite military cybercommand strike force and has a top-secret security clearance. The other man is on a federal watch list for suspected terrorists or drug traffickers, lives in Mexico and has a different date of birth, according to the lawsuit. “These matching algorithms treat Hispanic names just like a mix-and-match,” said Mr. Fernandez’s attorney, E. Michelle Drake. RentGrow declined to explain why the company included the other man’s record in Mr. Fernandez’s report, but said in a statement that it had “promptly resolved all concerns in his favor.” Mr. Fernandez was able to get into the apartment he wanted. While disputing the report, however, Mr. Fernandez said he discovered that RentGrow had incorrectly reported the same federal watch list information to a landlord four years earlier, according to the lawsuit. He said he was not informed at the time. Hector Hernandez took CoreLogic to court after the company mixed him up with an accused drug smuggler, Hector Hernandez-Garcia, causing him, his wife and their newborn son to be temporarily homeless in the Washington, D.C., suburbs. “I kept telling them: ‘You got the wrong guy. I’m telling you, that’s not me,’” Mr. Hernandez, who works for a pest control company, said in an interview. CoreLogic settled the lawsuit. In a deposition for another federal lawsuit, a CoreLogic employee said independently verifying reports like these before sending them out “would be an overwhelming task.” It’s certainly more expensive: Court filings in a federal lawsuit show that RealPage pays one data broker 22 cents for each criminal record by buying data in bulk. The company typically charges landlords $12 per report. If there’s a dispute, the data broker would charge RealPage $7 to hand-check a record, according to the contract, shrinking RealPage’s profits — but not eliminating them. That lawsuit claims RealPage produced 11,000 inaccurate renter background reports between 2014 and 2019 using “abbreviated” criminal records, which are cheaper than a full record check, bought from an affiliate of Backgroundchecks.com. The records don’t include details of the resolution or complete dates of birth, so are more likely to lead to incorrect reports. In a statement, RealPage said that “the screening that gave rise to this case occurred years ago” and that the company “has long since made changes to its criminal matching logic that would prevent this record from returning for the plaintiff in that case.” It would not elaborate on those changes. Federal regulators have fined both RealPage and Backgroundchecks.com. Backgroundchecks.com and an affiliated company were fined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau in 2015 over employment screenings. Among other things, the agency said the company had failed to look for patterns in customer disputes that would identify root causes of inaccuracies, such as court jurisdictions with unreliable data, error-prone procedures or employees who are particularly sloppy. In 2018, the Federal Trade Commission fined RealPage $3 million for using wild-card searches; the company did not have to admit wrongdoing. The company brings in about $48 million annually from tenant background screenings, according to court filings. Despite the federal action, RealPage continues to employ a name-matching program that tolerates a significant amount of imprecision, according to federal lawsuits. For instance, according to a lawsuit by Leon Howard, RealPage included criminal records for a Lonnie Howard and eviction records for a Linnea Howard in his background report when he applied for a rental in Georgia in 2019. Lonnie Howard’s date of birth was different than Leon Howard’s, and the report included a photo of the offender, according to the lawsuit, which RealPage settled for an undisclosed sum. Most hurt are people living on the edge, especially those who made it to the top of long wait lists for a housing voucher or a public housing unit only to lose out because of faulty background checks. Sandra Smith waited more than a year for a spot in public housing in her hometown, Jacksonville, Fla. After a divorce, she had been staying with friends and her mother. Unemployed while recovering from health problems, Ms. Smith was relieved she’d finally be able to move back out of her teenage bedroom. “I’m 55,” she said. “Having my own space is something I haven’t had in a long time, and I felt like I was ready for that.” But the housing authority turned her down after a background check reported a 2013 eviction for a different Sandra Smith. “Everything was a runaround,” she said. “No one had any more anything to show me — why they were so convinced that this was me.” Agency officials said she had been denied because of the screening, which is their policy. “It would’ve taken them two to three minutes to investigate this,” said Adam Thoresen, a Jacksonville Area Legal Aid lawyer whom Ms. Smith turned to for help. The signature on the lease agreement, which was attached to the online eviction records, wasn’t the same as his client’s, he said. The lease listed multiple children — but his client has only one child, an adult in his 30s, and the names didn’t match. “This is really simple stuff,” Mr. Thoresen said. It took Ms. Smith a year and a half to get her denial overturned. She is still dealing with the paperwork and hasn’t gotten an apartment. Maddy Varner and Surya Mattu contributed reporting.Hoping to take advantage of wreckage in the wake of the coronavirus pandemic, investors are preparing to snap up commercial real estate at rock-bottom prices. Long before states and cities closed businesses and issued stay-at-home orders, many real estate funds were stockpiling cash and waiting for a buyer’s market. Some have raised billions of dollars in the last several weeks. As a result, Blackstone Group, Kayne Anderson Capital Advisors, Starwood Capital Group and other investment firms are sitting on roughly $300 billion of equity ready for deployment, said Douglas M. Weill, a founder of Hodes Weill & Associates, a global real estate capital advisory firm in New York. By comparison, property sales totaled $570.6 billion in 2019, according to Real Capital Analytics, a commercial real estate researcher that tracks deals of $2.5 million and up. “It’s a staggering amount of dry powder,” Mr. Weill said. “Institutional investors are defensively looking after their own portfolios, but they’re beginning to look around for opportunities.” This is the second time in the last dozen years that investors have anticipated an onslaught of big property discounts; the 2008 financial crisis also fueled a surge of distressed funds. Yet many that ramped up during the Great Recession fizzled because the expected depth and breadth of distress never materialized. Will this time be different? Just like the last crisis, when government intervention, loan modifications and other measures “kicked the can down the road” until real estate values rebounded, lenders and regulators hope to buy time using similar measures, including injecting trillions of dollars into the financial system. In many cases, lenders are trying to accommodate borrower requests to suspend loan payments for 60 to 90 days with an eye toward making long-term modifications later, said Jay M. Sakalo, a lawyer in Miami who specializes in financial restructuring. As of April, more than 5,000 borrowers, representing 17 percent of $583.8 billion in commercial mortgage-backed securities, had asked to explore forbearance or other relief, according to credit rating firm Fitch Ratings. Unlike loans held by banks and insurance companies, commercial mortgage-backed securities are pools of real estate loans that are carved up by risk and sold to investors. “The idea is that if we can press pause, we’ll do less damage than telling borrowers, ‘You have to pay, no matter what,’” said Joe McBride, head of commercial real estate finance for Trepp, a research firm in New York. “There’s not a lot of upside to mass foreclosures.” States and cities did not shut down economic activity during the financial crisis, however, and most tenants still paid rent. But that’s not the case this time. Some 38.6 million people have filed unemployment claims, according to a Labor Department report released Thursday, and millions of small businesses and restaurants are expected to permanently close. The retail and hospitality industries are suffering the most. For example, Macerich, a shopping center owner based in Santa Monica, Calif., collected 26 percent of its April rent, it said in its latest financial report. Early rent collections for May dropped to 18 percent. And although hotel occupancy has rebounded in recent weeks, it was still roughly 56 percent lower in mid-May than a year earlier, according to STR, a hospitality research organization in Hendersonville, Tenn. The situation is one that tenants and landlords likely never anticipated, and for many businesses, the ability to survive remains a question. Barton Perreira, a high-end eyewear brand based in Irvine, Calif., whose products will be featured in the next Bond movie, recently reopened its stores in Aspen, Colo.; Kansas City, Mo.; and Nashville on a limited basis, but its New York location remains closed, said Bill Barton, a founder. He acknowledged that landlords were in a tough spot, and anticipated a reduction in foot traffic for the next six to eight months, compounding financial challenges caused by the closings. “I think tenants need to decide whether they want to tough it out, and landlords need to decide whether they want to keep a particular store,” Mr. Barton said. “But at the end of the day, if we can’t get help from landlords, it’s difficult to say that we’ll keep going.” As of mid-May, loan servicers representing 70 percent of the commercial mortgage-backed securities reported that 19.3 percent of hotel loans and 10 percent of retail loans were more than 30 days late, according to Trepp. The end of grace periods could significantly increase those percentages, Trepp noted. On average, the value of lodging properties slid 16 percent over the last three months, while the value of malls dropped 25 percent and strip retail fell 15 percent, according to Green Street Advisors, a commercial real estate research and advisory firm in Newport Beach, Calif. Commercial real estate values over all fell an average of 10 percent in that period, Green Street found. 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 150 Commercial real estate prices 125 April: 9.4% decrease from March 100 75 50 Commercial Property Price Index (CPPI), monthly 25 0 ’00 ’05 ’10 ’15 ’20 Source: Green Street Advisors By Karl Russell Some property owners that do not have the ability to withstand a downturn are already looking to sell. But given the widespread anticipation of continued erosion in property values, few willing buyers are in the market, experts say. Every commercial property owner has its specific problems, but mom-and-pop landlords that own a handful of apartment buildings, retail centers or other assets are in a much more compromised position, said Sanford D. Sigal, president and chief executive of NewMark Merrill, a shopping center owner and manager in Woodland Hills, Calif. “Very few small owners are equipped for this type of market,” said Mr. Sigal, who expected to collect about 57 percent of his May rent from tenants across some 70 properties in California, Colorado and Illinois. “I’ve seen more deals in the past week that were worth looking at than I did in the entire prior year.” Some borrowers seeking relief from lenders are seeing mixed results. Legacy Development, which owns shopping centers primarily in the Midwest and Southeast, has not received rent from any of its 432 tenants since the beginning of April, said Dan Lowe, managing partner for the firm, which is based in Kansas City, Mo. Legacy Development’s bank and life insurance company lenders have displayed a willingness to work with the company, he said. A loan servicer of commercial mortgage-backed securities has been less accommodating. “I’m guessing that a lot of opportunities for distress will result from C.M.B.S. borrowers who couldn’t get relief,” Mr. Lowe said. Mr. Sigal said that he, too, had found bank and life insurance lenders accommodative. He stopped borrowing from lenders in the commercial mortgage-backed securities market because of difficulty working with servicers during the last downturn, he added. Still, no amount of temporary relief or permanent loan restructuring will save all properties, particularly those just scraping by before the pandemic. Plus, because of virus fears, even retail and entertainment properties that performed well before the crisis are likely to experience less traffic for weeks, if not months, after reopening, said Brian Stoffers, global president of debt and structured finance for CBRE, a real estate services firm. “It’s going to take a while for real estate’s problems to completely manifest themselves,” he said. “This has been caused by a health crisis that could have life-changing impacts on some properties.” Indeed, how the virus is shaping consumer and business attitudes toward commercial real estate should be a question uppermost in the minds of distressed buyers, said Carlos A.G. Vigon, a commercial real estate investor in Los Angeles. Coming out of the last downturn, investors that found deeply discounted properties profited by simply riding the recovery, said Mr. Vigon, who last year started PaxCap Investors to focus on opportunistic deals. Buyers in this new real estate cycle must calculate potential costs to redesign or upgrade properties to fit new societal and health norms. “This is not a problem that will be fixed only by highly available, low-cost capital,” said Mr. Vigon, who has $300 million in equity to spend. “This is a different kind of dislocation. It’s greater, and it’s deeper.”Getting infected with Covid-19 is a frightening, isolating experience. But as more people endure it, the community of survivors is growing — and with them comes better guidance. My husband and I got sick from the coronavirus in late March. We had so-called mild cases, meaning only that we weren’t hospitalized: In fact, we were sicker than we had ever been. Because we could breathe fine, we knew we weren’t supposed to go to the hospital. But what were we supposed to do? The standard advice — rest, fluids and fever reducers — was and is essential, but at times it felt inadequate to the severity of the illness. As we recovered, I spoke with many friends, colleagues and internet strangers going through similar ordeals. Here is some collective wisdom on how to manage noncritical cases of Covid-19. First, of course, you need to be confident that your illness can be managed at home. Most cases of Covid-19 can be. But if you develop any symptoms on this list, including trouble breathing, persistent pain or pressure in the chest, new confusion, an inability to wake or stay awake and/or bluish lips or face, seek emergency care. Some people will have relatively mild symptoms at first and then become more seriously ill. These patients are likely to develop shortness of breath four to eight days after their first symptoms, and “that’s really where people should start paying attention,” said Dr. Pieter Cohen, an associate professor at Harvard Medical School and an internist at the Cambridge Health Alliance who was co-author of an article about the progression of Covid-19 symptoms. If the shortness of breath worsens from day to day, Dr. Cohen said, that’s a sign to call your doctor. Less commonly, patients with low oxygen levels may experience dizziness or lightheadedness instead of shortness of breath, so keep an eye out for that too. Otherwise, read on. If you’re reading this while healthy, buy basic supplies now, including a thermometer, acetaminophen or ibuprofen, and rehydration drinks like Pedialyte. A pulse oximeter can sometimes be helpful, both in flagging severe illness and in reassuring you of the opposite, my colleague Dana Goldstein says: If you feel short of breath but your oxygen level is normal, you may be able to avoid the hospital. (You should still contact your doctor.) If you’re sick and don’t have supplies, see if a friend can pick them up for you, or if a grocery store or bodega will deliver. (Tip well!) Either way, avoid contact: Whether it’s a friend or a delivery person, have the bag left outside your door, and don’t open the door until the delivery person is gone. Over-the-counter drugs may not be enough. In particular, the coughing and nausea caused by Covid-19 can be severe enough to warrant prescription medication. For my husband and me, benzonatate (for the cough) and promethazine (for the nausea) were lifesavers. Some colleagues were prescribed codeine-based cough medicine or Zofran. If you feel you might need them, ask your doctor about medications sooner rather than later. Don’t wait until you’re doubled over coughing or can’t keep anything down. If you don’t have a primary care doctor, some urgent care clinics offer virtual appointments, and some pharmacies offer prescription delivery. Dry air can exacerbate some symptoms such as coughing and chest tightness. If you have a humidifier, use it. If not, a hot shower works. Several readers reported that they felt better when they lay on their stomach. A woman in Britain whose partner was sick for several weeks told me that a particular breathing exercise helped him: You take a deep breath, hold it for 5 seconds and release. Do that 5 times, then on the 6th time on the release, cough hard. Do that cycle twice, then lie on your front and take slightly deeper breaths for 10 minutes. Try to do it a couple of times a day. In some cases, your doctor may also prescribe an albuterol inhaler to reduce your cough and ease your breathing. As soon as you get sick, start a detailed log. Every time you take your temperature — do it several times a day, at consistent times — log it. Every time you take a pill, log it. Every time you eat or drink, log it. If one symptom resolves or a new one develops, log it. As my colleague Eliza Shapiro noted in a Twitter thread worth reading in full, this creates a detailed record to take along if you end up needing medical attention. It also helps you stay on top of your care. Can I take more cough medicine yet? How long have I had this fever? Is it a little lower than it was yesterday? You won’t be able to keep these things straight while shivering in bed, but a spreadsheet can. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Having Covid-19 is intensely stressful. It’s not unusual to feel depressed or anxious, or to have panic attacks. Don’t be embarrassed to talk to your doctor about your mental health — it’s just as important as your physical health. Derek Norman, a news assistant at The Times, says that in the worst moments of his illness, when he felt short of breath and panicky, he would sit upright, focus on breathing steadily and picture a vivid memory. I’d close my eyes and picture the exact details of a scene I had once experienced, and I’d completely immerse myself in that memory. Something like sitting at an outdoor cafe in Morocco. I’d try to recall the sounds of street life and the dry desert air on my skin, or the smell of the spices, hookah and exhaust swirling in the air. Very, very specific details that I look back fondly on. I’d continue to slowly breathe through it. Tim Herrera, our Smarter Living editor, emphasized fresh air. That can be hard to come by safely when you’re contagious, but even if you live in a crowded area with no private outdoor space, it can help to open a window. It’s also OK to not be OK. You don’t have to handle this “well,” whatever that means. You just have to get through each day. So go ahead and cry, binge Netflix, do a jigsaw puzzle, reread the entire “Animorphs” series — whatever gets you through the day. Some people have mild symptoms for the first few days and then suddenly get sicker. Some have fevers that go up and down repeatedly. Some are sick for two weeks straight, then have a few symptom-free days, then relapse. Some have lingering symptoms for months. This is both maddening and very common. Give yourself as much time to rest as your job and financial situation will allow. For me and for several colleagues, that meant nearly three weeks of sick time. Since tweeting about my experience last month, I’ve received many emails from people in the “this will never end” phase. I share the same screenshot with all of them: a text I sent to a friend on April 5. “Why do I even bother giving good news when it’s only going to last a few hours?” I wrote. “I’m just so tired of this. I don’t know how to keep dealing with it.” Every day, more people will hit that wall — and every day, more people will find their way past it. They will feel alone, but they won’t be. Sarah Maslin Nir contributed reporting.Did you get a new dog during the coronavirus lockdown? Or has your long-time four-legged companion gotten used to having you home? “Dogs are highly social, which is why we get along with them so well,” said Patricia B. McConnell, certified applied animal behaviorist and author of “The Other End of the Leash: Why We Do What We Do Around Dogs.” “If all the sudden, they go from ‘everybody home all the time’ to ‘nobody home all day long,’ it can lead to some serious behavioral problems.” This can mean accidents in the house, chewing on the furniture when you are away, or worse. Want to avoid that? Here’s how to transition to a new normal, for both of you. The members of your household probably haven’t left the house for an extended period of time for what, weeks? Months? The 17 years this quarantine has felt like? So, start transitioning as cities and states reopen by leaving a little bit at a time. But not for too long. Start “unbelievably slow,” said Dr. McConnell. Leave a handful of treats on the ground and, while the dog is eating them, “everybody walks out the door,” she said. Come back in five seconds. Next time, leave for 10 seconds, then walk to the mailbox and back, then take a longer walk or a long drive. Make sure you are mimicking the routine you’ll have when you go back to work: Get your wallet and keys, leave through the door you’ll go through. This way, the dog gets used to the cues that mean you are leaving — and coming back in through the same spot. Make sure your dog is left in a safe space that it knows — and don’t lock it in a room that’s unfamiliar. That safe space might be a crate, though not all dogs like being in a crate. (My first dog, a Jack Russell terrier, loved her crate; the dog I have now, a cattle dog mix, couldn’t be bothered.) Other dogs are just fine being left to lie wherever in the house they want. The best space for your dog may not be one with a view either, said Sarah Wilson, dog trainer and author of “My Smart Puppy: Fun, Effective and Easy Puppy Training,” especially if your dog barks a lot. “When they’re screaming out the window at everyone who’s going by, their brains are flooded with all of this confusing and upsetting brain chemistry, which doesn’t go away on its own instantly,” she said. “It’s not a game for them when they’re barking hysterically out the window.” If a crate doesn’t work for that dog, it may work to use a baby gate to keep it in a room it likes, but without access to a window. If your dog has gotten used to walks every four or five hours, what’s going to happen when that’s not an easy option? Can you come home to walk the dog? Will you hire a dog walker, or take your dog to a doggie daycare? Dr. McConnell suggests you figure out how you’re going to engage your dogs’ brain if the level of physical exercise you are currently providing it is not an option. You can teach them new tricks, or try new walking routes, which engages their brains because dogs will work to analyze new smells. “Even if it’s just once or twice a week, pop your dog in the car and go somewhere different,” said Dr. McConnell. Dogs with separation anxiety may go to the bathroom in the house, or chew or rip up things that are not their toys. But don’t punish the dog when you come home, said Katherine A. Houpt, professor emeritus of behavior medicine at the Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine, because dogs will forget what they did and by then they will “no longer associate punishment with the action.” Your dog may also get clingy and follow you around the house, pace when it thinks you’re leaving or drool. That also means the dog is experiencing separation anxiety and you need to work a little bit more to help it. If you are frustrated or feel like nothing is working, reach out for help. Call your veterinarian to make sure that nothing is physically wrong with your dog. If it is behavioral, then your veterinarian may recommend calling a dog trainer or animal behaviorist. Dr. McConnell said to look for a certified applied animal behaviorist or a certified professional dog trainer. Trainers should use positive reinforcement instead of force and coercion. Your veterinarian may also recommend anti-anxiety medication for your dog, if the anxiety persists despite making the recommended changes. You may also consider anti-anxiety medications if your dog’s behavior is causing harm even if it’s not destructive — such as if your dog’s barking is annoying your neighbors to an extreme degree.As climbing temperatures herald summer’s return, cities and states around the United States are beginning the stilted process of reopening. In many places, that means a chance to return to the beach. Texas state beaches were ordered to reopen on May 1; now state beaches in Florida, Oregon and California are also starting to reopen. On the East Coast, New York, New Jersey, Delaware and Connecticut reopened state beaches over the Memorial Day weekend, though with limits on capacity and other measures. (Cities, counties and other municipalities may have different restrictions; New York City’s 14 miles of public beaches, for example, remain closed.) For those concerned about their safety during the coronavirus pandemic, the current consensus is that socially distant outdoor activities are some of the safer ways to re-engage with the world. “Outdoor settings, like beaches, are less likely to spread the virus than indoor settings,” said Dr. Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins University Center for Health Security. Professor Linsey Marr, an engineering professor at Virginia Tech who specializes in the airborne transmission of infectious diseases, agrees that a beach visit should be fine — as long as you are able to maintain social distancing. “The good news is that the virus dies off relatively quickly in direct sunlight,” she said. “There’s often some wind at the beach, which really helps disperse the virus particles in the air.” But no activity is going to be completely risk-free. “The steps you take are not going to be one-size-fits-all; it depends on your individual risk tolerance,” said Dr. Adalja. Here are five things to keep in mind when planning a beach day. Getting there Like most things in the time of Covid-19, rules governing beach access, use and safety change frequently and likely differ depending on your state, city and even your beach. “We’re in a very dynamic place right now in terms of beach access,” said Dr. Chad Nelsen, chief executive officer of Surfrider Foundation, a nonprofit organization that has been compiling resources and providing recommendations regarding water quality and beach safety with regards to Covid-19. The group also works with coastal communities on opening beaches safely. Start by learning the regulations of your area and your beach by accessing government websites for your city or county. And consider how far along your local area is in terms of reopening. “If your community is still in active mitigation mode, plan on being extra cautious,” said Kristine Stratton, president and chief executive officer of the National Recreation and Park Association, a nonprofit organization that recently published guidelines for phased re-openings of public spaces, including beaches. You should expect new rules this season. Picnicking might be allowed, or beach access may be for recreation only. Masks might be required and entries may be timed. Parking lots, public bathrooms and concession stands may or may not be open, or offer only limited access. Other resources to tap include websites for your local parks and recreation or public health department, the local beach manager or your local lifeguard department. The varied regulations are because of the diversity of beaches across the United States and the likelihood of crowds. “Local context matters,” Dr. Nelsen said. “The U.S. coastline is hugely varied in terms of its geography and population. You could go up to Oregon, or Northern California, and be at a beach all day alone. Urban beaches in Southern California or Miami are a different story.” Densely crowded beaches make maintaining six feet of distance more difficult, and increase the likelihood of more sustained exposure to the virus. You may need to navigate a crowded parking lot, or take a narrow path or stairway to access the sand. “Make an informed judgment: ‘Does it seem like the beach is on the busy side?’” Ms. Stratton said. “If you’re pulling up to a beach and the parking lot is full, our recommendation is that you find a less-populated spot.” Professor Marr suggests vetting beaches beforehand via a webcam, if possible, to assess the crowd. Safety at the shore Keeping your hands clean, avoiding touching your face and, of course, maintaining at least six feet of social distance are as paramount at the beach as they are anywhere else. “If it’s a crowded beach with people playing games, or parties mixing with other parties, there is always a risk of transmission,” said Dr. Adalja. “There will be people who think that risk is acceptable, others who don’t, especially at at-risk populations.” Surfrider’s current recommendations encourage beachgoers to “keep it moving.” The N.R.P.A. similarly recommends that, in these early days of reopening, it’s safer to plan on shorter, recreation-driven visits. “If you’re out swimming or paddling, walking or running, it’s going to be easier to avoid the packed towel-to-towel beach crowd,” Dr. Nelsen said. A recreation-only policy is currently in place in Los Angeles County; similar policies tend to prohibit beachgoers from bringing chairs, umbrellas, coolers, barbecues and other gear (again, check on the latest status at your local beach before going). Dr. Adalja agrees that being on the move is, over all, a safer proposition: “If people are running by each other, the virus can’t magically transport from one person to another,” he said, noting that the highest risk for exposure comes from spending anywhere from 10 to 30 minutes within six feet of another person. When you are in and near the water, there may be fewer lifeguards than usual, or none at all. “Many of our parks and rec agencies are already affecting budget cuts, there’s a real risk of not being able to staff beaches with required lifeguards,” Ms. Stratton said. “There may be continued beach closings, both out of concerns for public health, and because of limitations of staffing, recruiting and training.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. When lifeguards are present, keep in mind that you are not only exercising caution for your sake, but for theirs, too — fewer lifesaving situations means less exposure for them. “We’re trying to keep the lifeguards up in the stands as much as possible, and in a safe, socially distant place,” said Tom Gill, vice president of the United States Lifesaving Association. “The less they have to interact with the public, especially in an emergency situation, the safer everyone’s going to be.” While much about transmissibility of the coronavirus remains unclear, waterborne transmission appears to be less likely. As for other surfaces you might encounter at the beach, such as rental beach chairs and kayaks, or even beach toys, Ms. Stratton urges caution in all regards. “We strongly discourage sharing equipment outside of your household — throwing a Frisbee, or tossing a ball around,” she said. “Before you rent equipment, ask the question: was this item cleaned and disinfected in between uses? If not, the recommendation would be to not use equipment.” Your own chairs should not be an immediate risk factor — assuming six feet of social distancing can be maintained — as there is no evidence pointing to easy transmission in the sand. To be safe, clean your beach equipment with household disinfectants when you return home. And take your garbage home too. Single-use plastics have been on the rise, and beaches are taking the hit — after some in Florida reopened, nearly 12,000 pounds of trash were left behind according to news reports. But pandemics don’t render environmental concerns irrelevant. If there is no trash collection or it appears to be overwhelmed, take your trash home with you to dispose of accordingly. “Our municipalities are going to be incredibly challenged from a budget perspective,” Ms. Stratton said. “Rather than leave trash in receptacles that are overflowing, do your part and carry it out.” Public restrooms are a tough topic these days. They have high-touch, frequently shared surfaces, and some reports also cite a possibility of transmission via an aerosolized “toilet plume.” Recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention for public restrooms include guidelines for regular cleaning and disinfection, operational toilets and well-stocked handwashing supplies. But beachgoers should check out facilities when they first arrive, to see if restrooms are clean and can allow for social distancing. “We, of course, are recommending that municipalities and parks and recreation maintain facilities, but beachgoers should not assume that that’s the case,” Ms. Stratton of the N.R.P.A. said. It’s always wise to bring hand sanitizer and disinfectant wipes, wear a mask, close the lid of the toilet when you flush, if possible, and thoroughly wash your hands. The safest course: Keep your beach visit short enough that using public restrooms won’t be necessary — use the bathroom, and change into your swimsuit, before you leave home. Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation.Every morning, Isaac Calpito sets the stage in the East Hampton living room of his friend Stephanie DiTullio. Mr. Calpito, 39, is dressed, often, in sparkling yoga tights and a tank top that show his muscles to good advantage. His main prop is an iPhone. At 11 a.m. sharp, accompanied by a new playlist chosen by Ms. DiTullio (a.k.a D.J. Steph), he turns on Instagram Live and welcomes thousands of housebound fitness buffs and at least one Real Housewife, all of whom tune in to take part in (or at least watch) Mr. Calpito’s Torch’d workout. For 45 minutes, the music pumps as he cycles through push-ups and squats, giving cheeky tough-love directions. At a time when it’s difficult to introduce a new product or a business, Torch’d has become, rather organically, the breakthrough workout of the stay-at-home era. Mr. Calpito has been leading the classes virtually since March 17. Last week, about 2,500 people tuned in every day. The video of each class remains accessible on Instagram for 24 hours, and he said an additional 17,500 people typically tune in during that time. (On three occasions, Mr. Calpito has broadcast on a split screen that showed the actress Vanessa Hudgens and Lisa Rinna, a star of “The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills,” doing their Torch’d workout. Each of those classes attracted about 8,000 live viewers. The last time Mr. Calpito featured Ms. Hudgens, more than 250,000 people watched during the 24-hour period.) The class is free, but Mr. Calpito asks that people taking it consider making a donation to No Kid Hungry, a charity that helps provide meals to children in need. So far, he has raised more than $200,000. After getting Torch’d, you're likely to wake up sore the next day. But Mr. Calpito’s constant monologue keeps exercisers coming back. “A lot of you are so preoccupied with whether to point or flex your toes,” he said during one session earlier this month. “Just move your damn leg, OK? Like, you’re not auditioning for American Ballet Theater. Those days are gone. Just torch that” rear end, he said. Alas, it’s difficult to quote Mr. Calpito’s mid-class soliloquy without running into a word that rhymes with “sass.” “This one’s for you, Taylor, and every boy who ever broke my heart,” he said recently, while doing tush-toning leg circles as a Taylor Swift song played. He cursed his exes, then continued his instruction: “Now carve out that real estate, baby!” There will also be the occasional wry, off-topic cultural observation (“When did all the gays get married? It’s so confusing to me”). The trainer coos over his poodle, named Davis after Bette, who prances into the frame from time to time, often wearing a red Gucci cardigan. “He’s a bit fancy. I try to keep him humble and remind him that his father grew up on food stamps,” said Mr. Calpito, who was raised by a family of humble means in Waimānalo, Hawaii, a small town on the island of Oahu. Davis preens as Mr. Calpito keeps his own legs suspended an inch off the ground for an excruciating amount of time and tells you that you should be doing the same. This is unlikely but the chaos keeps the eye on the screen and the cruncher or jumping-jacker from quitting altogether. Then there are the emojis and comments from bold-faced Instagram handles, cascading down the screen as Mr. Calpito calls out names. “Hey Vanessa Hudgens!” “What’s up, Michael Rapaport?” “Hey Christy Turlington!” “Hey Jessica Chastain, how’s your grandma?”(It’s a mystery how the constantly mentioned Lizzie Tisch is able to text so much while she’s purportedly in plank position.) Thus he manages to approximate the feel of sweating in a packed room alongside friends and strangers, some of whom might be rich and famous. Mr. Calpito’s success has been a long time coming, according to his friends and fans. “Isaac is one of the most entertaining people you will ever meet,” said Kelly Ripa, who has known him for 18 years and who last month gave him the “Live with Kelly and Ryan” bump when she told viewers that she’s been taking his Torch’d classes on Instagram. “I just think he’s tapped into the moment,” Ms. Ripa said in an interview. “He’s put the fun into working out and the community back into the lives of people. He’s made a great big alienated, desolate world feel very small, and all you need is your phone.” Ms. Rinna, so much a regular that Mr. Calpito has named an on-your-side-Rockette-leg-kick “the Rinna,” says she plans her mornings around Torch’d. “It gives me something to look forward to,” she said, adding that after 10 weeks, her derrière has never looked better. “I don’t like to work out by myself, I’m a class girl and at the end, I feel like I’ve just been to a boutique fitness class.” As a boy who loved dance and theater, Mr. Calpito was bullied, but kept at it, encouraged by his grandmother and mother. In 1998, just after graduating from high school, he booked a one-way flight for New York. He slept on the floors of friends’ dorm rooms, hit audition after audition and got his first big gig within six months, as part of the touring cast for “Mamma Mia.” In 2003, he joined the ensemble of the Broadway production. “Six years of eight shows a week,” he said. “It’s a tight-knit family on Broadway. I learned discipline, compassion and the importance of community.” He next was cast in the 2009 Broadway revival of “West Side Story.” The production was directed by Arthur Laurents, who wrote the book for the original musical back in the 1950s. “Arthur became a very important mentor for me,” Mr. Calpito said. “He kept me on track for bigger goals. He was a father figure.” It was during the production that Mr. Calpito created a floor-exercise circuit to give himself a full-body workout when he had no time to go to the gym. “I created this flow and this method that I knew would work for me, and I did it alone every day on the stage of the Palace Theater with my boom box with Madonna playing before performances,” he said. “Before long, other castmates started doing it with me.” After the show closed in 2011, Mr. Calpito moved to Los Angeles to work as a choreographer for pop stars like Ariana Grande and a fitness trainer for celebrities including Faye Dunaway. In 2015 he began working as a SoulCycle instructor in New York. He left the company in 2019 and has focused on private sessions and Torch’d since, leading classes at Art Basel. In mid-March, Ms. DiTullio contacted him and suggested he pack up his two dogs (the other has since died of old age) and shelter with her. “Days into the quar, I was wondering how I was going to connect with my clients so I offered the Torch’d workout as something as a one-off,” Mr. Calpito said. A few hundred people from all over the world tuned in. “It surpassed any of my expectations,” he said. So he kept going. Caryn Wall, 54 and sheltering at home in Virginia Beach with her husband and two teenage children, started doing Torch’d after hearing Ms. Ripa talk about it on TV. “Isaac’s doing every single move with you, he’s sweating just like you are, he has wonderful energy and the whole time you hear him calling names like Lisa Rinna and Aerin Lauder,” said Ms. Wall. “You feel like you’re in the class with them.” Mr. Calpito is working on an app that will offer his workouts, but through the summer he will continue to broadcast to Ms. Wall, Ms. Chastain, “my best friend’s Aunt Jan who lives in Jersey” and all the rest. “So many people have committed to coming to Torch’d every day,” he said. “And I am committed to them.”When you finally return to work after the lockdown, coronavirus might not be the only illness you need to worry about contracting at the office. Office buildings once filled with employees emptied out in many cities and states as shelter-in-place orders were issued. These structures, normally in constant use, have been closed off and shut down, and health risks might be accumulating in unseen ways. “The buildings aren’t designed to be left alone for months,” said Andrew Whelton, an associate professor of civil, environmental and ecological engineering at Purdue University. Dr. Whelton, other researchers and public health authorities have issued warnings about the plumbing in these buildings, where water may have gone stagnant in the pipes or even in individual taps and toilets. As lockdowns are lifted, bacteria that build up internally may cause health problems for returning workers if the problem is not properly addressed by facilities managers. Employees and guests at hotels, gyms and other kinds of buildings may also be at risk. The biggest worry is Legionella pneumophila. The bacteria can cause Legionnaires’ disease, a respiratory condition. It leads to death in about one in 10 cases, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The National Academies of Science, Engineering, and Medicine estimates that over 52,000 Americans suffer from the disease each year. A single small outbreak can sicken many people. During the water crisis that started in Flint, Mich., in 2014 after the city changed its water source and officials failed to inform the public of water quality problems, many people became sick. The crisis was linked to the deaths of 12 people from Legionnaires’ disease. After an outbreak at the North Carolina Mountain State Fair last September, 135 people contracted the disease and four died, according to the state’s department of health and human services. Investigators blamed a hot tub exhibit that sent Legionella through the air and was inhaled by passers-by. Most worrying, Legionnaires’ disease tends to affect people with compromised immune systems. “Covid patients and survivors could be more vulnerable to this, so when they go back to work we might be concerned about another infection,” said Caitlin Proctor, a postdoctoral fellow at Purdue who, along with Dr. Whelton conducted a study that has been accepted for publication in the journal AWWA Water Science examining risks from water stagnation during the coronavirus lockdown. Once forming in a building’s plumbing, Legionella can be dispersed through the air when toilets are flushed. Even turning on taps, as employees wash their hands to limit the spread of the coronavirus, can send water droplets into the air that carry Legionella. Typically, facilities managers reduce the risk of Legionella and other bacteria by pouring small amounts of disinfectant into a building’s water systems. But when the water is left stagnant for too long, the disinfectant disappears. “Even just after a weekend, disinfectant can be gone in some buildings and the water is vulnerable to contamination,” Dr. Whelton said. Facilities staff can also flush out old water and bring in a new and fresh supply. Or they can send a high dose of disinfectant through the building and raise temperatures to kill the microbes. Shutdowns in the U.S. began in mid-March, meaning some buildings have now been closed for two months. And the researchers say that the consequences of long-term water stagnation are relatively unknown. “We haven’t really done studies on monthslong stagnation,” said Dr. Proctor. “The ecological system may change. So while we’re looking at these organisms, maybe other organisms pop up.” William Rudin, C.E.O. and co-chairman of Rudin Management Company which manages 16 commercial office buildings in New York, said his staff is being careful and cautious in their approach to reopening. “Our engineers go through the building testing systems all the time,” he said. “That’s standard procedure.” [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] One problem for some property managers may be inconsistent and incomplete guidance from regulators and health authorities. Dr. Proctor and Dr. Whelton’s study assessed 21 sets of guidelines developed around the world since the pandemic began, including the C.D.C.’s and 11 from states and counties. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “Not all of the guidelines are created equal,” said Dr. Proctor. “The original C.D.C. guidelines only covered certain systems.” Because the effects of long-term water stagnation are so little understood, most of the guidelines are based on preventive measures and may not directly address reopening after long-term shutdowns. “They all go different ways,” said Michèle Prévost, a co-author of the study and the industrial chair of drinking water on the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada. “It’s not ill-intended, there’s not that much evidence to guide our choices.” Unfortunately many of the public health officials who would normally be tackling these issues and getting information out are currently focused on responding to the spread of the coronavirus. “Health officials are overstretched and have conflicting information,” said David Dyjack, executive director of the National Environmental Health Association. “Health officials simply cannot keep up. Public health is being asked to do things it’s never had to do before.” Even if only a small portion of buildings have problems, with so many reopening at once, the researchers fear there will be more outbreaks than usual. “Not every building will have issues but based on what we know, enough of them probably will,” Dr. Proctor said.The Paycheck Protection Program, the federal government’s ambitious effort to keep workers at small businesses off the unemployment rolls through the worst of the pandemic, has provided a financial safety net to more than four million companies. For many, the money was a lifeline. It let a trucking company keep paying drivers who would otherwise have been laid off and gave a group of therapists time to adjust to telemedicine and connect with new clients. But the pandemic’s devastation continues. Many cities are still shut, consumers’ habits have changed and recharging the economy may take years. Small companies, which employ nearly half of America’s workers who don’t work in government, typically have thin margins and scant savings. Some fear they won’t survive without further help. Even for those who got help, the program’s rollout was messy and chaotic, and Congress is arguing over proposed changes. The program offered small companies a loan that would be converted to a grant if they used most of the money for eight weeks of payroll. The earliest loan recipients are near the end of their eight-week relief period. Here’s how six businesses that got loans from the paycheck program’s $660 billion fund are faring. Billings, Mont. + Received a loan on April 3 (declined to disclose the size) Tanya Weinreis, the owner of Mountain Mudd, remembers the moment her business changed: 9:01 p.m. on Friday, March 13, as she wrapped up a 14-hour shift at her coffee kiosk at the MetraPark events center. Mrs. Weinreis had just taken delivery of 60 gallons of milk for the next day’s final round of a statewide high school basketball tournament. “The announcer got on the speaker and said, ‘Don’t come back’ — the tournament was canceled,” Mrs. Weinreis recalled. “We lost thousands of dollars from just that one day.” Mrs. Weinreis had around 50 employees at Mountain Mudd’s 11 kiosks and pop-up event locations. The MetraPark location was one of her busiest, and missing its summer season — with events like rodeos, graduation ceremonies and the annual MontanaFair — will leave a crater in her company’s sales. But Mrs. Weinreis’s business is generally well suited for a socially distanced world: The kiosks can operate with just a few workers, and customers drive through. She has been able to keep nearly all of her other stands running. Mrs. Weinreis received her federal loan check just a few hours into the program’s first day, thanks to a team at Yellowstone Bank. Her employees’ head count and hours have stayed fairly constant, Mrs. Weinreis said, and she expects to have her loan fully forgiven. She hired several new workers in May and is cautiously optimistic heading into the summer. “April was the worst month we’ve ever had. But May, so far, has been better,” she said. “Based on that, I’d like to think we’ll be in good shape to continue operating without needing any more funding. I’m very hopeful. This was a great program, and I feel very thankful for it.” Salt Lake City + Received a five-figure loan on April 6 Utah is one of the few places that never had a statewide stay-at-home order, but Jennifer McMurrough’s customers vanished as the pandemic spread. March 14 was the first weekend in her company’s 22-year history that she had no overnight boarders. “It went to zero, and it stayed there a long time,” she said. “The whole business is down at least 90 percent. No one is going to work, and half my business relies on the travel season.” Ms. McMurrough had nine full-time employees (one quit because of the pandemic) and some part-time help. The paycheck loan helped her keep paying her workers, who are still caring for Little Dogs Resort’s handful of canine clients, but she’s frustrated by the program’s shifting rules and complicated terms. She was wary when she signed the paperwork — “I’ve never signed loan documents before where I didn’t know all the rules,” she said — and she is concerned about whether her post-pandemic payroll will line up with her precrisis head count, wages and hours. If it doesn’t, a portion of her loan may have to be repaid under the program’s rules. “I’m treating this as a debt that I have to start paying back in November,” she said, referring to the end of the loan’s six-month grace period. “I’ll be pleasantly surprised if I don’t have to, but I’m not counting on it. And if I do have to pay it back, I’m in an even more precarious position than I was when I started.” Ms. McMurrough is determined to adapt and survive, but she’s concerned about how the pandemic has reshaped her market. She expects to lose what is usually a booming summer season. Her staff has stayed busy making repairs and catching up on paperwork, but none of that work makes money. She recently applied at her bank, Celtic Bank, for a working-capital loan. “I have no doubt my business is viable and we will thrive again, but we’ve lost months of sales,” she said. “My next payroll is the last one in my covered period, so whatever I’m going to do next, I have one pay period left to figure it out.” Ada, Okla. + Received a $699,000 loan on April 15 Just one week after A&J Transportation got its paycheck loan, its entire staff of truckers was out of work because producers shut down their wells as oil prices plunged in April. “We lived through the 2014 oil crash, the 2008 economic crash. This one is worse,” said Dana Sanford, the office manager for the family-run business, which worked exclusively on oil fields. “We’ve never had zero oil work for this amount of time, ever.” The loan arrived right as the work disappeared, so A&J used it to keep paying all its 72 employees, even though most had nothing to do but stay home. The money kept those workers off the unemployment rolls, Ms. Sanford said. To get some cash, A&J started bidding for over-the-road contracts. It landed jobs hauling toilet paper, medical supplies and other goods, but the work required refitting its fleet of trucks for different road conditions. For the drivers, too, long-haul trucking is very different from what they did before, hauling sand used for hydraulic fracturing. “It was expensive and time-consuming, but we had to do something to adjust,” Ms. Sanford said. She does not expect a quick recovery. A&J hopes to return one of its crews — about a third of its workers — to the oil fields in June, but Ms. Sanford thinks it will be months before the company’s full fleet is needed. Its eight weeks of payroll support will run out in mid-June. “The drivers are getting a little more scared as that last week approaches, wondering, ‘Am I going to have a job when this is done?’” she said. “I wish we could apply again. Even four more weeks would be really helpful. The P.P.P. has been a wonderful program, and we’re really glad the Trump administration did it. But what comes next is still pretty uncertain for us.” Minneapolis + Received a $29,700 loan on April 16 When Minnesota closed its schools on March 18, business plunged at Arubah Emotional Health Services, which works extensively with children and families. “We lost about 40 percent of our clientele,” said Anissa Keyes, the group’s founder and president. “But then, the pandemic caused a different, larger population to need support.” Because medical reimbursements typically have at least a month’s delay, Arubah’s cash-flow nadir came in mid-April. “There was 37 cents in my business account,” Ms. Keyes recalled. “It was right after payroll. The next day, the loan deposited, and I could breathe again.” Arubah’s therapists had never done telehealth appointments, but virtual visits were soon the only option. As they adjusted, Arubah’s calendar began filling up again. Bookings are back to about 80 percent of what they were; Ms. Keyes thinks they’ll reach — and probably surpass — full capacity by July. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The loan “was perfectly timed and gave us the perfect boost to sustain us,” she said. She began working on her loan-forgiveness calculations this past week and is unsure if her debt will be fully erased. Some of her 15 employees had their hours reduced during the slow weeks. The paperwork is “a headache,” she said, and is full of imprecise and confusing language. “Even if I have to pay some of it back, I’m grateful,” she said. “Our numbers are going back up. For the mental-health industry, this crisis has caused a really big boom — which is unfortunate.” Parkville, Md. + Received a six-figure loan on April 14 On Monday, March 16 — the day Maryland’s schools closed — Brandon Hutson, the president of Ed & Jim’s Body Shop, arrived at work at 7:30 a.m. to a ringing phone. “I thought, ‘OK, here it comes,’” he said. “It was the first cancellation. I hung up, and it rang again — and again, and again, and again, the entire morning.” Two weeks later, Mr. Hutson and his uncle William Hutson, the shop’s owners, furloughed their 14 employees. When Brandon Hutson learned about the Paycheck Protection Program, he applied immediately, and started recalling his workers the day the money came through. But sales since then have been spotty. “We have work coming in, but it’s not nearly what it was,” he said. “We had one really good week, then it tapered off, then a decent week, then a slow one.” Right now, thanks to the loan, the workers are being paid roughly what they made before, but the end date for that subsidy is nearing. And other deferred bills — health insurance, vendor payments, the business’s bank loan — will also be coming due. Mr. Hutson would like to see another round of small-business aid. “Eight weeks was a good chunk of time,” he said. “We were optimistic. We thought that it would be rough, but that would be enough time to get through this curve. But we’re not through. What about the next eight weeks? That’s a concern everyone has right now.” Charlottesville, Va. + Received a $159,100 loan on April 7 “I was on Cloud 9 the day our loan came through,” said Lindsey Munson, the administrator of the Montessori School of Charlottesville, Va. “It really made such a difference for us.” Ms. Munson’s school has children from age 21 months through kindergarten — too young for much screen time and distance learning. After Virginia announced on March 13 that it was closing its schools, the Montessori School furloughed its 13 assistants and tried to figure out how long it could keep paying its six teachers, who have been running online sessions. Ms. Munson offered parents a rebate for the final two months of the year. They had three choices: a cash refund, a credit toward next year’s tuition or a tax-deductible donation to the nonprofit school. About half chose to donate the money. “That’s the only thing allowing us to not start off next year at a loss,” she said. “We do a lot of scholarships and basically break even. We can’t just borrow our way out of this, because we have no way to pay it back.” The Paycheck Protection Program helped the school stay solvent through the end of the year, but Ms. Munson is wary of what comes next. It’s “anyone’s guess” what will happen to the school’s small summer camp, which normally starts in late June, and Virginia’s government is still hashing out a plan for the fall. “If things stay closed, everyone who has benefited from this program really needs it to happen again,” she said. “We need to be keeping people on payrolls so they can pay their bills, and we need our small businesses and nonprofits to stay intact so that there’s jobs for people to come back to.”Mass protests against police brutality that have brought thousands of people out of their homes and onto the streets in cities across America are raising the specter of new coronavirus outbreaks, prompting political leaders, physicians and public health experts to warn that the crowds could cause a surge in cases. While many political leaders affirmed the right of protesters to express themselves, they urged the demonstrators to wear face masks and maintain social distancing, both to protect themselves and to prevent further community spread of the virus. More than 100,000 Americans have already died of Covid-19, the disease caused by the new coronavirus. People of color have been particularly hard hit, with rates of hospitalizations and deaths among black Americans far exceeding those of whites. The protests in dozens of cities have been spurred most recently by the death last week of George Floyd at the hands of the police in Minneapolis. But the unrest and outrage spilling out into the streets from one city to the next also reflects the dual, cumulative tensions arising from decades of killings by police and the sudden losses of family and friends from the virus. The spontaneous outpouring of protests are occurring as many states have warily begun reopening after weeks of stay-at-home orders with millions of American unemployed. Restaurants, schools, beaches and parks are under scrutiny as the public tentatively practices new forms of social distancing. In Los Angeles, where demonstrations led to the closing of virus testing sites on Saturday, Mayor Eric Garcetti warned that the protests could become “super-spreader events,” referring to the types of gatherings, usually held in indoor settings, that can lead to an explosion of secondary infections. Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland, a Republican, expressed concern that his state would see a spike in cases in about two weeks, which is about how long it takes for symptoms to emerge after someone is infected, while Atlanta’s mayor, Keisha Lance Bottoms, advised people who were out protesting “to go get a Covid test this week.” Some infectious disease experts were reassured by the fact that the protests were held outdoors, saying the open air settings could mitigate the risk of transmission. In addition, many of the demonstrators were wearing masks, and in some places, they appeared to be avoiding clustering too closely. “The outdoor air dilutes the virus and reduces the infectious dose that might be out there, and if there are breezes blowing, that further dilutes the virus in the air,” said Dr. William Schaffner, an infectious disease expert at Vanderbilt University. “There was literally a lot of running around, which means they’re exhaling more profoundly, but also passing each other very quickly.” The crowds tended to be on the younger side, he noted, and younger adults generally have better outcomes if they become ill, though there is a risk they could transmit the virus to relatives and household members who may be older and more susceptible. But others were more concerned about the risk posed by the marches. Dr. Howard Markel, a medical historian who studies pandemics, likened the protest crowds to the bond parades held in American cities like Philadelphia and Detroit in the midst of the 1918 influenza pandemic, which were often followed by spikes in influenza cases. “Yes, the protests are outside, but they are all really close to each other, and in those cases, being outside doesn’t protect you nearly as much,” Dr. Markel said. “Public gatherings are public gatherings — it doesn’t matter what you’re protesting or cheering. That’s one reason we’re not having large baseball games and may not have college football this fall.” Though many protesters were wearing masks, others were not. SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes the Covid-19 disease, is mainly transmitted through respiratory droplets spread when people talk, cough or sneeze; screaming and shouting slogans during a protest can accelerate the spread, Dr. Markel said. Tear gas and pepper spray, which police have used to disperse crowds, cause people to tear up and cough, and increase respiratory secretions from the eyes, nose and mouth, further enhancing the possibility of transmission. Police efforts to move crowds through tight urban areas can result in corralling people closer together, or end up penning people into tight spaces. And emotions have been running high, Dr. Markel said. “People get lost in the moment, and they lose awareness of who is close to them, who’s not, who’s wearing a mask, who’s not,” he said. The biggest concern is the one that has bedeviled infectious disease experts since the pandemic began, and it’s the coronavirus’s secret weapon: that it can be transmitted by people who don’t display any symptoms and feel healthy enough to participate in protests. “There are a huge number of asymptomatic carriers, and that makes it hugely risky,” Dr. Markel said. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Dr. Ashish Jha, a professor and director of the Harvard Global Health Institute, said more than half of coronavirus infections are spread by people who are asymptomatic, including some who are infected but never go on to develop symptoms and others who don’t yet know they are sick. Arresting, transporting or jailing protesters increases the potential for spreading the virus. Dr. Jha called on protesters to refrain from violence, and urged the police to exercise restraint. Dr. Scott Gottlieb, a former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, appearing on CBS’ “Face The Nation” on Sunday, also predicted the protests would lead to new “chains of transmission.” He said social and economic inequities, including poor access to health care, discrimination in health care settings, greater reliance on public transportation and differences in employment were all factors leading to a greater burden of Covid-19 disease among people of color. “Stopping the pandemic is going to depend on our ability to take care of our most medically and socially vulnerable,” Dr. Gottlieb said. “We absolutely need to resolve these underlying problems to eliminate the risk of pandemic spreading of the epidemic."This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic. Read about others here. Word spread quickly through the Green Haven Correctional Facility in Beekman, N.Y., that the Elder Statesman was gone. Before Benjamin Smalls was imprisoned two decades ago, he had been known around Westchester County, Manhattan and the Bronx as a hard-driving businessmen, juggling real estate holdings, a deli, a seafood restaurant, several bars and a nightclub. He was “Ben” back then. Mr. Smalls changed in prison, and so did the name people called him. He grew more stoic, and dusted off an old paralegal degree to become steward of the prison’s law library, helping hundreds of men file appeals, request transfers or fight restrictions on visitation. “We called him Mr. Smalls, or the Elder Statesman — we never called him anything else,” said Jose H. Saldaña, a former Green Haven inmate and prison reform activist. “I don’t have a very high opinion of jailhouse lawyers, but Mr. Smalls was different. I mean, he really helped people.” Mr. Smalls died on May 4 of the new coronavirus at the Vassar Brothers Medical Center in Poughkeepsie, N.Y., after a three-week hospitalization, his daughter Jhana DuPont said. He was 72. His application to Gov. Andrew Cuomo for executive clemency, based on heart issues and glaucoma, had been pending since 2018. Three emergency requests were filed on his behalf after the virus started sweeping through state prisons, said Dave D. George, associate director of the Release Aging People in Prison campaign. Mr. Smalls anguished to the very end about the status of his paperwork. Shortly after he died, Ms. DuPont discovered an unopened voice mail from her father, gasping into the hospital phone, asking, “How long will I have to be here?” Survivors include four children and seven grandchildren. Benjamin Franklin Smalls Jr. was born in Harlem on Dec. 4, 1947. When he was 3, his father, Benjamin Sr., was killed in a car accident. His mother, Ernestine, moved to Westchester County with Mr. Smalls and two sisters and started a real estate venture. Mr. Smalls graduated from Mount Vernon High School in 1965, bounced in and out of college and worked briefly as a back-office manager on Wall Street. But he soon struck out on his own, managing his family’s buildings, then running restaurants, bars and clubs — where he felt most at home. He would chat up customers and befriend musicians who performed in his places, including the soul singer Cuba Gooding Sr., who became a close friend. That bustling life came to an ugly, abrupt end on Oct. 3, 1998, when Mr. Smalls was 51. Aided by an accomplice, he abducted, threatened and assaulted at gunpoint a female tenant involved in a rent dispute with his sister, according to court records and newspaper accounts. He was sentenced to 39 years for kidnapping and assault. The narrowing of life in confinement lent Mr. Smalls the focus that had eluded him in freedom, his family said. Mr. Smalls joined the “lifers” committee that met to improve prison conditions at Shawangunk, the maximum security prison in Ulster County, where he was first held; Later, after he was transferred to Green Haven, he anchored a discussion group on issues confronting inmates, part of a project connecting Yale Law School students with prisoners. Mr. Smalls was running a legal practice out of a one-man cell so overstuffed with documents that prison authorities periodically ordered him to declutter. “Every time I saw Benny, he would give me legal papers to store,” said Glen R. Skinner, a friend who visited him every few months. “I still have them.”In a different age, about three months ago, 20 bucks could buy you up to four sets of music at Smalls, the pulsing Greenwich Village basement club celebrated for crowd-pleasing, unfussy jazz. Squeeze into the front row and you’d be close enough to the musicians to sweat on one other. Buy a drink and you were welcome to stick around for a 1 a.m. jam session featuring brash up-and-comers — and maybe guest turns by established stars. That cover charge, and a willingness to pack yourself in, also bought access to the intimate Mezzrow, Smalls’s sister club, just across Seventh Avenue South. Smalls and Mezzrow haven’t been packed in the last 12 weeks, of course. The clubs shuttered after performances on March 15, and their owner, Spike Wilner, said that even before the mandated shutdown, the crowds had diminished and musicians had been canceling gigs. But there’s a funny thing about jazz: It keeps roaring back to life. Live music returns to Smalls on June 1, in a socially distant way, thanks to Mr. Wilner’s persistence, the club’s shift into full nonprofit mode and a windfall from a celebrity benefactor — a $25,000 donation to the SmallsLIVE Foundation from Billy Joel. “That gift was such a positive vibe at a time when things were really dark,” Mr. Wilner said last week. “The impact of the virus has been devastating on the jazz community.” In a phone interview, Mr. Joel said he felt compelled to support Smalls in its time of need: “Live music is the vitality of New York.” He added: “That great sound is the hum of the city. And during this pandemic, it’s the jazz and classical players who get hit first.” Mr. Wilner’s plan for the money addresses the greatest hardship that jazz players are facing during the shutdown: lost gigs. He has booked a different jazz band at Smalls for two sets a night, at 7 and 8:30 p.m., all through June, paying the usual gig rate. It’s not quite a reopening, though. The musicians will be alone in the club except for an engineer and a manager. The audience will be at home, watching via the livestream that has regularly broadcast Smalls shows. Smalls makes its sets available in real time, then archives them behind a paywall for donors who have given at least $10 to the SmallsLIVE Foundation. The livestreams will also be available on the club’s Facebook page. No other major New York City jazz club is getting back to live, on-site performances so early. The trumpeter and composer Jeremy Pelt, who plays Smalls on reopening night in the drummer Joe Farnsworth’s quartet, has no qualms about being cautious while performing. “We’re armed with the basic knowledge of how the virus spreads. When I go down to Smalls, I’m not going to be hugging people and slapping high fives, even with my very dear friends. We’re going to make this music and leave.” The organist and composer Akiko Tsuruga noted that the Smalls stage is large enough for the players to connect while still staying six feet apart. She said that when her quartet plays there on June 12 she’ll miss the club’s community — the crowds of aficionados and out-of-towners, the musicians who pop in to hang — but will simply be happy for the chance to play. “The lockdown has reminded me how important playing music is to my life,” Ms. Tsuruga said. The money matters, too, of course. Jazz musicians rely more than ever on live performances to pay their bills, especially as streaming has gutted revenues from recordings. Ms. Tsuruga has lost gigs with the Clayton-Hamilton Jazz Orchestra and the all-female collective Lioness, and Mr. Pelt had to cut short a European tour. “This hit everybody right where it hurts, right in the pocket,” Mr. Pelt said. “That’s not even mentioning the mental effect of not playing with your colleagues.” Some help has come from the Louis Armstrong Educational Foundation, whose current president is Wynton Marsalis. The organization has allocated a million dollars for grants of $1,000 to the region’s working jazz musicians to be dispensed through an emergency fund. Other clubs have booked players for Zoom gigs, like the Jazz Gallery’s Lockdown Sessions, in which musicians like Joel Ross or Camila Meza chat over Zoom with Rio Sakairi, the Gallery’s artistic director, and then present new, homemade videos of themselves playing solo or with a live-in partner. Some festivals, too, have moved online, such as the annual celebration for artists on the pianist Fabian Almazan’s Biophilia Records. But jazz players insist that a Zoom connection doesn’t cut it when it comes to collaborative improvisation. “That connection can’t happen over a computer,” the pianist and singer Johnny O’Neal said. Ms. Tsuruga agreed: “Musicians need eye contact and the same vibe.” Mr. Pelt titled his most recent album “The Art of Intimacy, Vol. 1,” which refers not just to the romantic yearning of the set’s luminous ballads. “It’s not necessarily about the love aspect. It’s the fact that listening to this music is like listening in on a private conversation between the musicians.” Conversations like that, Mr. Pelt believes, demand physical presence. “We’re almost able to play and interact digitally, with no blips and not being a nanosecond off. But what will never be replaced is the human interaction with your fellow musicians.” Mr. Joel agrees. “There’s something about the atmosphere or the acoustics of playing together live in a small place that you can’t replicate any other way,” he said. “It’s an immediate sensation, feeling the vibrations of the drum and the resonance of a standup bass.” Like the jazz players, Mr. Joel has also tired of canceled gigs, including a summer tour and his Madison Square Garden residency. The singer and pianist said that he’s fortunate enough to be able to pay his band and crew full salary during the shutdown, but he misses “the community aspect” of playing live — connecting with other musicians. Mr. Wilner, meanwhile, is doing what jazz players do best. He’s improvising. Besides reaching out to other potential big-ticket supporters, he’s upgraded Smalls’ livestream technology and redesigned the club’s website to allow for financial contributions, large and small. The cost of a donation allows patrons access to the Smalls archive of 18,000 recorded performances from about 4,000 musicians. Wilner’s royalty system cuts checks to musicians whose archived sets get streamed, though the issue of performance rights royalties for original compositions remains murky. “We look at it as a sponsorship rather than a subscription,” Mr. Wilner said. “We don’t want to sell this music. We want people to support it.” He’s trying to get the cats playing again — and to get the cats paid. “We need to collect about $25,000 a month,” he said. “That would pay for 28 bands and one month’s rent.” The Smalls that returns on Monday won’t be the Smalls of old, exactly. But it will still be Smalls. That means something to Mr. O’Neal, whose exuberant trio performs there on June 2. “Everybody comes to Smalls. Everybody. It will go down in history as one of the premiere jazz clubs in history.”When Rose Wang called the customer service line at Zappos, all she wanted was a quick confirmation that a gift receipt was included with the hot pink Crocs she had ordered for her mother for Mother’s Day. But a few minutes into the call, Ms. Wang, 33, realized something felt different. After helping her with the gift receipt, the customer service representative, who was based in Las Vegas, started making small talk. In a calming voice that reminded Ms. Wang of a grandmother, the representative told her that she, too, found it nearly impossible to buy gifts for her mother. Amid the isolation of the coronavirus pandemic, Ms. Wang was willing — eager, actually — to chat. The two women ended up discussing mother-daughter relationships, a favorite Brazilian restaurant in Las Vegas and a girls’ trip to Hawaii. The conversation lasted nearly 45 minutes. “To hear someone on the West Coast commiserate with me and talk about their plans and what they wanted to do after the quarantine — it felt very connecting,” Ms. Wang, who lives in New York, said. Customer service representatives, even on the best of days, typically field a lot of complaints — missing deliveries, unsatisfied customers and other gripes. But these days, with people grappling with financial insecurity, separation from their friends and family, and uncertainty, the tone has changed. Rather than viewing calls as a form of drudgery, some people seem to relish having a person on the other end of the line to talk with. Sensing the shifting need, and wanting to make use of customer service representatives whose call volume was down, Zappos, the online merchant best known for its shoes, in April revamped its customer service line: People could call just to chat — about their future travel plans, Netflix shows or anything on their minds. “Sure, we take orders and process returns, but we’re also great listeners,” Zappos said in a statement on its website. “Searching for flour to try that homemade bread recipe? We’re happy to call around and find grocery stores stocked with what you need.” With plunging retail sales, businesses are trying new ways to retain customers. Brian Kalma, one of the Zappos employees who came up with the idea for the revamped customer service line, said the company’s use of Holacracy, a self-management system in which there are no managers and employees define their own jobs, had helped to create an environment where the idea could come to life. Mr. Kalma said Zappos, which was acquired by Amazon in 2009 but runs independently, was considering adding to its 400-person customer service team to keep the new service line running longer. “We’re seeing signals that this is something we may want to maintain as the world reopens,” he said. Even before the new service line officially started, Zappos had said its customer service representatives were available just to chat. One call, several years ago, lasted nearly 11 hours, the company said. People have called to have conversations about their life stories. Single parents at home with small children have called, grateful to speak with another adult. Teenagers have called asking for homework help. The most common questions, Mr. Kalma said, are where to find a nearby medical center or how to find household supplies that are out of stock at local stores. But the new line is good for more than helping to stock toilet paper. In mid-April, around the time when coronavirus patients were filling New York City hospitals and equipment was in short supply, David F. Putrino, the director of rehabilitation innovation for the Mount Sinai Health System, reached out to Zappos looking for pulse oximeters, devices that indicate blood oxygen level and heart rate. The devices were sold out or on back-order everywhere he looked. To his amazement, Zappos was able to locate the devices. Within days, the company had shipped 500 oximeters to Mount Sinai — and later donated an additional 50. “It was, like, unbelievable from our perspective,” he said. Crystal Mouzon, the Zappos customer service representative who spoke with Ms. Wang, the woman in New York, said customers regularly told her that her voice was soothing. “I bring ’em on in,” Ms. Mouzon, 60, said. “If they have an anxiety, I just calm them down, and we just talk about anything.” She said she chatted with callers as if they were her friends. “We laughed and talked about so much,” Ms. Mouzon said of her conversation with Ms. Wang. “Every time she was going to hang up, she would ask me something else, and then we laughed and talked about that.”MANAGUA — Just hours after Yamil Acevedo died in a hospital, funeral home workers in hazardous materials suits strapped his coffin to the back of a pickup truck, drove it to a cemetery and buried him in the dark of night. Across Nicaragua, families are being forced to hold these “express burials,” rushed funerals at all hours of the night, without time to call a priest or to buy flowers. The services are happening so fast, and in such a haphazard fashion, that relatives worry terrible mistakes are being made. “The doctor said, ‘If you can bury him as soon as possible, do it,’” said Amani Acevedo, Mr. Acevedo’s daughter. “I don’t know that the person in that coffin was even him.” Long lines have formed at the country’s hospitals, and pharmacies have run out of basic medicines. The popular baseball season has been suspended, with players refusing to take the field. The signs are everywhere that the coronavirus is raging across Nicaragua. But the Nicaraguan government insists it has the virus firmly under control, with the lowest Covid-19 death toll in Central America. Nicaragua, a nation of 6.4 million people, is one of the last countries to resist adopting the strict measures that have been put in place around much of the world to curb the spread of the disease. It never closed its schools. It did not shutter businesses. Throughout the pandemic, the government not only allowed mass events — it organized them. Families say the consequences of these decisions are being buried, literally, under cover of darkness. Without any testing for Covid-19, they are told that their loved ones died of pneumonia and — because of fear of contagion — are urged to bury them as soon as possible. Health organizations are struggling to get accurate case numbers. Testing is limited and controlled by the government. Doctors and activists watching respiratory illnesses spread around the nation are bracing for disaster, just two years after antigovernment uprisings against President Daniel Ortega turned violent. Facing withering criticism, the government released a report last Monday stating that critics were trying to sow chaos, and that the vast majority of people in the country, the second-poorest in the hemisphere, could not afford to lose work under a strict lockdown. In the document, which was posted online, the government compared its approach to that of Sweden, challenging “one-size-fits all” tactics and arguing that each country’s response to the pandemic should be tailored to its own reality. “Countries that have totally closed their economies are uncomfortable with the example of countries that do not apply a draconian closure and do not destroy their economies to face the pandemic,” the government said in the document. The document did not say how many people had been tested for the virus or explain why the government has allowed mass events — like food festivals and a march called “Love in the Time of Covid” — to continue as planned. In a video the government prepared, Paul Oquist, an American-born adviser to Mr. Ortega, said people in the countryside could not shelter at home because they were busy milking cows, gathering eggs and finding wood. Some 80 percent of workers in Nicaraguan cities have informal jobs, he said, and if they do not work, they do not eat. Mr. Oquist added that the country’s health system was prepared for the outbreak because the Ortega government had increased the number of hospitals and doctors over the past 13 years. Nineteen hospitals were designated to respond to the coronavirus, and a mass campaign to disinfect taxis, buses, schools and markets was underway. For almost two months, the government reported only handfuls of infections. In late May, however, as signs of the spread of the virus became more obvious, the government’s count shot up 10-fold, and the Ministry of Health now says it has confirmed 759 cases and 35 deaths. The Citizen Observatory, an anonymous group of 90 doctors, epidemiologists and other public health volunteers who formed an underground organization to track coronavirus cases in Nicaragua, puts the coronavirus death toll in Nicaragua at 805. They have counted 3,725 cases as of Saturday. The government says routine pneumonia cases, which are no higher than normal, are being conflated with the coronavirus. Ms. Acevedo said the absurdity of the pneumonia diagnosis given her father, a 61-year-old retired executive assistant who died after a two-week illness, was underscored by the timing of his funeral: midnight. Although experts say it is not necessary, people dying of “atypical pneumonia” are being buried quickly because of an apparent fear of contagion — making the incorrect diagnosis obvious, the family said. Since when, Ms. Acevedo asked in an interview, do Nicaraguans bury their dead at such hours? Pneumonia cases in other years had not led to such hurried, late-night funerals. “My father did not die of pneumonia,” Ms. Acevedo said. “My father died of Covid-19.” The pandemic has arrived at a time when trust in the Nicaraguan government is low. Two years ago, enormous uprisings against Mr. Ortega left hundreds of people dead or in prison. In the document released last Monday, the government asserted that its opponents were trying to use the pandemic to force economic collapse and undermine Mr. Ortega’s administration at a time when the economy is still reeling from the uprisings, which it says cost more than 150,000 jobs. Some doctors say they fear speaking out, since it could cost them their jobs — or worse — as was routine during the political crisis. Dr. Carlos Quant, the chief of the infectious disease unit at Manolo Morales Hospital in Managua, said at least 100 medical workers at his hospital were out sick, yet the hospital stopped testing staff members for the illness. He said that it was unclear whether there was a shortage of testing supplies or a bottleneck at the testing facilities centralized by the government, but that few of the patients who probably died of Covid-19 were likely to have had the correct cause of death listed on their death certificates. “I don’t know if this is a bad intention to have an undercount, to hide information or hide data, but it’s very easy for the government to say, ‘No, these are atypical pneumonias,’” he said. “And, sure, they are atypical pneumonias, because they are not tested.” With testing centralized by the government, it is difficult for private hospitals to conduct their own exams. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “They hide the information and hide the tests,” said Luis C. Siero Alfaro, whose father, Cristóbal Siero Huembes, 59, an airline pilot, died May 15. “The nights that my father was in the military hospital, they were taking 15 to 20 people out through the back every night. You could see it. You saw people filming it.” Vice President Rosario Murillo, who is also the first lady and the spokeswoman for the Nicaraguan government, has criticized such videos as “fake news” filmed in other countries. But in a Facebook Live video that Mr. Siero shot of his father’s body being taken from the morgue to the cemetery at nightfall shows unmistakable scenes from Managua, including the “Tree of Life” structures that Ms. Murillo installed throughout the capital in 2013, which many described as a symbol of wasteful government spending. Mr. Siero’s video shows a bare-chested gravedigger working at night, with a T-shirt pulled over his face. In the video, when Mr. Siero asked the funeral workers why they drove so fast to the cemetery, the worker said he was “following orders,” but did not say whose. “From the moment they admitted him until he died, my father never got a test result for Covid,” despite having all the symptoms, Mr. Siero said. Ms. Murillo did not respond to a request for comment, and a request to interview the health minister went unanswered. Jarbas Barbosa da Silva, the assistant director of the Pan American Health Organization, the regional division of the World Health Organization, said international health authorities were struggling to get accurate data from Nicaragua. Most countries provide daily figures, while Nicaragua releases only weekly numbers. Nicaragua has not accepted the organization’s offer to send international experts to carry out an epidemiological analysis and an evaluation of Nicaragua’s health services, he said. But he said the government  did eventually agree in recent weeks to limit the size of mass events. While the government has not closed schools, most classrooms are empty: Parents are keeping their children home. “The whole world has to understand the truth of the crime that our government is committing,” said Elena Cano, whose 46-year-old son, Camilo Meléndez, the facilities manager at the National Assembly building, died May 19 after trying to get medical care several times. His death certificate says he died of acute respiratory failure as a consequence of “unusual severe pneumonia.” Alfonso Flores Bermúdez reported from Managua, and Frances Robles from Key West, Fla. Alexander Villegas contributed reporting from Costa Rica.These days, as I stand at the kitchen sink, washing my hands and wondering why 20 seconds never seemed so long before, I find myself thinking of Robert Gober. So much of our current life-in-quarantine resembles the anxious homebody world he has imagined in his art. He first became known in the mid-1980s for pristine sculptures of sinks, usually with two holes in the place where the faucet should go. You might say he punctured the neutral surfaces of Minimalism, investing them with intimations of the human body, and bringing the unlikely themes of hygiene and handwashing to the forefront of contemporary art. Mr. Gober’s art overlaps with our new, wash-around-the-clock culture in other ways as well. At a time when the pandemic has created shortages of staples like paper towels, common objects can seem to have a sudden luster, reminding us of Mr. Gober’s habit of fetishizing household goods and giving them a radiant presence by virtue of his painstaking craftsmanship. Some of his sculptures consist of exacting replications of supermarket items — a 25-pound bag of cat litter; or a Table Talk apple pie whose cardboard box is festooned with a fluorescent sticker advertising a price of 69 cents. Initially, Mr. Gober’s food sculptures seemed to allude to a class of Americans who probably didn’t eat kale or shop at Whole Foods, although now, I suspect, amid our pandemic deprivations, few among us would be foolish enough to decline a slice of Table Talk pie. On the other hand, the family home, as defined by the artist, is also a place where things go seriously awry. He is best known for his sculptures of a lopped-off adult male leg jutting out from a wall, dismembered but still dressed for work. You can read it as a pop symbol of Oedipal struggle (i.e. the leg could belong to an unlucky father who was bumped off, like the Wicked Witch, when a house tumbled out of the sky and severed his leg). Or you can see it instead as an emblem of the American plague that descended on this country in the 1980s, when the AIDS epidemic was raging, and the normally quotidian rituals of domestic life were shadowed by catastrophe and death. As it so happens, the Matthew Marks Gallery is now hosting its first online exhibition, “Robert Gober: Sculpture, Photographs, and Works on Paper 1976 -2019” (through June 10), a selection of 20 works spanning the artist’s fertile career. Many of us have mixed feelings about online exhibitions, a hybrid form that poaches on the tradition of gallery-going while emptying it of sensual pleasure. On the other hand, it is all that we have at the moment. In its defense, if the desire to learn about art and the desire to feel represent opposite ends of the art-viewing spectrum, online exhibitions at least deliver the learning quotient of the experience. The show at Matthew Marks opens dramatically, with “Death Mask” (2008), a white plaster oval that fills the screen, putting you face to face with what looks like an affable polar bear. It has piercing blue eyes, which are outlined in pencil, and a loosely painted red mouth. A link produces background information: Mr. Gober created the work after he lost his hound dog, Paco. “Death Mask” is a combined double likeness, melding the artist’s features with the snout of his pooch. A documentary photograph shows the artist lying on a table on his back, a sage-green towel draped over him, an assistant daubing what appears to be wet plaster on his face. Also provided are the measurements of the work. It turns out to be only 10 inches tall. The truth is that sculpture, compared to other mediums, has the most to lose from digital reproduction. As you click around a screen, the abrupt changes in scale that can make an image too big or too small, too near or too far, tend to erase the psychological intimacy of Mr. Gober’s objects and cause them to look like props for a horror movie. This is especially the case with “Short Haired Cheese” (1992-3), a generous wedge of Swiss sprouting thin, black strands of human hair. Ditto for “Untitled” (1992), a beeswax sculpture of a girl’s right shoe, with hair growing inside. It crosses the Surrealist objet of the ’30s with the identity politics of the ’90s, as if to say that mutants-r-us. Drawings and photographs, by virtue of their two-dimensionality, are less vulnerable to digital distortion. The earliest work here, an untitled black-and-white photograph from 1976, is a stirring still life. A hippie-style bedspread, embroidered and un-ironed, appears in close-up, with a book of photographs by Diane Arbus resting on top, and a small plate holding the remains of a slice of watermelon. The photograph has a blunt, powerful composition, and seems to contain everything a young artist could need to dream: a bed, a snack, the perfect book. Wondering how Mr. Gober is faring in the midst of the pandemic, I called him the other day. Now 65 years old, he is currently in lockdown out in Peconic, N.Y., on the North Fork of Long Island, in a house and garage-turned-studio where he has lived and worked for decades. I was eager to ask him whether he saw parallels between the current pandemic and the era of AIDS, for which there is still no vaccine. Mr. Gober first exhibited his sink sculptures at the Paula Cooper Gallery in 1985, about six months after the Food and Drug Administration approved a test for H.I.V., ending the period when asymptomatic people had no idea whether they were infected. Are his sink sculptures about the dream of cleanliness? “The impossibility of cleanliness,” he replied. “There is the reality that I worked and lived through another epidemic in New York,” he said, “and there might be overtones of that now. But nobody was banging on pots and pans at 7 o’clock during the AIDS crisis.” Indeed, neither patients nor their caretakers were given the cheering support that has been extended to the medical community during the current epidemic. AIDS has since claimed the lives of more than 700,000 Americans. “AIDS was always fatal,” Mr. Gober said, referring to the earlier years, before the advent of effective drugs, whereas many victims of Covid-19 are likely to recover. “The differences are more numerous than the similarities,” he said. What is he working on these days? “I am not really working,” he said. “I am not making art. My studio is shut, but I have been keeping my assistants employed. There are four of them, and they are working from home and sending me pictures. I have really been out in the garden. I have woods. I have a pond. I have a flower garden. I don’t have vegetables, but I have a varied terrain piece of property and I have planted trees and shrubs. I usually see spring episodically. On weekends, or maybe I take a week. And this time I got to see it incrementally, like every day. It was very rewarding.” Does he often have periods like this, when he is not working? “Sometimes I will go a number of months and not make anything. I am assuming, based on many years of making things, by blind faith, that my brain is working on things, but I am not physically making things and I really don’t have ideas yet.” It was a relief, in a way, to hear from someone free of the compulsion to turn out work for the sake of keeping busy. These days we all need additional time to keep up with the torrent of news. And to clean. Robert Gober: Sculpture, Photographs, and Works on Paper 1976 -2019 Through June 10, matthewmarks.com.LONDON — When Boris Johnson became the editor of The Spectator in 1999, he declared that he planned to make the weekly magazine, Britain’s oldest, a “refuge for logic, fun, and good writing.” It would, he promised somewhat paradoxically, “continue to set the political agenda, and to debunk it.” Now that Mr. Johnson is the prime minister, the magazine he once ran has never been closer to fulfilling his ambition of being at once in bed with Britain’s conservative establishment and willing to yank the covers off it. Yet in the past few weeks, The Spectator’s incestuous ties with the governing elite have thrust it into the murky heart of an uproar over a 260-mile drive that Mr. Johnson’s most influential adviser, Dominic Cummings, and his wife made to his parents’ house in northern England, violating Britain’s lockdown rules. Mary Wakefield, one of the magazine’s senior editors, is married to Mr. Cummings and wrote a vivid account of how she and her husband both fell ill with the coronavirus. Mr. Cummings, she said, lay “doggo” in bed for 10 days before emerging into “the almost comical uncertainty of London lockdown.” The trouble is, she did not mention that they had actually gone to Durham, a journey that brought charges of hypocrisy and calls for Mr. Johnson to dismiss Mr. Cummings, at a time when the government was already under fire for Britain’s rising death toll, ravaged nursing homes and hapless test-and-trace program. Ms. Wakefield’s omissions have cast an unflattering light on The Spectator as well. Critics have accused it of misleading readers. Britain’s Independent Press Standards Organization, a watchdog group, has received more than 100 complaints from the public about the column, which, pending an investigation, could force the magazine to publish a correction. “The English tradition of editing has always been more laissez faire than the American one,” said Timothy Garton Ash, a historian at Oxford University and longtime contributor to The Spectator. “But there was too much latitude in this case.” The Spectator’s current editor, Fraser Nelson, declined to discuss the contretemps, and Ms. Wakefield, who has since assigned stories critical of her husband, did not return a request for comment. A spokesman for the magazine said, “We’re happy to let the coverage speak for itself” — a standard-issue response that in this case might accurately convey the magazine’s sentiments, given the streak of mischief in its culture. “They’d be amused by the notoriety,” said Andrew Gimson, a former foreign editor of The Spectator who wrote a biography of Mr. Johnson. “They’ve always had a tradition of allowing people leeway and laughing at mistakes.” At once high-minded and playful, conservative and louche, The Spectator occupies a peculiar niche in British media. It has only 83,000 print and digital subscribers, but an outsize influence because of its 192-year history, legacy of acclaimed writers (Christopher Hitchens, A.N. Wilson, Jeffrey Bernard), and reputation as an incubator for Conservative Party leaders, from Mr. Johnson to Nigel Lawson, who edited the magazine in the 1960s and went on to become chancellor of the Exchequer. With offices in a stately Westminster townhouse, where the leather chairs and bookcases are more redolent of an Oxford college than a 21st century news organization, the magazine is famous for its summer party. No food, but the champagne flows freely and the guest list, one writer cracked, can range from cabinet ministers and famous authors to a “Catholic monsignor, aged 106.” During Mr. Johnson’s editorship, when he also won a seat in Parliament, he and other editors carried on a tangle of extramarital affairs in the office, prompting The Spectator’s Fleet Street rivals to nickname it The Sextator. Colleagues of Mr. Johnson say he always enjoyed a good joke, sometimes at the expense of other publications. In 2002, when The New York Times sent a photographer to shoot a portrait of Mr. Johnson, he tried to get Mr. Gimson to sit in his chair and impersonate him. The Spectator’s publisher “got wind of this childish prank, was not amused by it and put a stop to it,” Mr. Gimson recalled. As Alexander Chancellor, one of its most storied editors, once said, “The Spectator is more of a cocktail party than a political party.” And yet, under Mr. Nelson, its Scottish editor who went to the University of Glasgow rather than Oxford, the magazine has tried to be more sober and balanced. It has published several tough articles about Mr. Johnson and the Cummings affair, including at least one commissioned by Ms. Wakefield, according to the writer Anthony Horowitz, who is a critic of the government. And it published a piece by its Scotland editor, Alex Massie, that declared, “Boris isn’t fit to lead.” The Spectator sponsors a Parliamentarian of the Year award that has become a fixture in the political calendar. Mr. Nelson and his political reporters are well connected in political circles, and often break stories about the government. Current and former staff members say they doubt Mr. Nelson knew about Ms. Wakefield’s travels before publishing her column, though they have not discussed it with him. “It’s a very serious professional operation pretending to be a bunch of champagne dilettantes,” said James Kirkup, a writer for the magazine. “If it were just a Tory mouthpiece, it wouldn’t be very interesting or successful.” Still, the magazine’s ties to the government are an undeniable part of its cachet, and Mr. Johnson’s rascally spirit animates both. The two “share a degree of stylistic and cultural affinity, through their unflappable confidence and their propensity for mischief,” said Sophia Gaston, director of the British Foreign Policy Group and a fellow at the London School of Economics. Not everyone is beguiled. Simon Jenkins, a former editor of The Times of London, said the influence of weekly magazines was waning in general, with the emergence of digital rivals like UnHerd, a website that has published provocative pieces about the pandemic. “The peculiarity of The Spectator is, quite simply, Boris Johnson,” he said. Professor Garton Ash said the magazine had become more of a “house journal for Brexiteers” since the 2016 referendum on European Union membership, even if it has held on to its irreverent tone and good writing. Since 2004, The Spectator has been owned by the Barclay brothers, David and Frederick. Reclusive billionaires who are best known these days for feuding with each other, the Barclays hold staunch pro-Brexit views. But staff members say they are less involved in the magazine than in their other media property, The Daily Telegraph. It’s not clear if the magazine’s bosses were amused by its cameo role in the Cummings affair. Andrew Neil, whom the Barclays installed as chairman of its parent company, retweeted a post in which a Times of London columnist labeled Ms. Wakefield’s column “a piece of noble deception.” Mr. Neil referred questions to Mr. Nelson, saying, “He’s responsible for the content of the magazine.” So far, the only person who has stepped forward with an explanation is Mr. Cummings, who contributed a short piece of his own to The Spectator, which also skipped over the Durham trip. He defended the omission because, he said, his family had received threats in their London home. “Why on earth would I mention another house I was in, where I’ve got two elderly parents and other relatives living there?” he said during a session with reporters in the garden at 10 Downing Street. Then why, a reporter pressed Mr. Cummings, write an article at all? “My wife’s a writer,” he replied. “I don’t tell her what to do.”LLANÇÀ, Spain — With an intensity of flavor to match their color, the big, bright-red prawns caught off Spain’s eastern coast are the kind of delicacy that someone might eat once or twice in a year and remember fondly for the rest of it. Around Christmas, when they are often a highlight of restaurants’ holiday menus, the wholesale price at the daily fish auctions in ports like that of Llançà, in Catalonia, would be up to 100 euros a kilogram. That’s about $50 a pound. In mid-March, before Spain declared its coronavirus state of emergency, they fetched around 70 euros a kilogram. In Llançà this past month, a kilogram went for €36. More than 90 percent of the catch would usually be earmarked for restaurants. With dining rooms closed, that top-end market has disappeared, and the prawns are being picked up at vastly reduced prices by fishmongers who serve a much broader clientele than the elite customers of Spain’s best restaurants. For those working on fishing boats trawling the seabed in search of the prawns — 12 hours at sea can yield just a dozen kilograms or so — the only consolation has been that oil prices have also collapsed during the pandemic, allowing them to use their boats without spending so much on gas. “The question is whether people will return in large numbers to the restaurants before the oil prices rise again,” said Josep Garriga, 71, who has officially retired but who still enjoys prawn fishing alongside his son, Jaume, who has taken over the captaincy of their family boat. “Everything has become like the day-to-day uncertainty of fishing, where you always hope for a good catch but never start with anything guaranteed.” For years, Mr. Garriga and a few other local fishers supplied Paco Pérez, a chef whose two-star Michelin restaurant is within walking distance of the port. The lockdown forced Mr. Pérez to close up and spend more time inside his adjoining family home. Three Latin American trainees, who arrived for cooking apprenticeships shortly before the beginning of the state of emergency, have also been marooned on his property. While Mr. Pérez is grappling with the cost of closing his flagship restaurant and seven other establishments that he manages worldwide, this unexpected setback has also been a chance for him to reflect about the food chain, and how the closing of restaurants has affected not only his staff but also a selected group of suppliers including fishers, cattle farmers and owners of orchards and vegetable gardens. “The famous chefs are the faces of our gastronomy, but none of this success would be possible without having a fantastic network of suppliers who can deliver just what I am looking for, depending on the season and the dish that I have in mind,” he said. “Everybody has been talking about not being able to go to a restaurant, but clearly there is also the less visible side of this story, namely the special suppliers who have been suffering heavily because of the coronavirus,” he added. Prawns have always been appreciated by local people, Mr. Pérez said, but the growth of Spanish gastronomy has pushed the price of the largest and most famous varieties beyond the reach of normal households. On the other hand, Mr. Pérez noted that Spain’s fine-dining boom had put on the table some previously discarded items. “I remember a time before haute cuisine when people here would not even eat some of the wonderful things that I have been cooking,” he said, citing the local sea cucumbers that he likes to grill on charcoal, serve in a stew, or even sometimes combine with pig’s trotters. Since the closing of restaurants, some premium food distributors have also recently been scrambling to find new customers. “In the last 20 years, gastronomy made all sorts of seafood very fashionable, from our prawns to our urchins,” Xavier Calsina Bosch, a local fish distributor, said. “Many in our business are now seeing the clear disadvantage of having become highly dependent on restaurants, but I still see hope in the longer term, because our great chefs have at least made a lot more people aware of the fantastic variety of produce that can be found along our shores.” During a fish auction recently, David Pareja Martínez, a fishmonger, sat in the stands reserved for the buyers, carefully viewing the different fish that moved along a conveyor belt, as if watching a fashion catwalk. Among his purchases were eight crates of large red prawns, which he packed in extra ice before driving them back to his shop in Girona, an hour away. “I have customers who were not even dreaming before this crisis about buying such prawns, but who are of course now very happy to be able to afford them,” he said. The chance may not last. Catching the prawns is complicated: They shelter far below the surface in rocky, hard-to-access areas. Fishers must steer their boats slowly along the path of underwater canyons, casting huge nets at a depth of about 2,600 feet. Spain is returning gradually to what Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez has called “the new normalcy,” with plans to remove lockdown restrictions by late June. While restaurants were allowed in May to reopen outdoor eating areas, Mr. Pérez, the chef, said he was planning to welcome back patrons inside his establishment by July 1. If the premium market does not recover soon, Mr. Garriga said, he and his son will focus on searching instead for sea bream and other more common fish that are sold in supermarkets and whose price has not been undermined by the coronavirus lockdown. Asked whether he had ever seen anything like this crisis, Mr. Garriga recalled his youth, spent in the isolated and impoverished fishing community of Llançà before foreign tourists started to turn Spain into one of Europe’s main beach holiday destinations. “I grew up in a house without a door, electricity or running water, and I remember having my first home shower when I was 14,” he said. “This coronavirus has brought about a tough time, but nobody needs to teach me anything about living in hardship.”LLANÇÀ, Spain — With an intensity of flavor to match their color, the big, bright-red prawns caught off Spain’s eastern coast are the kind of delicacy that someone might eat once or twice in a year and remember fondly for the rest of it. Around Christmas, when they are often a highlight of restaurants’ holiday menus, the wholesale price at the daily fish auctions in ports like that of Llançà, in Catalonia, would be up to 100 euros a kilogram. That’s about $50 a pound. In mid-March, before Spain declared its coronavirus state of emergency, they fetched around 70 euros a kilogram. In Llançà this past month, a kilogram went for €36. More than 90 percent of the catch would usually be earmarked for restaurants. With dining rooms closed, that top-end market has disappeared, and the prawns are being picked up at vastly reduced prices by fishmongers who serve a much broader clientele than the elite customers of Spain’s best restaurants. For those working on fishing boats trawling the seabed in search of the prawns — 12 hours at sea can yield just a dozen kilograms or so — the only consolation has been that oil prices have also collapsed during the pandemic, allowing them to use their boats without spending so much on gas. “The question is whether people will return in large numbers to the restaurants before the oil prices rise again,” said Josep Garriga, 71, who has officially retired but who still enjoys prawn fishing alongside his son, Jaume, who has taken over the captaincy of their family boat. “Everything has become like the day-to-day uncertainty of fishing, where you always hope for a good catch but never start with anything guaranteed.” For years, Mr. Garriga and a few other local fishers supplied Paco Pérez, a chef whose two-star Michelin restaurant is within walking distance of the port. The lockdown forced Mr. Pérez to close up and spend more time inside his adjoining family home. Three Latin American trainees, who arrived for cooking apprenticeships shortly before the beginning of the state of emergency, have also been marooned on his property. While Mr. Pérez is grappling with the cost of closing his flagship restaurant and seven other establishments that he manages worldwide, this unexpected setback has also been a chance for him to reflect about the food chain, and how the closing of restaurants has affected not only his staff but also a selected group of suppliers including fishers, cattle farmers and owners of orchards and vegetable gardens. “The famous chefs are the faces of our gastronomy, but none of this success would be possible without having a fantastic network of suppliers who can deliver just what I am looking for, depending on the season and the dish that I have in mind,” he said. “Everybody has been talking about not being able to go to a restaurant, but clearly there is also the less visible side of this story, namely the special suppliers who have been suffering heavily because of the coronavirus,” he added. Prawns have always been appreciated by local people, Mr. Pérez said, but the growth of Spanish gastronomy has pushed the price of the largest and most famous varieties beyond the reach of normal households. On the other hand, Mr. Pérez noted that Spain’s fine-dining boom had put on the table some previously discarded items. “I remember a time before haute cuisine when people here would not even eat some of the wonderful things that I have been cooking,” he said, citing the local sea cucumbers that he likes to grill on charcoal, serve in a stew, or even sometimes combine with pig’s trotters. Since the closing of restaurants, some premium food distributors have also recently been scrambling to find new customers. “In the last 20 years, gastronomy made all sorts of seafood very fashionable, from our prawns to our urchins,” Xavier Calsina Bosch, a local fish distributor, said. “Many in our business are now seeing the clear disadvantage of having become highly dependent on restaurants, but I still see hope in the longer term, because our great chefs have at least made a lot more people aware of the fantastic variety of produce that can be found along our shores.” During a fish auction recently, David Pareja Martínez, a fishmonger, sat in the stands reserved for the buyers, carefully viewing the different fish that moved along a conveyor belt, as if watching a fashion catwalk. Among his purchases were eight crates of large red prawns, which he packed in extra ice before driving them back to his shop in Girona, an hour away. “I have customers who were not even dreaming before this crisis about buying such prawns, but who are of course now very happy to be able to afford them,” he said. The chance may not last. Catching the prawns is complicated: They shelter far below the surface in rocky, hard-to-access areas. Fishers must steer their boats slowly along the path of underwater canyons, casting huge nets at a depth of about 2,600 feet. Spain is returning gradually to what Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez has called “the new normalcy,” with plans to remove lockdown restrictions by late June. While restaurants were allowed in May to reopen outdoor eating areas, Mr. Pérez, the chef, said he was planning to welcome back patrons inside his establishment by July 1. If the premium market does not recover soon, Mr. Garriga said, he and his son will focus on searching instead for sea bream and other more common fish that are sold in supermarkets and whose price has not been undermined by the coronavirus lockdown. Asked whether he had ever seen anything like this crisis, Mr. Garriga recalled his youth, spent in the isolated and impoverished fishing community of Llançà before foreign tourists started to turn Spain into one of Europe’s main beach holiday destinations. “I grew up in a house without a door, electricity or running water, and I remember having my first home shower when I was 14,” he said. “This coronavirus has brought about a tough time, but nobody needs to teach me anything about living in hardship.”COLUMBIA, S.C. — In an on-camera address after a week of destructive protests, former vice president Joseph R. Biden Jr. pleaded with his audience to imagine life for black people in America. Imagine, he said, “if every time your husband or son, wife or daughter left the house, you feared for their safety.” Imagine the police called on you for sitting in Starbucks. “The anger and frustration and the exhaustion, it’s undeniable,” he said. Exhaustion. For many black Americans across the country, what a year this month has been. The coronavirus pandemic has continued to disproportionately kill black people, and a spate of high profile killings in recent months in Georgia, Kentucky, and Minnesota, the latter two at the hands of the police, led to widespread demonstrations nationwide.  Protests shook more than three dozen cities on Saturday as crowds expressed outrage over the death of George Floyd, a black security guard who was killed in police custody in Minneapolis. Demonstrators shut down freeways, set fires and battled police batons and tear gas, the pain and frustration of the moment spilling out into the streets.  In Columbia, the city where Mr. Biden delivered his victory speech after the South Carolina primary just over three months ago, demonstrators on Saturday said they were demanding more than what it seemed like an election in November would deliver. Not only justice for the death of George Floyd, but change in political and economic power that would prevent the death of another black person in police custody, another brutal video going viral. “I’m tired of coming out here,” said Devean Moon, a 21-year-old Columbia resident, one of hundreds who participated in the peaceful protests in the city. “I’m tired of feeling forced to do all this.” It dawned on Sierra Moore, 24, who attended the protests carrying a homemade sign that read “No Justice, No Peace,” that she and her grandmother have been protesting the same issues over the course of a century. She looked at the racially diverse group of thousands, which gathered for a short program on the State House steps before leading a march to the local police station. Next to her was another sign: “Respect my existence or expect my resistance.” “I just don’t think that’s how change happens,” Ms. Moore said of voting. “They’ve been telling us to do that for so long — and we’ve done it — and look at everything that’s still going on.” Her words — expressing a sentiment shared by her peers — serve notice to politicians, civil rights groups and Mr. Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee who has urged unity amid the frustration. “If you want change in America, go and register to vote,” said Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms of Atlanta, but interviews with activists and leading Democratic figures including Stacey Abrams of Georgia, the longtime civil rights leader and former presidential candidate Jesse Jackson, and Representative Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts, flipped that typical framework: If Democrats want people to vote, party leaders need to listen to why people are angry. Ms. Abrams described the events of the past week as what happens when people are desperate for “their pain to be validated.” “You cannot motivate someone to a behavior that they don’t believe will actually bring change,” she said. “We have to start by saying what you feel and what you fear is real.” As he seeks to win the White House for the Democrats, the party that is the political home of most black Americans, Mr. Biden has attempted to strike this balance. He made clear that he has spoken to Mr. Floyd’s family. “We are a nation enraged, but we cannot allow our rage to consume us,” he said in a statement released early Sunday morning. “We are a nation exhausted, but we will not allow our exhaustion to defeat us.” “The very soul of America is at stake,” he said, tying the tension between the police and black communities to removing President Trump from the White House. The moment may still test Mr. Biden’s priorities, as a weary black electorate desires far greater change than the promise of a return to normalcy that has fueled his campaign. Energizing those voters, activists and elected leaders say, means addressing their demands for change and the realities of racism. But the former vice president, one of the Senate architects of the modern criminal justice system, cannot confront racism without addressing systemic inequalities, and he cannot address systemic inequalities by simply returning to a pre-Trump America. “Our needs aren’t moderate,” Mr. Jackson said in a recent interview. “The absence of Trump is not enough.”  Mr. Biden’s win in South Carolina was a turning point for his once-flailing campaign. His support came from across all demographics, but his particular strength was older black voters — people who said the community’s familiarity with and trust of Mr. Biden, combined with his perceived ability to beat Mr. Trump, earned their backing. To win in November, and to deliver on his promise of American unity, Mr. Biden is likely to need more than the coalition that brought him his primary victory. And to engage younger voters, he’ll need to offer more than the promise of ousting Mr. Trump as an answer to current despair. On the policy front, a task force with criminal justice experts that supported Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont has already been convened. Mr. Biden recently released a “Plan for Black America,” covering economic inequality and voting rights. Mr. Jackson, who supported Mr. Sanders in the primary, said Mr. Biden is “a consensus builder” and, if surrounded by the right people, the quality should serve him well. But Mr. Biden also must minimize mistakes, said Mayor Stephen Benjamin of Columbia, alluding to the recent controversy in which Mr. Biden apologized after saying “you ain’t black” to black people uncertain whether to support him or Mr. Trump. “The greatest asset that every candidate has, for better or for worse, is authenticity,” Mr. Benjamin said. He views authenticity as a prerequisite to leveling with people who are used to being disappointed. “I do believe, that if the vice president is authentically Joe, a legitimately good man who cares, I think people will gravitate to that authenticity.” Engaging with a community that feels disaffected by the political system can be difficult. Mr. Trump has made a public show of trying to coax black Americans away from the Democratic Party, though he inadvertently made clear in comments to reporters on Saturday how little progress he has made: “MAGA is Make America Great Again,” he said, discussing his voting base. “By the way, they love African-American people, they love black people. MAGA loves the black people.” Last October, Mr. Trump was in Columbia to address a forum on policing and criminal justice — many of the issues protesters are taking to the streets over — held at Benedict College, a historically black institution. He spoke a day ahead of some of the 2020 Democratic candidates, including Mr. Biden. “The Democratic policies have let African-Americans down and taken them for granted,” Mr. Trump said then. Progressive black leaders are extremely critical of Mr. Trump, as are many black voters. But they also believe that Democrats have sometimes been their greatest obstacle in addressing police brutality and racial inequality. “Part of the reason these are systemic inequalities is that they transcend not only party, but time,” said Ms. Abrams, who is among those being vetted by Mr. Biden as a potential running mate. She also noted that:“We have to be very intentional about saying this is not about one moment or one murder — but the entire infrastructure of justice.” Ms. Pressley, one of the House members who introduced a resolution to condemn police brutality, racial profiling, and the excessive use of force in Congress this past week, pointed to the confluence of issues facing black communities: a public health crisis, an economic crisis and, with the threat of police violence, “just trying to stay alive.” Economic experts have predicted that even as the country faces a nationwide downturn, black communities may be hit particularly hard. Access to capital will dry up more quickly, especially for black business owners, and a coming “avalanche of evictions” could displace black renters across the country. Ms. Pressley, an insurgent progressive in 2018 who beat a Democratic incumbent partly with a strategy to engage nontypical voters, said if elected officials want to speak to people’s pain, they have to understand the “deficit of trust” they’re operating under. “People don’t participate, not because they’re ignorant and they don’t know enough,” she said. “It’s because they know too much. They live it every day.” At Saturday’s march in South Carolina’s capital, thousands gathered at a state capitol rich with its own racial back story. The Old Carolina State House was burned to the ground during the Civil War, and the new building includes monuments to 19th-century state figures who were open racists — such as Dr. J. Marion Sims, a pioneer in the field of surgery who experimented on enslaved black women, and Benjamin Tillman, a former U.S. senator and South Carolina governor who spoke positively about lynch mobs that killed black residents. On Saturday, the state house steps were filled with many black South Carolinians, demanding the right to live without fear, an echo of what some people fought for more than a century ago, in the days of Mr. Sims and Mr. Tillman.  “Clearly our voices are not enough,” said Kayla Brabham, a 28-year-old student at Benedict College who skipped Mr. Trump’s speech at her school. “It’s not just the last couple years or months, it’s the whole time I’ve been alive,” she said. “We should not have to come out here to make y’all feel like we’re important.” Even her name, she said, was a reminder of the country’s legacy of black violence. “B-R-A-B-H-A-M, ” she said, spelling it out. “We got that from our slave masters. My great-great-grandmother was a slave in Hampton, South Carolina.”Patrick Kingsley, an international correspondent, and Laetitia Vancon, a photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles to explore the reopening of the European continent after coronavirus lockdowns. Read all their dispatches. PRAGUE — To attend her first play in more than two months, Marie Reslova, a prominent Czech theater critic, drove into Prague, headed to a large vegetable market, parked next to a convertible sports car and switched off her engine. Soon, actors from the Czech National Theater strode onto a platform a few yards from Ms. Reslova’s windshield. The play had begun. And she hadn’t even left her car. The Czech Republic enforced tighter restrictions than most European countries to combat the coronavirus pandemic. For several weeks, Czechs were barred even from jogging without a mask. Even after the government eased that restriction, masks were still mandatory in most other public contexts. But the country also loosened the lockdown earlier than most — and that has made it a laboratory for how arts and culture can adapt to a context in which some restrictions on social life have been lifted, while others remain in place. The drive-in theater at Prague’s vegetable market was an ambitious example. To circumvent restrictions on public gatherings, audience members watched plays, concerts and comedy from behind their steering wheels — in a monthlong program that ended with a variety act by the National Theater last Sunday evening, attended by Ms. Reslova. Across Europe, drive-ins have become a familiar means of circumventing pandemic restrictions. By default, cars keep their occupants socially distanced, leading even nightclub owners and priests to set up drive-in discos and churches. Though considered a gimmick at first, their proliferation suggests they could become a common feature of society at least until the development of vaccines and treatments for the coronavirus. But that will probably have ramifications for both the environment and the quality of cultural events. At times, the drive-in theater felt more like a traffic jam than a work of drama. When the audience members wanted to applaud, they honked their horns. When it started to drizzle, they flicked on their windshield wipers. And to hear the actors, they hooked their car speakers to a portable radio provided by the organizers. It was theater, but not quite as Ms. Reslova remembered it. Not that she minded — initially, at least. Before the lockdown, she watched three or four plays in person a week. During the lockdown, she had seen theater only on the internet. “I don’t have to watch this online!” she said cheerily through her car window, before the show started. The couple in the convertible beside her, a pair of marketing executives, were equally excited. But standing at the back, having sneaked in on foot, a Czech photographer was more circumspect. Delighted as he was that there was at least something to watch, David Konecny wondered how the performers would foster that sense of shared experience and connection that he feels is so central to live theater. Otherwise, Mr. Konecny feared, “it’s just people in their cars, sitting in their bubbles.” For the actors, the experience was a strange mix of exhilaration at performing again after a long pause — and eeriness. Peter Vancura, one of the performers that night, at first felt nervous stepping onstage, confronted not by faces and frowns, but the hoods of 30 cars. But then he noticed he could make out some people’s expressions through the windshield, and even see their smiles. “It’s not so bad!” he said backstage. “Not so unconnected.” The project was dreamed up in late March by Karel Kratochvil, an actor with a children’s theater company who couldn’t stand how the lockdown had laid waste to all forms of cultural life, including his own productions. Just as doctors care for people’s medical health, he felt a duty to care for people’s emotional well-being. “To me, an actor is not a job, it’s something higher,” Mr. Kratochvil said. “It means taking some responsibility for society.” To that end, Mr. Kratochvil initially put on his own one-man show, declaiming literary excerpts from a small boat moored under a famous medieval footbridge in central Prague. But only one person showed up, sending Mr. Kratochvil back to the drawing board. A few days later, he woke up with a brand-new idea. What if people could attend a drive-in play, just as they might see a film at a drive-in cinema? Mr. Kratochvil can’t actually drive, but that was just a detail. Within days he had founded “Art Parking,” a festival that ended up including both the drive-in theater and a drive-in cinema a few miles across town. Mr. Kratochvil invited several theaters to participate, from small independent outfits to the state-funded National Theater last Sunday night. There were also folk singers and classical violinists, rock guitarists and chanson singers. By the end of the month, 11,000 people had attended 28 performances. At first it was unclear whether the artists would need to speak or sing through masks, since they were working in public and the law technically required them to cover their mouths and noses. But at the first performance, the singer decided at the last minute to go without. The police did not intervene, and a precedent was set. For Tomas Dianiska, a comic playwright who performed his own play earlier in the festival, his show had been an important human experience, but not one he hopes will need to be repeated any time soon. “We came to the stage, and said ‘hello’ to these cars,” Mr. Dianiska remembered. “You can’t see the people — they’re using klaxons instead of laughing.” “Better than nothing,” he summarized. “A good experience to tell people about in the pub, but not for theater.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The artistic quality was varied, Mr. Kratochvil happily acknowledged. But that was beside the point, he said. The goal was to keep the cultural world ticking along and to maintain at least some form of human interaction, rather than to aim for virtuosity. “My thought was: We have to show how living art will never die,” he said. And since the lockdown eased significantly the morning after the festival ended — Czechs need no longer wear masks outdoors — the process had now served its purpose. “There’s no more need for this,” Mr. Kratochvil said. “And I’m glad about that.” And so it seemed was Ms. Reslova, who drove off disappointed. “Terrible,” said her companion, shouting through the car window as they left the car park following the performance. “That’s all we have to say.” Ms. Reslova later emailed to clarify that she had appreciated the concept of the festival itself, but not the National Theater’s variety show. While smaller theater groups had opted to perform entire plays, the National Theater’s submission was a messy collection of excerpts from various different plays — from Faust to Oedipus — and it didn’t really hang together, Ms. Reslova reckoned. But the couple in the convertible had a very different reaction, ecstatic to be back among other people at a cultural event. “It was a great pleasure,” said Jan Bezpalec, a marketing consultant. “Something that you just can’t get through the internet.” There was just one problem, he said. All the honking had taken its toll. His car battery was out of juice.Since April, landlords have looked to the first of the month fearing that tenants will stop paying their rent. For the most part, that has not happened. Despite a 14.7 percent unemployment rate and millions of new jobless claims each week, collections at many buildings are only slightly below where they were last year, when the economy was booming. How can this be? The answer is a little negotiation and a lot of government money. The $2 trillion CARES Act, which backstopped household finances with stimulus checks and extended unemployment benefits, has kept a surprising number of tenants current on their monthly balances. At the same time, many landlords have reduced rents or are forgiving overdue payments in full or in part. The trend cannot continue without a swift and robust recovery, which is becoming increasingly unlikely, or without another big injection of government money, which Senate Republicans say is not happening anytime soon. American households were struggling with rent long before the economy went into free fall, and there are signs — from an increase in partial payments to surveys that show many tenants are putting rent on their credit cards and struggling to pay for essentials like food — that this pressure is building. When the coronavirus outbreak started shutting down the economy in March, there was widespread fear that millions of tenants would fall behind on their monthly bills. Renters were already struggling with housing costs, with a quarter of tenant households paying more than half their before-tax income on rent and utilities, and the loss of jobs and hours seemed almost certain to worsen those troubles. Much of the available data has told a different story. In April, the National Multifamily Housing Council started releasing weekly payment tallies covering about a quarter of the nation’s rental units, and aside from a substantial dip in the first week, the collection rates have been only slightly below where they were last year. Through May 20, landlords in the council's survey had received 90.8 percent of rents, compared with 93 percent a year earlier. A similar story has played out in state surveys and earnings reports from real estate investment trusts like Mid-America Apartment Company and Equity Residential. But many of these numbers skew toward higher-end buildings. Other surveys show that buildings with poorer tenants have lower collection rates. Meantime, deferrals and partial payments appear to be increasing: Apartment List, a rental listing service, said 31 percent of respondents failed to make the full May payment on time, up from a quarter the month before. Hoping for a swift recovery, many landlords are telling tenants they can pay later, knowing this often won’t happen. “Landlords and renters will share in the pain,” said John Pawlowski, an analyst with Green Street Advisors, a real estate research firm in Newport Beach, Calif. “We just don’t know what the sharing balance will look like.” New Story, a San Francisco-based nonprofit organization that builds and finances affordable housing, recently raised $2 million to help renters struggling to make their bills because of coronavirus-related job losses. Alexandria Lafci, a founder of the organization and its chief operating officer, has spent the last few weeks calling landlords to haggle on behalf of tenants. “I called 21 properties and got eight yeses with an average of 20 percent off,” she said. Only three landlords rejected any accommodation, with the rest agreeing to arrangements like lower payments for the next three months or shaving down past-due balances to give tenants a break without lowering their advertised rents. Rental housing is a fragmented business, with purveyors ranging from publicly traded corporations that own tens of thousands of units to operators of only one or two. And falling rent collections are more likely to affect smaller landlords, who tend to have a limited financial cushion and less capacity to borrow. These landlords play an important role in the housing system — especially for lower-income tenants. Individual investors own about half the supply of low-cost units, and many are what housing advocates call “naturally occurring affordable housing,” or homes and apartments that carry below-market rents even without a subsidy, according to the Joint Center for Housing Studies at Harvard. These units, which overwhelmingly consist of small apartment buildings and single-family homes, are also more likely to have tenants affected by the coronavirus, with more than half of renters in the hardest-hit occupations living in single-family homes and duplexes, according to the center. Naturally occurring affordable housing is often overlooked, but these units are crucial. Government housing programs like Section 8 rental vouchers and the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit do not come close to satisfying the demand for lower-cost housing. This is why cities have yearslong lists for vouchers and lotteries for the tiny number of newly built subsidized units. Getting such housing is laborious and invasive, and it leaves out workers like undocumented immigrants and families whose incomes put them just beyond the threshold to qualify. Naturally occurring affordable housing is in a sense more valuable, because it represents units that anyone — someone switching jobs or fleeing an abusive spouse, for instance — can find on Craigslist. This housing can also be easily lost, not because it disappears, but because it is purchased by a homeowner or investor who renovates in hopes of increasing rents. This is what has happened over the last two decades: Since 2014, according to Harvard’s Joint Center, the nation has lost about 2.7 million affordable units, defined as those carrying rents less than $600. Carline Chery, 50, owns three Boston duplexes. Two-bedroom units go for $1,800, more than what the lowest-income renters can pay but roughly $900 less than the typical rent in the metropolitan area, according to Zillow. Compared with a public company, Ms. Chery runs a shoestring operation, with no reserves and little capacity to absorb a missed month. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. So when tenants in one of her buildings recently stopped paying, she borrowed from family members to make the mortgage payment, then put the building up for sale. The strongest interest has come not from another landlord, but a first-time home buyer. “I cannot afford it anymore,” Ms. Chery said. Fearing a surge in homelessness, state and local governments spent March and April instituting triage measures, like bans on evictions and utility shut-offs, along with limited subsidies for struggling renters. The CARES Act also offered aid to public-housing providers and grants to state governments that could be used for rental assistance. Since then, tenant activists have unified around a cry of #CancelRent, staging car rallies and roadside protests to demand that the government halt rent and mortgage payments — without the accrual of back payments — as long as the economy is battered by the coronavirus. Representative Ilhan Omar, Democrat of Minnesota, introduced a bill that roughly mirrors that desire. Although the bill has little chance of passing, housing advocates and landlords’ groups have pressed for more direct help to renters. The CARES Act allotted $12 billion in housing grants to cities, homeless shelters, affordable-housing providers and states, but the money was largely directed to renters and landlords in public or subsidized housing. That leaves out most moderate- and low-income tenants who live in market-rate developments, and small landlords like Ms. Chery, whose loans are held by private lenders and not backed by the federal government. The House of Representatives recently passed the $3 trillion HEROES Act, which in addition to more financial stimulus to households included $100 billion in rental subsidies for tenants affected by coronavirus-related job loss. That bill has no prospect of Senate approval, but landlord and tenant groups continue to push for expanded aid for tenants. “Small landlords and renters depend on each other, and both need emergency assistance to stay afloat during this time,” said Diane Yentel, chief executive of the National Low Income Housing Coalition. “Without it, we will end this crisis having saddled low-income renters with more debt, and having lost more of our country’s critical housing stock.”They are parallel plagues ravaging America: The coronavirus. And police killings of black men and women. Jimmy Mills’s life has been upended by both. His barbershop in Midtown Minneapolis was one of many small, black-owned businesses that have struggled to survive the pandemic. But Mr. Mills was hopeful because, after two months shut down, he was due to reopen next week. Then early on Friday, the working-class neighborhood where Mr. Mills has cut hair for 12 years went up in flames as chaotic protests over the death of George Floyd and police killings of African-Americans engulfed Minneapolis and cities across the country. “To have corona, and then this — it’s like a gut shot,” Mr. Mills, 56, said. The upheaval sparked by a video capturing Mr. Floyd’s agonizing last minutes as a white police officer kneels on his neck is pulsing through an America already ragged with anger and anxiety. Emotions are raw over the toll of a pandemic that has killed more than 100,000 people across the country and cost millions of jobs. Minneapolis residents said outrage and protests in the aftermath of the killing of George Floyd were a result of a community being tested repeatedly in recent weeks by both police violence and the virus — and in ways that put America’s deep racial inequalities in stark relief. The outbreak has inflicted disproportionate economic and health tolls on racial minorities and immigrants in Minneapolis and beyond. Black and Latino workers have been more likely to have lost their jobs. Many others are among the low-paid hourly workers who risk their health by going to work at grocery stores, nursing homes, factories, slaughterhouses and other jobs that cannot be done remotely. The black community in Minnesota has also been hit hard by cases of the virus, just as African-Americans across the country are being infected and dying at higher rates. By one estimate, black people accounted for at least 29 percent of known Covid-19 cases in Minnesota, despite making up about 6 percent of the state’s population. African-Americans make up 35 percent of coronavirus cases in Minneapolis, though they are less than 20 percent of the city’s population. “There are no words to describe what people are going through,” said State Representative Mohamud Noor, who represents a district with many Somalis and other immigrants. His great-uncle died of the coronavirus a few days ago, and Mr. Noor said he is losing track of how many other relatives and constituents are dying. Scenes from the protests over racism and police violence that have erupted across the country. Mr. Noor said the school closures had hurt poorer students without laptops or reliable internet access to take classes online, and that waves of job losses had sent local unemployment rates soaring. Now, with more than 200 businesses damaged or destroyed in the unrest, Mr. Noor said he was worried about new waves of foreclosures, job losses and business failures. “Many people who are poor who didn’t have much, this devastation will really impact them,” Mr. Noor said. Even before the pandemic, the Midtown neighborhood, where buildings were burned, damaged and looted, had been trying to rebuild itself after years of economic hardship. The area is in a historically segregated part of town where some residents had felt neglected. A railway was repurposed into a bike and walking trail that runs through the neighborhood. The Midtown Global Market had sprung up, attracting diners and shoppers to its Hmong, Indian, Moroccan and other international food and crafts. But now, next door to Mr. Mills, the barber, a dollar store and beauty-supply shop have been burned to rubble. The front windows of Mr. Mills’s barbershop were smashed, and looters stole his televisions, video equipment and his clippers. Now, with the power out, water seeping across the floor and phalanxes of police officers and National Guard troops blockading his neighborhood, he does not know when his J-Klips barbershop might reopen. “Half of the place is condemned,” he said. “Where do we go from here?” Phillipe Cunningham, a City Council member, represents a poor ward in northern Minneapolis with a large black, Hmong and Native American population. He said had spent the past two months fighting to get a coronavirus testing site opened and fielding calls from laid-off workers falling behind on rent and black business owners unable to navigate the maze of federal relief programs. On Friday, Mr. Cunningham drove around surveying damaged buildings, helping some of the same business owners board up their storefronts and trying to prevent looters from breaking into stores. “We were already struggling,” Mr. Cunningham said. In many pockets of the city where the virus seemed to be more concentrated, residents have not had access to masks and hand sanitizer, even as the mayor ordered masks be worn when inside businesses as of earlier this week, said Jia Starr Brown, pastor of First Covenant Church in downtown Minneapolis. Even healthy people in Minneapolis were feeling anxious after a long stretch of being holed up in their homes as spring arrived; a limited reopening of businesses was not set to begin until Monday. That loosening of restrictions came with a long list of social-distancing and sanitation rules. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Ms. Brown spoke as she stepped away from a protest outside a county building Friday afternoon, saying she was heartened to see so many people attend rallies calling for justice for Mr. Floyd, even when doing so was a health risk. “This is about collective widespread grief, and how great must the grief be that people would risk their livelihoods?” she said. “Who we are as a people is greater than the risk to be out there. This is urgent. This isn’t about just our own individual lives as black people, but this is about our futures and children.” Many young people, especially minorities, were gig-economy workers holding two or three part-time jobs that evaporated when the outbreak hit, said Tyler Sit, pastor of the New City Church, which is blocks away from where Mr. Floyd died and from the Third Precinct that was burned in the protests. They were left jobless and worried about not having benefits should they become ill. Sitting at home during lockdown, with no work and no prospect of finding work for the foreseeable future, he said, they were more aware than usual of news reports and then had the time to react by taking to the streets. “I hear messages from community members trying to deliberate whether or not they’re going to show up. They don’t want to catch Covid-19 and spread Covid-19 if they happen to be an asymptomatic carrier,” he said. “But there’s a deep feeling of we have to do something because our city is burning.” In Atlanta, Denver, New York and beyond, protesters have also emerged despite the pandemic. They have slipped on face masks and bandannas to guard against the coronavirus, as well as tear gas. Anais Nunez, a 31-year-old community organizer from the Allerton neighborhood of the Bronx, said she braved the risk of coming to a crowded protest to show solidarity with others marching against police violence. “I’m from the Bronx, the epicenter of the epicenter,” she said about the borough that has the city’s highest rates of cases, hospitalizations and deaths from the coronavirus. “We’re already suffering. Having to do all of this, it makes the terrible even worse.” Rashawn Ray, a sociologist and fellow at the Brookings Institution, said one crucial difference between the two plagues is that the coronavirus, like past diseases, may one day dissipate with a vaccine or medical breakthrough. “We’ve never gotten to a place where racism is not a significant part of everyone’s life in the United States,” he said. Aaron Randle contributed from New YorkTimes Insider explains who we are and what we do, and delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how our journalism comes together. As a New York Times television critic, I’ve spent the last 10 years working at home. Not just at home, but alone, sequestered in front of a TV set and a laptop for hours a day. So when the pandemic hit, it didn’t feel as if my work life changed all that much. Instead, a lot of other lives were becoming a little more like mine. This sense of sameness was buttressed by the ability of the TV industry, relatively speaking, to maintain some semblance of business as usual. Colleagues who covered arts that depended on the physical proximity of audiences — theater, dance, live music, art museums and galleries, even movies, which is to say just about all of them — suddenly found themselves scrambling to find things to write about. On TV, meanwhile, new shows kept coming out. One result of that continuity is that we can provide readers with a summer TV preview, in today’s Arts & Leisure section, that is as varied and full of information as ever. It takes a look behind the scenes of the hottest new streaming service, HBO Max; offers an elaborate guide to binge-watching your way through classic TV for those who are still hunkering down; and includes my opinionated roundup of new shows to look out for, winnowed down from a typically long roster of premieres. But the truth, of course, is that everything is changing, and change is quickly catching up to TV. The absence of live sports has been the most obvious effect of the pandemic, but the near-total shutdown of production on most non-news programming is already rejiggering schedules and playing havoc with the fall season (if that designation even means anything now). Creators are just beginning to explore new and safe methods of making shows. (A leading-edge example, the dramatic anthology “Isolation Stories,” made it on the air this month in Britain and comes to BritBox in America in June.) The next time we do a TV preview, it will probably look a lot different. And while TV critics have had it easier than just about anyone during this troubling and sometimes terrifying period, we haven’t been untouched. No matter how well practiced you are at sitting on a couch and staring at a screen, you’re not doing it with the same level of comfort that you had before. The urge to check the news is stronger. Any susceptibility you might have to feelings of general uselessness is doubled. Worst of all, everyone else in your building is now home during the day too, and instead of watching TV they’re doing dance aerobics or practicing the cello. If the rigors of enforced isolation start to get to you, though, despite your long and meticulous training for them, you can remind yourself of a few things: You are being paid to do something that nearly everyone else in the world does for free and wishes they could do more of. On top of that, you’re being given a platform to dispense your opinions on a subject about which nearly everyone has their own, deeply held opinions that they would love to share more widely. I get it. So does the restaurant critic. Occasionally, despite the evident perks of my job, I will rashly begin a sentence with, “Well, it’s not always a picnic …” and the person with whom I was having an animated conversation will suddenly go quiet. There is something about the idea of watching TV for a living that enraptures people, and no discussion of hours spent bingeing mediocre shows is going to change anyone’s mind. They don’t want to hear it, and they’re right. So, time to hunt down the link for the screeners of that new series on that new streaming service and settle in for the next four or eight or 12 hours on my laptop. (I can hard-wire or Bluetooth it to my flat screen, if I don’t mind the colors being slightly off.) If the pandemic has given you your first taste of what it’s like to be home all day in front of the set, it’s nice to have you with me here on the couch.Regístrate para recibir nuestro boletín con lo mejor de The New York Times. Este artículo forma parte del boletín gratuito de Frank Bruni. Puedes registrarte aquí para recibirlo en inglés todos los miércoles. En 2008, cuando intentaba terminar a toda prisa un libro de memorias durante los breves ratos libres que me quedaban del trabajo de tiempo completo que tenía en The New York Times, desarrollé un sistema —un hábito— que me ayudó muchísimo. Escribía mis artículos para el Times en la computadora personal que estaba sobre un gran escritorio en un cuarto de mi apartamento de tamaño modesto. Pero iba acumulando los capítulos de mi libro en la computadora portátil que estaba en la pequeña mesa de comedor en otra habitación. Pasarme a esa mesa y encender esa computadora portátil era una señal, y alejarme de ella era otra. Y como ocupaba un espacio designado en mi casa, las memorias también ocupaban un espacio designado en mi cerebro. Cuando me enfocaba en el libro, realmente podía centrarme en él por completo. Creo que jamás he escrito algo con tanta velocidad ni con una concentración tan imperturbable. Recordé esto durante varias conversaciones que he tenido últimamente con amigos y colegas sobre cómo estaban sobrellevando este asfixiante y maldito estado de confinamiento. Escuché una queja recurrente sobre cómo todo en la vida se había vuelto una experiencia amorfa y sin límites claros. La casa y la oficina de pronto son la misma cosa, y no hay oportunidad de salir a una cafetería con buena conexión a internet para cambiar de aires. Los niños que antes se iban muchas horas y luego regresaban ahora están siempre presentes. Los cónyuges o parejas sentimentales están cerca las 24 horas del día. Los días entre semana ya no se distinguen de los fines de semana. Las fechas que solían marcarse en el calendario (fiestas de cumpleaños, graduaciones, bodas) han desaparecido, al igual que la costumbre de reservar ciertas actividades para ciertos lugares. La variedad entera de actividades ahora tiene un mismo escenario: el hogar. Si bien eso puede incrementar la eficiencia, ya que se eliminan los traslados en transporte público, el tráfico y muchos mandados, también puede hacernos sentir aletargados. Ciertamente, mis amigos y conocidos no celebraban a causa de todo el trabajo que estaban logrando terminar. Más bien les asombraba cuán ilógicamente a la deriva se sentían ahora que están más anclados que nunca a un mismo lugar. El confinamiento los había dejado sin rumbo en un espacio demasiado reducido. Claro que ellos son sumamente afortunados, al igual que yo. Muchas personas no tienen la opción de quedarse en casa y resguardarse. Sus circunstancias les exigen salir, sin importar el riesgo que esto implique para su salud. Ellos aceptarían con gusto el desafío de la monotonía soporífera. Aun así, es un reto. Un profesor de universidad a quien estaba entrevistando para una columna de próxima publicación me habló sobre lo difícil que puede ser mantener la claridad mental cuando estás sentado en un lugar fijo, mirando una pantalla fija, y tu metabolismo psíquico está en un lugar fijo durante tanto tiempo. Dijo que antes de esta pandemia, jamás había apreciado del todo “la importancia de salir de la habitación”. La importancia de salir de la habitación. Eso era lo que yo estaba reconociendo y respetando, sin poder explicarlo, cuando estaba escribiendo mi libro con el proceso que describí hace un momento. Y es una frase —una idea— que implica más que una ubicación física. Solemos darle significado a lo que hacemos, para elevarlo y protegerlo, definiéndolo, poniéndole parámetros, asignándole su propio espacio, separándolo. El hecho de poder acercarnos a él y poder alejarnos de él es una parte fundamental de su cualidad especial. ¿Por qué los terapeutas les dicen a las personas con insomnio que no lean ni vean televisión en la cama, sino que solo pongan la cabeza en la almohada cuando realmente quieran quedarse dormidas? Eso es para marcar límites: de este lado, la vigilia, pero, de este otro, el sueño. Se trata de entrenar al cerebro y al cuerpo a fin de que respondan a ciertas señales relacionadas con ciertos comportamientos. Parte del objetivo de una oficina —y la razón por la que surgió WeWork y creció con tanta rapidez— es cambiar de configuración mental: ahora que estoy aquí, haré tal cosa de tal manera, al menos hasta que regrese allá. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. La manera en que nos vestimos es otra forma de definición, otro conjunto de señales. Si te pones algo almidonado, anuncias que es hora de hacer negocios; si te pones algo llamativo, anuncias que es hora de festejar; si te pones unos pantalones deportivos, anuncias que es hora de distenderse. Entonces, ¿qué sucede cuando usas pantalones deportivos para tomar café por la mañana, para atender la videoconferencia en Zoom, para la hora feliz por Zoom, para cenar? Lo mismo que sucede cuando el café, la videoconferencia, el cóctel y la cena ocurren a pocos metros de distancia entre sí. He aquí la bruma de la cuarentena. “La forma misma de la sociedad se está desvaneciendo frente a nosotros”, escribió Sam Anderson en un ensayo reciente publicado en The New York Times Magazine, en el que señaló que los rituales como las jornadas laborales y las horas de comida “ahora han quedado despojados de significado. La sociedad se ha quedado, en gran medida, sin huesos. Es una sopa de ex sociedad”. Una vida deshuesada y caldosa: suena y se siente acertado. La concentración depende de los huesos y los límites. Requiere compartimentos y compartimentación. Estoy trabajando en un nuevo libro. El proceso jamás había sido tan lento. Frank Bruni llegó al Times en 1995 y ocupó una variedad de puestos — incluido el de reportero de la Casa Blanca, jefe de la corresponsalía en Roma y jefe de crítica de restaurantes— antes de convertirse en columnista en 2011. Es autor de tres libros que fueron éxitos de venta. @FrankBruni • FacebookOnce more, the pronouncements arrived in a torrent, though this time they were about rebirth rather than cancellation. The N.B.A. was planning to start up again in late July. The N.H.L. announced a playoff tournament would take place through the summer. Major League Baseball was continuing negotiations with its players for a shortened season. The N.F.L. was moving toward opening training facilities. Soccer leagues for both men and women in North America were working toward finalizing plans for summer tournaments. Top-tier soccer leagues in England, Italy and Spain announced they would resume play in June. After months filled with pessimism, hesitation, quiet planning and uncertainty about whether major sports would happen again in 2020, nearly every sport was preparing to come back, provided that work agreements with players could be negotiated and that public health authorities raised no objections. Player representatives, league officials, lawyers and business consultants who work closely with them say the sudden shift resulted from a mix of dramatic changes few could foresee a month ago. There has been an increase in the availability of testing, which has allowed some of the leagues, like many other businesses, to secure all the kits they believe they need. There were also far more mundane developments. Lisa Baird, commissioner of the National Women’s Soccer League, said a final linchpin for her league’s plan was gaining approval from its insurance company. “Science has advanced,” Mark Cuban, the owner of the Dallas Mavericks, wrote Wednesday in an email. “We know more than what we did before, and just speaking personally, my expectation is that science will continue to progress forward with therapies, testing and vaccines. I’m actually more optimistic about a vaccine coming early than what others expect.” Not everyone is as bullish as Cuban about the prospects for a vaccine, with most experts saying one won’t be widely available until at least early next year. And while the coronavirus curve has flattened and testing has increased both nationally and in the hardest-hit areas, it remains below a level that some epidemiologists say is needed to help mitigate future outbreaks. But with reopening plans underway in all 50 states and with elected officials and the public anxious for business activity to resume, league officials had a growing sense that there would be minimal opposition if they moved ahead with plans. Also, people who work closely with the leagues and team owners said, the financial consequences of not returning, potentially billions of dollars in losses across the leagues, made trying to come back vital. “The economics of missing an entire season are just really, really bad,” said Irwin Raij, co-chairman of the sports law practice at O’Melveny & Myers, who is in constant contact with numerous team officials and owners. Finally, while certain players have expressed concerns about their safety, especially those with compromised immune systems, most are like any other furloughed worker who wants to return to work and get paid, even if that means doing so without the usual comforts of the job. “We are all going to have to be a little less judgmental,” said Alison Riske, a tennis player who participated in a four-player event last weekend on a private court in the backyard of an estate in Florida, without her usual support team. “We have to roll with the punches.” J.C. Tretter, the Cleveland Browns center who is president of the N.F.L. Players Association, said the desire to get back was strong, so long as it could happen safely. “We all love playing football,” Tretter said Friday from Cleveland. “We also love our teammates and our families.” Regardless of the dire financial consequences the leagues were facing, none would have been able to pursue plans to reopen without the promise of fast, widespread testing. For two months, league officials could not talk seriously about acquiring the necessary tests without giving the impression that their needs were more important than the general public’s. During the last two weeks, as testing became more widely available, even in the cities the virus has hit the hardest, such as New York, that concern has diminished. One top sports industry executive, who speaks regularly with the leaders of all the major sports, said the N.B.A. had already secured enough tests to screen all of the players as often as they want. An N.B.A. official, who asked not to be identified because the league’s comeback process is still evolving, confirmed that the testing hurdle had been largely cleared. Baird said she had finally felt comfortable moving forward when medical experts signed off on an N.W.S.L. plan to test players before they arrive for the tournament in Utah, again when they show up, and then at least weekly during the monthlong competition. Brian McCarthy, a spokesman for the N.F.L., said the league was still working on its testing process and securing the necessary kits. As the major leagues waited for the right moment, they watched NASCAR hold races, golf stage two charity events, European soccer return and tennis pull off a backyard round-robin. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. With the United States largely reopening in recent days, the governors of California and New York, the largest states to impose extensive stay-at-home orders, said they would consider sports events without fans, giving hope to league officials.  Even without the expense of having to stage games and pay players, teams need some revenue to cover fixed costs. Some owners have borrowed hundreds of millions of dollars to acquire their teams or to build stadiums. The Mets, for instance, pay roughly $50 million annually toward construction debt on Citi Field. Stan Kroenke, who owns the Los Angeles Rams, as well as the N.B.A. and N.H.L. teams in Denver, earlier this month borrowed an additional $500 million from the N.F.L.’s stadium fund, in part to finance the continuing construction of a football stadium in Inglewood, Calif., that is scheduled to open this year. According to people familiar with its plans, the N.F.L. is weighing a series of scenarios in which it plays with no fans, or with stadiums at varying levels of spectator capacity. McCarthy, the N.F.L. spokesman, said league was “preparing to play the 2020 N.F.L. season as scheduled and with increased protocols and safety measures for all players, personnel and attendees.” He said health was the league’s “primary focus.” Playing without fans would hardly be a panacea. Gate revenues, concessions and other money that fans spend at games account for roughly 25 percent of the N.F.L.’s $15 billion in revenue. Baseball collects about one-third of its $11 billion from the gate. But getting the games on television will generate at least some cash flow — and plenty of attention before fans decide to invest their passion and their disposable income elsewhere. “You can offset some losses, but this is about going beyond 2020,” Raij said. “They need to keep the fans engaged.”Mass protests over police violence against black Americans in at least 75 U.S. cities have spurred concern that the gatherings will seed new outbreaks. Speaking on CNN, Atlanta’s mayor, Keisha Lance Bottoms, said she was concerned that the protests could increase infections in communities of color, which are already being disproportionately hit by the disease. Death rates among black Americans are double those of whites, and the economic toll of lockdowns has also inflicted disproportionate economic pain.  “I’m extremely concerned we are seeing mass gatherings,” Ms. Bottoms said. “We’re going to see the other side of this in a couple of weeks.” Larry Hogan, the Republican governor of Maryland, echoed those concerns. Mr. Hogan told CNN the gatherings of “thousands of people jammed in together in close proximity” could lead to a spike in cases.   Dr. Ashish Jha, a professor of global health at Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health, urged protesters to take safety precautions, including wearing face masks and practicing social distancing.  On the CBS program “Face the Nation” on Sunday, Dr. Scott Gottlieb, the former commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, noted that Minnesota had seen an uptick in cases before the protests. He also predicted that the protests would ignite chains of transmission. “This country isn’t through this epidemic,” he said. “This is continuing to expand, but at a much slower rate, but it’s still expanding.” Dr. Theodore Long, who is leading New York City’s contact tracing efforts with its public hospitals agency, urged anyone who had been involved in the demonstrations to get tested for the virus. The protests, spurred by the killing of George Floyd in the custody of the Minneapolis police, are pulsing through a country ragged with anger and anxiety. More than 100,000 Americans who were infected have died, and some 40 million are out of work. The outbreak has inflicted disproportionate health and economic tolls on black and Latino  communities.   “To have corona, and then this — it’s like a gut shot,” said Jimmy Mills, a barber in a working-class area of Minneapolis.  The protests could affect planned reopenings. Mayor Carlos Gimenez of Miami-Dade County said on Sunday that the unrest had prompted him to keep local beaches closed, rather than reopening on Monday as scheduled.  The virus has infected more than 6,118,200 people in at least 177 countries. This week, as global coronavirus cases pass six million, many nations are entering a pivotal period, giving students, shoppers and travelers more freedom to return to some sense of normalcy after months under lockdown.  Greece, seeking to bolster its crucial tourism sector, announced one of the more aggressive reopening plans. After initially announcing on Friday that it would allow entries from 29 countries whose outbreaks were mostly contained, it shifted to allow flights from all countries. From June 15 to June 30, the Greek foreign ministry said on Saturday, the flights will go to Greece’s two largest airports, in Athens and Thessaloniki. Passengers from the 29-nation list, including Germany, Australia and South Korea, will be subject to random tests. Those flying in from countries deemed by the European Union Aviation Safety Agency to have a high risk of virus transmission will be tested.  As of July 1, all Greek airports will reopen to international flights, with random screening for all passengers. Arrivals by sea will be allowed as of July 1, also subject to random testing. In Britain, more stores will be allowed to open starting Monday, and small groups from different households can meet outdoors. Primary schools will open  in England with new social-distancing rules and spaced seating. The government also gave the green light for professional sports to resume under strict protocols, according to government guidelines published on Saturday. Other countries are creating “travel bubbles,” allowing visitors from nations with low infection rates.  Norway and Denmark will allow leisure travel between the two countries, excluding Sweden, where coronavirus infections are higher. Norway will also allow entry to business travelers from the other Nordic countries from Monday, the government said. But in Spain, Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez said on Sunday that he would ask Parliament for a sixth and final extension to the state of emergency, allowing his central government to keep control over the lockdown in Madrid, Barcelona and other parts of the country until June 21.  Mr. Sánchez told a news conference that Spain needed to “immediately” recover its tourism sector, but that quarantine rules for outside visitors would be kept in place until July 1. “We cannot throw away all the work that we have done,” he said. In communities from the Deep South to California, congregations that had been sequestered for months ventured forth at a social distance on Sunday in search of comfort, prayer and political expression. With their sick and elderly at home and their nation wracked by the pandemic, evangelical congregations across California violated state health rules in the name of unity. “Outside the confines of these walls we hear the sound of a very broken world,” Samuel Rodriguez, the pastor of New Season Christian Worship Center in Sacramento, said. At least a dozen evangelical churches in California made a coordinated return to church timed to Pentecost, a holy day particularly tied to fundamentalist worship. Some in that group were also seeking to pressure the state’s Democratic governor, Gavin Newsom, into dropping a 100-person cap on church attendance that the state had enacted to curb the spread of the disease. Supporters acknowledged the legal and health risks, but said their congregants’ spiritual health would suffer if they delayed their return to public worship. “It’s been terrible, an unimaginable tide of grief,” said the Rev. W. Franklyn Richardson, the senior pastor at Grace Baptist Church in Mount Vernon, N.Y., said of the moment. Mr. Richardson, who is African-American, noted that during the worst of the pandemic, he was making three to five condolence calls a day. Still, he said, the church has not, and cannot, abdicate its central role in pushing for positive change. “I think the church has to help make sure it is a wake up call,” he said of the unrest. “The church has had to be a safety net for a society that has ignored the community.” Nicaragua is one of the last countries to resist adopting strict measures to curb the spread of the virus. It never closed its schools. It did not shutter businesses. Throughout the pandemic, the government not only allowed mass events — it organized them. Now there are signs everywhere that the virus is raging across the country, though the  government insists it has the situation under control. Long lines have formed at hospitals, and pharmacies have run out of basic medicines. Families of people who die of respiratory illnesses are being forced to hold “express burials” at all hours of the night, for fear of contagion. Health organizations are struggling to get accurate case numbers. Testing is limited and controlled by the government. Doctors and activists are bracing for disaster, just two years after antigovernment uprisings against President Daniel Ortega turned violent. Facing withering criticism, the government released a report last Monday stating that critics were trying to sow chaos, and that the vast majority of people in the country, the second-poorest in the hemisphere, could not afford to lose work under a strict lockdown. Elena Cano said her 46-year-old son, Camilo Meléndez, the facilities manager at the National Assembly building, died on May 19 from “unusual severe pneumonia,” after trying to get medical care several times. “The whole world has to understand the truth of the crime that our government is committing,” she said.  Once more, the pronouncements arrived in a torrent, though this time they were about rebirth rather than cancellation. The N.B.A. was planning to start up again in late July. The N.H.L. announced a playoff tournament would take place through the summer. Major League Baseball was continuing negotiations with its players for a shortened season. The N.F.L. was moving toward opening training facilities. Soccer leagues for both men and women in North America were working toward finalizing plans for summer tournaments. Top-tier soccer leagues in England, Italy and Spain announced they would resume play in June. After months filled with pessimism, hesitation, quiet planning and uncertainty about whether major sports would happen again in 2020, nearly every sport was preparing to come back, provided that work agreements with players could be negotiated and that public health authorities raised no objections. With reopening plans underway in all 50 states and with elected officials and the public anxious for business activity to resume, league officials had a growing sense that there would be minimal opposition if they moved ahead with plans. Also, people who work closely with the leagues and team owners said, the financial consequences of not returning, potentially billions of dollars in losses across the leagues, made trying to come back vital. The United States has delivered two million doses of a malaria drug to Brazil for use in the fight against the coronavirus pandemic, and the two countries are embarking on a joint research effort to study whether the drug is safe and effective for the prevention and early treatment of Covid-19, the White House announced Sunday. The White House announcement comes after months of controversy over the drug, hydroxychloroquine, which President Trump has aggressively promoted, despite a lack of scientific evidence of its effectiveness as a treatment for Covid-19. Mr. Trump stunned public health experts recently by saying he was taking a two-week course of the medicine. The donated doses will be used as a prophylactic “to help defend” Brazil’s nurses, doctors and health care professionals against infection, and will also be used as a therapeutic to treat Brazilians who become infected, the White House said. Hydroxychloroquine is widely used for the prevention of malaria and for treatment of certain autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid arthritis and lupus, and many doctors consider it safe. But the Food and Drug Administration has warned that it can cause heart arrhythmias in some patients, and the debate over its use in the coronavirus pandemic has been politically fraught. Early research in Brazil and New York suggested that it could be linked to a higher number of deaths among hospitalized patients. More recently, a review of a hospital database published by the influential medical journal, The Lancet, concluded that treating people who have Covid-19 with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine did not help and might have increased the risk of abnormal heart rhythms and death. But last week, more than 100 scientists and clinicians questioned the authenticity of that database. Some researchers say hydroxychloroquine does show promise as a possible prophylactic or treatment in the early stages of Covid-19, and a number of clinical trials — including one conducted by the National Institute for Allergy and Infectious Diseases — are trying to answer those questions. Amid the uproar, experts say, legitimate research has suffered. New York City, reeling from days of chaotic confrontations between protesters and the police that have resulted in dozens of injuries, hundreds of arrests, smashed storefronts and burned police vehicles, braced on Sunday for a fourth night of turbulence over the death of George Floyd. The protests in New York were part of escalating demonstrations in dozens of cities across the country that were sparked by a video capturing the final moments of Mr. Floyd, who is black, as a white police officer knelt on his neck for nearly nine minutes. The growing protests in Manhattan, Brooklyn and other parts of the city on Sunday afternoon followed a long night of unrest the day before. Mayor Bill de Blasio on Sunday tried to defend the protesters and the police, saying he would investigate any abuses by the police while urging protesters to refrain from violence. The mayor’s remarks on Sunday represented a shift in tone from Saturday night, when he said that the New York Police Department had “overwhelmingly” acted appropriately and with restraint during the protests. Police officials said they have made 786 arrests since the protests started three days ago, including three people who faced federal charges in connection with throwing Molotov cocktails at police cars. The protests have raised fears among public health officials about a second wave of the virus. Dr. Theodore Long, who is leading New York City’s contact tracing efforts with its public hospitals agency, urged anyone who had been involved in the demonstrations to get tested for the virus. Gov. Andrew Cuomo on Sunday announced 1,110 additional coronavirus cases for the state, bringing the total to 370,770.  “We have gone through hell and back — we are on the other side and it’s a lesson for all of us, and we need to stay vigilant as we reopen different parts of the state so that we don’t backslide,” he said. The governor also announced that dentists statewide can reopen their practices on Monday “as long as they follow health and safety guidelines that the state is laying out and that we have been discussing with them.” Alaska, which has been one of the most aggressive states in seeking to reopen its economy during the coronavirus pandemic, has seen a sudden rise in identified coronavirus cases over the last few days. On Sunday, the state reported a record 27 new cases. After Alaska, which has a population of about 731,545, reported its previous high of 22 cases on April 7, the number of identified infections dropped substantially. Throughout much of May, there were days when state officials reported zero or one case. But they have now identified about 50 in the past four days. At the end of April, the state began to relax rules on in-person dining, allowing some of the first restaurants in the country to reopen. Alaska Gov. Mike Dunleavy, a Republican, finalized a broad rollback on business restrictions on May 22, saying that week: “It will all be open just like it was prior to the virus.” One area of concern has been the seafood industry that draws thousands of workers to Alaska each year. The state said one of the new cases identified Sunday was in an industry worker in the Dillingham area, in southwest Alaska.  Since April, U.S. landlords have looked to the first of the month fearing that tenants would stop paying their rent. For the most part, that has not happened. Despite a 14.7 percent unemployment rate and millions of new jobless claims each week, collections are only slightly below where they were last year, when the economy was booming. How can this be? Part of the answer is a little negotiation and a lot of government money. The $2 trillion CARES Act, which backstopped household finances with stimulus checks and extended unemployment benefits, has kept many tenants current on their monthly balances. At the same time, many landlords have reduced rents or are partly or completely forgiving overdue payments. At the same time, many of the numbers showing only a slight dip skew toward higher-end buildings. Other surveys show that buildings with poorer tenants have lower collection rates.  And deferrals and partial payments appear to be increasing: Apartment List, a rental listing service, said 31 percent of respondents failed to make the full May payment on time, up from a quarter the month before. Hoping for a swift recovery, many landlords are telling tenants they can pay later, knowing this often won’t happen. The rate of those who have been able to continue paying rent is unlikely to remain stable without a swift and robust recovery, which is becoming increasingly unlikely, or without another big injection of government money, which Senate Republicans say will not happen anytime soon.  American households were struggling with rent long before the economy went into free fall, and there are signs — from an increase in partial payments to surveys that show many tenants are putting rent on their credit cards and struggling to pay for essentials like food — that this pressure is building.  Air travel has plummeted in the pandemic, but private jet service has not fallen as hard, in part because of a rise in new paying customers. For years, jet service providers have ferried executives and wealthy leisure travelers who pay high fees for the privacy and security. Now, with business travel curtailed, those same companies are shifting to meet rising demand from people worried about getting on a commercial flight. Over the Memorial Day weekend, one of the busiest travel times in the United States in years past, traffic in the private jet industry was 58 percent of the volume from the same time last year, according to Argus, a company that tracks aviation data. But commercial flights fared worse, plunging to 12 percent of the 2019 level. Five weeks ago, private flights had fallen to 20 to 25 percent of what they were the same time last year, said Doug Gollan, the founder of Privatejetcardcomparisons.com, a research site for consumers. “Now to be back to 60 percent of pre-Covid levels shows the people who have access to private travel are getting back out there,” he said. NetJets, the largest private jet operator in the world, is seeing a rush in interest from new customers, said Patrick Gallagher, its president. “May is on track to be the best month of new customer relationships that we’ve seen in the past 10 years,” Mr. Gallagher said. Companies that carved out a niche with private international flights are also reporting an increase. Thomas Flohr, founder and chairman of VistaJet, which has longer-range jets, said the company’s refueling landings in Anchorage, a major stop for transcontinental flights to Asia, were up 250 percent since the pandemic began. Thousands of maskless vacationers flocked to the Maryland town of Ocean City this weekend as the Greater Washington region began to emerge from a coronavirus lockdown. As Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland has emphasized, the state is at Phase 1 of his “Roadmap to Recovery,” which includes restrictions to keep the virus from spreading. Among them are a requirement that face coverings be worn inside businesses. But at the Quiet Storm Surf Shop, a clerk folding T-shirts said, “We make them optional.” On the boardwalk outside, a police officer said that the problem was that merchants have to enforce the mask order, but many are reluctant to alienate their first summer customers. Not all of the tourists were nonchalant about the restrictions. Sitting on a wall dividing the boardwalk from the beach, Kelly and Dan Goddard, who live in a Baltimore suburb, were wearing masks. Their children were sporting tie-dyed cloth ones sewn by relatives. “There are a lot of unknowns and not a lot of real clear guidance,” Mr. Goddard said. “But I don’t think people realize how serious things are, or they don’t care.” Patrick Kingsley, an international correspondent, and Laetitia Vancon, a photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles to explore the reopening of the European continent after coronavirus lockdowns. Read all their dispatches. PRAGUE — To attend her first play in more than two months, Marie Reslova, a prominent Czech theater critic, drove into Prague, headed to a large vegetable market, parked next to a convertible sports car and switched off her engine. Soon, actors from the Czech National Theater strode onto a platform a few yards from Ms. Reslova’s windshield. The play had begun. And she hadn’t even left her car. The Czech Republic enforced tighter restrictions than most European countries to combat the coronavirus pandemic. For several weeks, Czechs were barred even from jogging without a mask. Even after the government eased that restriction, masks were still mandatory in most other public contexts. But the country also loosened the lockdown earlier than most — and that has made it a laboratory for how arts and culture can adapt to a context in which some restrictions on social life have been lifted, while others remain in place. The drive-in theater at Prague’s vegetable market was an ambitious example. To circumvent restrictions on public gatherings, audience members watched plays, concerts and comedy from behind their steering wheels — in a monthlong program that ended with a variety act by the National Theater last Sunday evening, attended by Ms. Reslova. Across Europe, drive-ins have become a familiar means of circumventing pandemic restrictions. By default, cars keep their occupants socially distanced, leading even nightclub owners and priests to set up drive-in discos and churches. Read the full dispatch here.  As U.S. unemployment claims exceed 40 million and those filing them grow more desperate, an altruistic instinct has emerged among some people who are more financially secure. Yet the sheer breadth of the pain is almost overwhelming, and the appeals are widespread. So what is the best way to give money to those who require it for food, shelter and other necessities? Sites and services like GoFundMe can connect donors with real people, but they may lack vetting of recipients, their back stories or their plans. They also may not make it possible to be identified or anonymous based on the preference of a giver or a beneficiary.  Donors with large amounts to give may want to use tax deductions to increase what they can afford to donate but may not be able to get them through one-off cash transfers. Here are a few ways you can help. Throngs of Muslim worshipers returned to formal services in Israel and Saudi Arabia on Sunday as two of Islam’s holiest sites reopened for the first time since being closed more than two months ago because of the coronavirus. At the Aqsa Mosque in Jerusalem, Islam’s third-holiest site, worshipers entering the compound for dawn prayers were greeted by officials who took their temperatures, distributed masks and implored them to follow social distancing guidelines. “We are depending on your heedfulness,” Omar Kiswani, the mosque’s director, said through a loudspeaker system. Ibrahim Zaghed, 25, an unemployed resident of Jerusalem, wept as he laid down his  prayer mat. “Today is no different than a holiday,” said Mr. Zaghed, who was not wearing a mask. “I feel like a complete person again.” The compound, which Jews revere as their holiest site and refer to as the Temple Mount, is often at the center of tensions between Israelis and Palestinians. In Saudi Arabia, the government said that 90,000 mosques across the kingdom had reopened on Sunday, including parts of the Prophet’s Mosque in Medina, considered Islam’s second-holiest site. The most revered site in Islam, the Kaaba in Mecca, remains closed. Imam Kiswani of the Aqsa Mosque, who estimated that about 3,000 people participated in the prayers on Sunday, said that while most followed social-distancing guidelines, some needed to exercise “greater attentiveness.” Manal Balala, 50, a housekeeper from Jerusalem who was wearing a mask and gloves, was overjoyed as she socialized with her friends after prayers. “I feel like my soul has been restored,” she said. Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Sheryl Gay Stolberg, Rick Rojas, Antonio de Luca, Dave Taft, Umi Syam, Alfonso Flores Bermúdez, Frances Robles, Alexander Villegas, Patricia Mazzei, Niki Kitsantonis, Roni Caryn Rabin, Raphael Minder, Karen Zraick, Conor Dougherty, Mark Landler, Stephen Castle, Ron Lieber, Paul Sullivan, Emma Bubola, Jack Healy, Dionne Searcey, Patrick Kingsley, Sharon Otterman, Elizabeth Williamson, Elian Peltier, Yonette Joseph, Hannah Beech, Maggie Haberman, Mike Ives, Aimee Ortiz, Suhasini Raj, Adam Rasgon, Kai Schultz and Derrick Bryson Taylor.President Trump said on Saturday that he planned to postpone the annual Group of 7 summit of world leaders until September and that he wanted to invite Russia to rejoin as part of an alliance to discuss the future of China. Mr. Trump told reporters traveling with him aboard Air Force One on his way back from Florida, where he attended the launch of the SpaceX rocket, that he also planned to invite South Korea, Australia and India to the meeting to discuss China’s future. “I don’t feel that as a G7 it properly represents what’s going on in the world,” Mr. Trump said, according to a pool report of his remarks. “It’s a very outdated group of countries.” The United States currently holds the presidency of the Group of 7 industrialized nations, which also includes Germany, Japan, France, Britain, Canada and Italy. “We want Australia, we want India, we want South Korea,” Mr. Trump said. “And what do we have? That’s a nice group of countries right there.” Mr. Trump made the announcement not long after Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany had suggested she wouldn’t attend a summit held in Washington amid the coronavirus pandemic. The president’s saying he would invite Russia — which was indefinitely suspended from the group in 2014 after the annexing of Crimea from Ukraine — could inflame other member nations. Mr. Trump has previously floated the idea of asking Russia to rejoin, but other member nations have opposed the suggestion, and their approval would be required. Still, as the host president, Mr. Trump is allowed to invite whoever he wants. And by making Russia one of four countries he said he wants to invite, it means that Russia would be a guest, the way it was before it formally joined the group in the mid-1990s. Mr. Trump at one point described the theoretical gathering as the “G10 or G11,” which would mean making those countries members — something he cannot do on his own. He said he had had conversations with the leaders of those countries. At one point Mr. Trump suggested he would host the summit in September, possibly around the time of the United Nations General Assembly, which is slated to begin Sept. 15 in New York, a city that is scheduled to begin its first phase of reopening from coronavirus shutdowns on June 8. At another point, Mr. Trump mused that he might schedule the summit for after the November general election. Russia’s status in what was then the G8 was a source of consternation for other member nations in 2014, some of whom disagreed on how to punish Russia’s president, Vladimir Putin, for aggression in Crimea. Mr. Putin last visited the United States for an event that was unrelated to the U.N. General Assembly in 2007, when President George W. Bush invited him to the Bush family compound at Kennebunkport, Maine. Mr. Putin, through advisers, has been pushing for another invitation to the United States since 2018. In July of that year, Mr. Trump stunned his director of national intelligence at the time, Dan Coats, when he announced he planned to invite Mr. Putin to visit in the fall. That visit never took place. Inviting countries with geopolitical significance to discuss China, a country that Mr. Trump has seen as a competitor and an adversary, gives the president a rationale to host Mr. Putin. But the sight of Mr. Putin appearing in the United States two months before the presidential election, after the U.S. intelligence community determined that Russia interfered in the previous one to benefit Mr. Trump, will inflame his critics and risk discomfiting some of his Republican allies. Even before Mr. Trump’s announcement Saturday, the planning of the summit has fueled months of drama. Mr. Trump had previously suggested holding the summit in June. At the time, officials said it would be held virtually because of the pandemic. But in late May, Mr. Trump suggested holding the event at Camp David, the rustic presidential retreat that the president has visited only periodically during his term. It is not only the invitees that have been a source of drama at the U.S.-hosted summit. In October, Mr. Trump announced he would host the summit at one of his private clubs, the Trump National Doral near Miami. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. That prompted a widespread outcry from critics, including some Republicans, who said that Mr. Trump had crossed a line in trying to hold that kind of event at one of his properties, where he would ostensibly profit off the spending of taxpayer funds to host the event and receive free publicity. World leader summits like the G7 typically involve hundreds of officials and support personnel and elaborate security measures. He then said he would host it at Camp David instead. Last August, Mr. Trump called for Russia to be readmitted to the summit. “I think it’s much more appropriate to have Russia in,” Mr. Trump told reporters. “I could certainly see it being the G8 again.” He said at the time that a rationale for readmitting Russia was that “a lot of the things we talk about have to do with Russia.” During his presidential campaign, in July 2016, Mr. Trump was dismissive about objections to the Russian incursion into Ukraine during an interview with George Stephanopoulos on ABC News. “The people of Crimea, from what I’ve heard, would rather be with Russia than where they were,” Mr. Trump told Mr. Stephanopoulos. “And you have to look at that, also.”OCEAN CITY, Md. — Dave Heyburn and Nevada Kaler viewed their weekend on this seaside boardwalk as an escape from the coronavirus “red zone” where they live, in Elverson, Pa. Neither wore masks, which are not required to be worn outdoors here. The illness at home is “always in the back of your mind,” said Ms. Kaler, a part-time nursing assistant standing alongside her husband, who was enjoying the sunshine on a newly reopened public bench. “But you’ve got to live your life.” That outlook appeared pervasive among the thousands of maskless vacationers who flocked to Ocean City for the beginning of the Greater Washington region’s emergence from coronavirus lockdown this weekend. Earlier in the week, on Memorial Day, photos of people strolling cheek-to-jowl on the teeming boardwalk appalled public health officials and prompted warnings about a potential new surge in cases. This weekend brought little apparent change. Gov. Larry Hogan of Maryland has emphasized that the state is only at Phase 1 of his “Roadmap to Recovery,” a step toward normalcy that still requires the public to abide by restrictions to keep the virus from spreading. Yet the crowds out enjoying the spring weather in Ocean City suggested a different mentality. “They’re just doing whatever they want,” said Aaron Gusler, a surf rescue technician — meaning lifeguard — for the Ocean City Beach Patrol. “People come up here with a vacation mind-set,” he said. Mr. Gusler is from Harrisonburg, Va., where he feels the pandemic has been impossible to ignore. But in Ocean City, “It’s weird. It’s like it’s not even happening.” Lifeguards patrol the water, not the big clusters of sunbathers on the beach, where groups of as many as 42 people gathered on the sand early Friday. “They told us to stay as far away from them as you can, and do your job,” he said. The beach patrol gave its employees N95 masks, but Mr. Gusler did not have his on. He said he didn’t want to smear the blue-toned zinc oxide sunscreen coating his nose. “I’m sure it’ll spike again around here,” he said of the virus. “I’m just glad I have a job, man.” Most of those eating, strolling and sunning on the boardwalk Friday shunned masks. “I work in a Covid hospital and I don’t care,” said Brandy Unger, who said she is a nurse in Pennsylvania. “It’s the flu.” Her husband, Hunter Unger, a mechanic, said, shrugging, “I work on all kind of random people’s cars, and eh.” By the governor’s order, face coverings are required inside businesses, but at the Quiet Storm Surf Shop, a clerk folding T-shirts said, “we make them optional.” On the boardwalk outside, a police officer who asked not to be named because he was not authorized to speak to the news media said, “the problem is merchants have to enforce” the mask order, but many are reluctant to alienate their first customers of the summer. “They’re supposed to document violations and report them to the health department,” he said. The police — who were issuing $100 tickets to people vaping on the boardwalk Friday — do not cite mask violators. At Flashback Old Time Photos, where patrons don vintage-looking costumes to pose for portraits against faux-historical backdrops the only masks offered were for customers who wanted to dress like cowboy bank robbers. “We’re doing good cleaning surfaces, keeping our masks on and staying six feet away,” said Sue McCrodden, the shop manager. The store’s employees try to spray the costumes with Lysol after each use, and launder them at the end of each day, she said. “If we keep telling people to keep their masks on, it’s going to stress them out and we want them to have a good time,” said Doyinsola Adebakin, an employee. “What are we going to do?” Ms. McCrodden asked. “We can’t lose money.” Michael Cantine, who owns Fat Cats Airbrush, which makes personalized T-shirts and toys, said this opening week has been busier than the same time last year because children are out of school. To operate the store safely, he and his staff initially installed Plexiglas barricades, donned face masks and moved all their stock behind a counter so customers couldn’t handle it. A week later, that’s all been undone. “People were going around” the barriers, removing their masks to pay for merchandise and leaving them on the counters, he said. “It blew me away, the lack of concern.” Mr. Cantine said he had also given up on wearing a mask inside his shop because his airbrush easel faced the wall, not customers. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “People are spending money,” he said, maybe because the big amusement parks, restaurants and larger bars have not fully opened. As of Friday night, restaurants were allowed to serve outdoors only, bringing a flood of patrons to tables that were supposed to be set six feet apart. “In a lot of photos, the boardwalk looks very congested,” said Mr. Cantine. “But if you took an aerial view, you could see the spacing.” Not all the tourists were nonchalant about following health restrictions. Sitting on the wall dividing the boardwalk from the beach, Kelly and Dan Goddard, who live in a Baltimore suburb, were wearing masks. Their children were sporting tie-dyed cloth ones sewn by relatives. Mr. Goddard, an accountant, said that when he and his wife packed up Cameron, 7, and Nash, 4, for a day trip to Ocean City on Friday, “we expected 50/50,” meaning that half of vacationers would wear masks. “But this is like 10 percent, maybe.” Ms. Goddard said she had just quit her job as a nurse in a long-term care facility in Catonsville to protect her family, after half the patients tested positive for the coronavirus, and 19 died. “This is the first time we’ve been out in a couple of months, except for the grocery store,” she said. “There are a lot of unknowns and not a lot of real clear guidance,” Mr. Goddard said. “But I don’t think people realize how serious things are, or they don’t care.”WASHINGTON — With a nation on edge, ravaged by disease, hammered by economic collapse, divided over lockdowns and even face masks and now convulsed once again by race, President Trump’s first instinct has been to look for someone to fight. Over the last week, America reeled from 100,000 pandemic deaths, 40 million people out of work and cities in flames over a brutal police killing of a subdued black man. But Mr. Trump was on the attack against China, the World Health Organization, Big Tech, former President Barack Obama, a cable television host and the mayor of a riot-torn city. While other presidents seek to cool the situation in tinderbox moments like this, Mr. Trump plays with matches. He roars into any melee he finds, encouraging street uprisings against public health measures advanced by his own government, hurling made-up murder charges against a critic, accusing his predecessor of unspecified crimes, vowing to crack down on a social media company that angered him and then seemingly threatening to meet violence with violence in Minneapolis. As several cities erupted in street protests after the killing of George Floyd, some of them resulting in clashes with the police, Mr. Trump made no appeal for calm. Instead in a series of tweets and comments to reporters on Saturday, he blamed the unrest on Democrats, called on “Liberal Governors and Mayors” to get “MUCH tougher” on the crowds, threatened to intervene with “the unlimited power of our Military” and even suggested his own supporters mount a counterdemonstration. The turmoil came right to Mr. Trump’s doorstep for the second night in a row on Saturday as hundreds of people protesting Mr. Floyd’s death and the president’s response surged in streets near the White House. While most were peaceful, chanting “black lives matter” and “no peace, no justice,” some spray painted scatological advice for Mr. Trump, ignited small fires, set off firecrackers and threw bricks, bottles and fruit at Secret Service and United States Park Police officers, who responded with pepper spray. The police cordoned off several blocks around the Executive Mansion as a phalanx of camouflage-wearing National Guard troops marched across nearby Lafayette Square. A man strode through the streets yelling, “Time for a revolution!” The image of the White House surrounded by police in helmets and riot gear behind plastic shields fueled the sense of a nation torn apart. Scenes from the protests over racism and police violence that have erupted across the country. Mr. Trump praised the Secret Service for being “very cool” and “very professional” but assailed the Democratic mayor of Washington for not providing city police officers to help on Friday night, which she denied. While governors and mayors have urged restraint, Mr. Trump seemed more intent on taunting the protesters, bragging about the violence that would have met them had they tried to get onto White House grounds. “Big crowd, professionally organized, but nobody came close to breaching the fence,” the president wrote on Twitter on Saturday morning. “If they had they would have been greeted with the most vicious dogs, and most ominous weapons, I have ever seen. That’s when people would have been really badly hurt, at least. Many Secret Service agents just waiting for action.” His suggestion that his own supporters should come to the White House on Saturday foreshadowed the possibility of a clash outside his own doors. “Tonight, I understand, is MAGA NIGHT AT THE WHITE HOUSE???” he wrote on Twitter, using the acronym for his first campaign slogan, “Make America Great Again.” Asked about the tweet later, he denied encouraging violence by his supporters. “They love African-American people,” he said. “They love black people. MAGA loves the black people.” By evening, however, Mr. Trump’s supporters were not in evidence among the crowds at the White House. Mayor Muriel E. Bowser of Washington responded sharply on Saturday morning, saying her police department will protect anyone in Washington, including the president, and by Saturday evening her officers were out in force around the White House. But she called the president a source of division. “While he hides behind his fence afraid/alone, I stand w/ people peacefully exercising their First Amendment Right after the murder of #GeorgeFloyd & hundreds of years of institutional racism,” she wrote. “There are no vicious dogs & ominous weapons. There is just a scared man. Afraid/alone …” After his morning barrage, Mr. Trump tried to recalibrate later in the day, devoting the opening of a speech at the Kennedy Space Center following the SpaceX rocket launch to the unrest in the streets and clearly trying to temper his bellicose tone. “I understand the pain that people are feeling,” he said. “We support the right of peaceful protesters and we hear their pleas. But what we are now seeing on the streets of our cities has nothing to do with justice or peace. The memory of George Floyd is being dishonored by rioters, looters and anarchists.” The days of discord have put the president’s leadership style on vivid display. From the start of his ascension to power, Mr. Trump has presented himself as someone who seeks conflict, not conciliation, a fighter, not a peacemaker. That appeals to a substantial portion of the public that sees in him a president willing to take on an entrenched and entitled establishment. But the confluence of perilous health, economic and now racial crises has tested his approach and left him struggling to find his footing just months before an election in which polls currently show him behind. “The president seems more out-of-touch and detached from the difficult reality the country is living than ever before,” said Carlos Curbelo, a former Republican congressman from Florida who has been critical of Mr. Trump. “At a moment when America desperately needs healing, the president is focused on petty personal battles with his perceived adversaries.” Such a moment would challenge any president, of course. It has been a year of national trauma that started out feeling like another 1998 with impeachment, then another 1918 with a killer pandemic combined with another 1929 given the shattering economic fallout. Now add to that another 1968, a year of deep social unrest. It is fair to say that 2020 has turned out to be a year that has frayed the fabric of American society with an accumulation of anguish that has whipsawed the country and its people. But in some ways, Mr. Trump has become a totem for the nation’s polarization rather than a mender of it. “I am daily thinking about why and how a society unravels and what we can do to stop the process,” said Timothy Naftali, a presidential historian at New York University. “The calamity these days is about more than Trump. He is just the malicious con man who lives to exploit our vulnerabilities.” As the nation has confronted a coronavirus pandemic at the same time as the greatest economic catastrophe since the Great Depression, whatever unified resolve that existed at the beginning of the twin crises quickly evaporated into yet another cultural clash. And the president has made everything into just another partisan dispute rather than a source of consensus, from when and how to reopen to whether to wear a mask in public. Mr. Trump led no national mourning as the death toll from the coronavirus passed 100,000 beyond lowering the flags at the White House, posting a single tweet and offering a passing comment on camera only when asked about it. Rather than seek agreement on the best and safest way to restore daily life, he threatened to “override” governors who prevented places of worship from resuming crowded services. “Crisis leadership demands much more from the White House than irresponsible threats on social media,” said Meena Bose, director of the Peter S. Kalikow Center for the Study of the American Presidency at Hofstra University. Mr. Trump’s initial response to the rioting in Minneapolis, where a police officer has been charged with murder after kneeling on Mr. Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes as he cried out that he could not breathe, underscored the president’s most instinctive response to national challenges. Threatening to send in troops, he wrote early Friday morning that “when the looting starts, the shooting starts.” Only after a cascade of criticism did he try to walk it back, posting a new tweet 13 hours later, suggesting that all he had meant was that “looting leads to shooting” by people in the street. “I don’t want this to happen, and that’s what the expression put out last night means,” he said, a reformulation that convinced few if any of his critics. Even some of Mr. Trump’s usual allies were distressed at the original shooting tweet. Geraldo Rivera, the television and radio host who often spends time with Mr. Trump at the president’s Mar-a-Lago club in Florida, decried “the recklessness” of that message and called on the president “to self-censor himself.” “Come on, what is this, sixth grade?” Mr. Rivera said on Fox News. “You don’t put gasoline on the fire. That’s not calming anybody.” He added: “All he does is diminish himself.” But many of the president’s defenders rejected the idea that he had mishandled the crises, pressing the argument that Democrats and the news media were to blame for the turmoil in the streets, which spread from Minneapolis to New York, Atlanta, Washington, Louisville, Portland and other cities. “Keep track of cities where hundreds of millions of dollars in property damage and serious injuries and death will take place,” Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor who has served as Mr. Trump’s personal lawyer, wrote on Twitter on Friday night. “All Democrat dominated cities with criminal friendly policies. This is the future if you elect Democrats.” Bernard B. Kerik, the former New York City police commissioner who was pardoned by Mr. Trump for tax fraud earlier this year, amplified the point on Twitter. “It should be no surprise that every one of these cities that the anarchist have taken over, are the same cities run by leftist Democrats with the highest violence, murder and poverty rates,” he wrote on Twitter. “They can’t handle their cities normally, so how are they going to deal with this?” Mr. Trump, who this past week retweeted a video of a supporter saying that “the only good Democrat is a dead Democrat” (though the supporter insisted he meant that in a political sense), picked up the theme on Saturday. With crowds visible from his upstairs windows, Mr. Trump reached for his phone and again assailed the “Democrat Mayor” of Minneapolis for not responding more vigorously and called on New York to unleash its police against crowds. “Let New York’s Finest be New York’s Finest,” he wrote. “There is nobody better, but they must be allowed to do their job!”Over the last two months, law-enforcement agencies around the country have increasingly found themselves transporting people infected with the coronavirus, and facing the challenge of how to quickly and effectively sanitize their vehicles. “We’ve been doing it by hand, wiping down the seats and interior with 70 percent alcohol and water,” said Robert Martinez, deputy commissioner for support services at the New York Police Department. “But with the virus, you can’t see it, so you don’t know if you’re getting every surface and every nook and cranny.” Now Ford Motor, a major supplier of police cruisers, has come up with an answer. The carmaker has developed a software update that can raise the interior temperature to 133 degrees Fahrenheit for 15 minutes, which it says is enough to eliminate the virus. The New York Police Department, with about 9,000 vehicles, mostly from Ford, is one of several law-enforcement agencies adopting the feature. Mr. Martinez said that it would take time to install software updates on all the Ford vehicles in the New York police fleet, but that the method seemed promising. “This is a pretty comprehensive, sure way of knowing that you killed the virus, or even bedbugs or other things,” he said. The feature is available on the Ford Police Interceptor S.U.V.s for the 2013 to 2019 model years. Some 176,000 of those vehicles were sold, making it one of the top models used by law enforcement. To be sure this approach would be effective, Ford turned to Ohio State University, where researchers examined the ability of high heat to destroy viruses in vehicles. The researchers performed tests using a coronavirus similar to the strain that has caused more than 100,000 deaths in the United States, said Jesse Kwiek, an associate professor of microbiology at Ohio State. A solution containing the virus was spread on the carpet, plastics and other materials used for the interiors of Ford’s police vehicles, and those parts were heated to 120 degrees for 15 minutes, Mr. Kwiek said. At that temperature, the study concluded, the protein that is a crucial component of the virus’s structure unravels. “Of all the materials we tested, we were never able to recover infectious viruses for any,” he said. Bill Gubing, Ford’s product line manager for S.U.V.s and passenger vehicles, said the automaker heard of the problem of decontaminating police vehicles in March as the coronavirus began spreading rapidly across the country. “Our engineers thought about how an autoclave is used to sterilize medical instruments,” Mr. Gubing said, referring to the heated containers used at high temperatures and pressures. The engineers envisioned “a way to do something like that with a vehicle,” he said, “because we have a perfect heat source right there,” the engine. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The company developed an update for the vehicles’ engine-control software that creates a sanitation mode that can be activated by pressing a series of buttons on the steering wheel. The software checks whether there is enough gasoline to keep the engine running for the 80-minute process, and prompts officers to ensure that no one is in the vehicle and no sensitive electronics remain inside. With the doors and windows closed, the software heats the interior to 133 degrees. After 15 minutes at that temperature, the vehicle’s air-conditioning comes on to cool off the interior. Mr. Gubing said the process should not damage interior parts. Metal would be unaffected by 120-degree heat, he said, and plastics typically melt at 212 degrees or higher.Jane Rosen began yelling sometime in April. By May, it had become routine. The incidents usually occur near her minivan, which she parks alongside Central Park in New York City. As she attempts to enter or exit the vehicle, a cyclist or a runner will whiz by, so close she can practically smell them. “I scream, ‘Where is your mask?,’” said Ms. Rosen, 73. Her daughter warned her that these confrontations could end badly. But it feels worth it, she said, because lives are at stake. She’s had about 18 such confrontations. The figure would be higher, she said, if she ventured out more often. Melissa Mayen, a high school senior in Washington, D.C., had also been avoiding going outside. Then in mid-May, she set out for a ride for the first time in nearly a month. She was startled when a man, walking across the street, yelled something about a mask. “I almost fell off my bike,” she said. She owns one mask, which her father brought her from a construction site where he works. Aside from the fact that it’s so thick that she can barely breathe in it, she tries to preserve it for higher-risk situations. “If you are yelling at someone to wear a mask, then give them a mask,” she said. Several months into the coronavirus pandemic, battles over when to wear masks have heated up, sometimes with political alliances replacing health guidelines. And few activities seem to have incited more debate than exercise: walkers, cyclists, runners, skaters — everyone seems to have contradicting interpretations of the science and etiquette around how to behave outside. Not necessarily. When cities and states started urging people to wear masks to reduce transmission of the coronavirus, some made exceptions for exercising. Carry a mask, many seemed to say, but if you’re by yourself on an empty street, you don’t have to wear it. New York City explicitly states that face coverings are not required while walking, running or biking, if you can keep your distance. Likewise, San Francisco has urged runners to carry a mask and put it on when they are within 30 feet of other people. Since mid-May, Los Angeles has required residents to put on a face covering upon leaving home. But masks are not required while running and biking so long as distance is maintained — though they should be carried, the county and city later clarified. In Boston, an elevated heart rate is no excuse not to cover your nose and mouth. “You need to be wearing a face covering when you’re out exercising,” Mayor Marty Walsh said in April.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommends wearing cloth face coverings in public settings “where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain,” but offers no specific guidance on exercising. It can be really hard to run in a mask. Many runners are put off by how challenging it is to inhale as their heart rate rises. It can be much more difficult than walking in a mask. “It’s harder to breathe, and it’s a lot more clammy,” said Gaston Ly, a store manager at Running Room in Honolulu.  Others forgo one because, even as the virus spreads, masks have not been widely adopted in their communities. “Oh gosh no!” said Larry Holt, the owner of Ken Combs Running Store in Louisville, Ky., when asked if runners there wore masks. “That’s the craziest thing I’ve ever heard of in my life.” (In Kentucky, Gov. Andy Beshear asked residents to begin wearing masks in public on May 11. Like officials elsewhere, he made an exception for people exercising alone.) Even in Hong Kong, a city so committed to face coverings in public that it has been widely praised as a model, there is little expectation that runners will wear masks, said Brian Woo, a founder of a running group there. “I assume it’s just understood that running is not a time for wearing masks,” he said. There is no scientific consensus around the importance of wearing a mask while exercising, primarily because so little relevant research has been completed.  Researchers do agree that masks slow the spread of the virus. They also agree that it’s best to avoid exercising within six feet of anyone beyond your immediate household and that working out is less risky outside than inside. Donald Milton, a professor of environmental health at the University of Maryland School of Public Health who has studied masks’ ability to block respiratory droplets, suggests their value depends on location. “Outdoors is relatively safe, and masks would only be important if you are exercising in crowded areas or indoors in space shared with other people,” he said. It would most likely occur while you were stopped talking to them, said Julian Tang, a virologist and a professor at the University of Leicester in England. He thinks the risk of infection from quickly passing someone is low, because the “massive air volume will dilute any exhaled virus and the wind may carry it away.” In general, researchers agree that air circulation outdoors seems to strongly inhibit transmission of the coronavirus. In a study of more than 7,300 coronavirus cases in China, just one was connected to outdoor transmission. In April, a draft of a scientific study by Belgian and Dutch engineers indicating that runners, brisk walkers and cyclists create a wake of air behind them that could carry exhaled respiratory droplets much farther than six feet began to circulate online. A widely shared Medium post referring to the research recommended keeping a distance of 32 feet when running or slowly cycling and at least 65 feet — four car-lengths — when cycling quickly. For a few days, every social media platform seemed to be oozing with the same terrifying graphic: two runners, one spewing a colorful cloud — many interpreted it to be coronavirus — on a man behind him.  Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The study’s authors soon published a follow-up, noting that their research was just an engineering wind-flow model, which found that when we walk or run, the air moves differently around us than when we are still. Despite telling people not to draw conclusions from their research about how the virus infects people, it had taken on a life of its own. One useful takeaway, both the study’s authors and several researchers not involved in it said: It’s best to avoid running or biking directly behind someone for a prolonged period. Stranger sweat is disgusting. But it’s not among the bodily fluids that the C.D.C. warns transmits the coronavirus.  Spitting is not only disgusting but also dangerous, as saliva can contain viral droplets. Runners, cyclists, skaters, walkers — don’t do it! (Or at least not around others.) Avoid popular routes and times, suggests Douglas Nicaragua, the owner of Go Run in Miami. He advises taking a mask, even if you don’t expect to cross paths with anyone. If you see someone, put it on.   “Over time, you’ll get used to it,” said Joey Ta, a competitive endurance athlete in Los Angeles who recently started wearing a mask. People exercising have used several kinds of masks, some with drawbacks. A surgical mask can easily grow damp and heavy with sweat; so can a cloth one. A bandanna tied around the head may slip more easily when running. Some may even consider a face shield. Others have used a face gaiter or Buff, a tube of cloth that extends from the collarbone to the ridge of the nose. That’s what Colin Klein, owner of Fleet Feet in Burbank, Calif., recommends. And whether you wear a mask or not, pay attention to the position of people around you. Dr. Benjamin D. Levine, a professor of internal medicine at UT Southwestern Medical Center and Texas Health Presbyterian Dallas, is advising the U.S. track and field team on how to train safely. He urges focusing on what he calls the four Ds: “double the distance” from six to 12 feet and “don’t draft,” meaning “don’t run or cycle directly behind someone so you are continually running into and breathing their expired air.” No. The idea that wearing a mask mimics high-altitude conditions is a myth, Dr. Levine said. “I don’t understand how people can’t understand that this is about more than just a mask,” said Ms. Rosen, the New York woman who has taken to yelling at runners. She said her confrontations were driven by a sense of duty to protect not only herself, but also her neighbors. But is yelling — which may also expel more viral droplets than talking — likely to change behavior? Possibly, said Alexandra Brewis, a professor in the School of Human Evolution and Social Change at Arizona State University and the author of a book on stigma and global health. But she has found that most people are far more likely to take advice from friends and family than from a stranger and to incorporate feedback delivered with empathy, not shame.Q: I need to move by July 1 and am looking for a rental in Manhattan, but I can only view apartments virtually. How can I get a sense of what an apartment really looks like from just videos and photographs? How does anyone move into an apartment without ever visiting it? A: Since stay-at-home orders were enacted in New York, video tours have quickly become the standard way to see available apartments. On StreetEasy, the number of listings with video tours jumped 132 percent from March to April. But not all videos are equal. While the luxury market is full of well-produced montages, the same can’t be said of the rental market. Many videos are short on useful information. Some show grainy footage of a hallway or other common areas. Others are dark, show cluttered apartments from odd angles, or zoom in on certain features without showing the whole room. The experience is certainly not uniformly enlightening, and if that’s all you’ve got to go on, it means taking a leap of faith with a lot of money at stake. But you need an apartment, so what do you do? First, if the listing has a floor plan, examine it carefully to get a sense of the layout and the size of the rooms. If it doesn’t, ask the listing agent to send you one. If there is a video, pay close attention to whatever details you can see. And take your time. “There is no need to rush,” said Kemdi Anosike, a salesperson at Warburg Realty. Apartments “are moving slowly.” Then contact the broker and start asking questions, like how tall the ceilings are, how far the windows are from the next building and which direction the light comes from — all of which will help you gauge how much light the unit gets. Ask how old the appliances are, and how many cabinets are in the kitchen. Find out how many other units are on the same floor. If the building has an elevator, ask if it has more than one. And ask the managing agent for additional photos. Perhaps the super could access the apartment and show it to you over FaceTime. (Mr. Anosike recommended that prospective renters get all their questions answered in writing.) So what happens if you sign the lease, get the keys and are not happy when you arrive? A lease is a binding agreement — if you sign one for an apartment sight unseen, you are assuming the risk that you might not like what you get. Many brokerages are requiring renters and buyers to sign a liability waiver, which explains that buying or renting a home sight unseen poses risks, and a broker can’t verify that the information in the photos or videos is accurate. Ultimately, virtual tours are probably here to stay, even once the state loosens the lockdown. “Those days of bringing 20 people into an apartment to help you make a decision are over,” Mr. Anosike said. “The days of open houses are over.” For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.World leaders, human rights activists, international musical acts and drag queens will participate in a 24-hour online celebration of gay pride organized after the coronavirus pandemic forced the cancellation or postponement of hundreds of L.G.B.T.Q. pride events around the world, organizers announced on Saturday. The event, which is scheduled for June 27, will feature remarks by Prime Minister Erna Solberg of Norway and Prime Minister Xavier Bettel of Luxembourg. Manvendra Singh Gohil, the first openly gay prince of India, is also expected to deliver taped remarks. Planned appearances include the singers Olivia Newton-John, Deborah Cox, Thelma Houston and Ava Max; the drag performers Pabllo Vittar and Courtney Act; and musical acts including the Dixie Chicks, Bright Light Bright Light and Steve Grand. Additional musicians and bands performing in the event, which will be streamed on YouTube and the Global Pride website, will be announced throughout June, organizers said. “Every Pride organizer in the world can tell you a story of someone whose life changed when they visited Pride,” Kristine Garina, president of the European Pride Organizers Association, said in a statement. “And so, with so many Prides being canceled or postponed, as organizers we felt we had a responsibility to come together and deliver Pride online.” There are more than 1,500 pride celebrations across the globe, according to Global Pride, and all are invited to participate. The organizers plan to include videos from regional L.G.B.T.Q. pride networks in the 24-hour livestream. Across the United States, pride events have been canceled or postponed in New York, San Francisco and Los Angeles as well as in Indianapolis; Charlottesville, Va.; and Birmingham, Ala. Some cities have started lifting stay-at-home measures and some people may be able to watch the online celebration with friends, or at bars or other locations. Organizers are encouraging viewers to follow local officials’ health guidelines. In addition to broadening the potential reach of the programming, moving pride celebrations to a virtual platform may allow some L.G.B.T.Q. people to participate for the first time, according to a president of InterPride, one of the chief organizers of Global Pride. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “This means people who aren’t out, or who are living in socially conservative countries, can take part,” the president, Julian Sanjivan, said in the statement.MEXICO CITY — A dengue epidemic ravaged Honduras last year, sickening over 100,000 people and leaving 180 dead. As this year began, officials braced for another surge in cases of the mosquito-borne disease and wondered how they would manage with their frail public health system and shortage of trained personnel. Then along came the coronavirus, pitching the nation into a grueling, two-front public health battle. “Horrible,” said Dr. Dinorah Nolasco, a top health official in northern Honduras, a region that has been particularly hard hit by both diseases. “These months have been tremendous.” As the coronavirus pandemic stalks the globe, some nations, particularly in the developing world, find themselves under extraordinary strain as they simultaneously contend with other outbreaks, chronic public health problems and challenges posed by government mismanagement, poverty and armed conflict. The all-consuming demands of the coronavirus, officials fear, could divert government focus and open the door to a possible resurgence of other illnesses. In Latin America, where the number of coronavirus cases has been rising sharply, governments are trying to contend with new dengue outbreaks while holding onto gains in the fight against other infectious diseases. But at least nine countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have paused some of their immunization activities, officials said, threatening efforts to control diseases such as polio, tuberculosis and measles. Dengue is also bedeviling nations in Southeast Asia, like Indonesia, another country hard hit by the coronavirus. And in Africa, health officials are concerned about recent outbreaks of yellow fever, cholera, measles and Ebola, among other diseases. In one alarming measure of the extent of the coronavirus’s disruption to global health strategies, vaccination programs in at least 68 countries have been “substantially hindered,” according to a statement released last week by the World Health Organization, Unicef and Gavi, a public-private partnership that helps provide vaccines to developing countries. The suspensions could affect about 80 million children under the age of one and risk a resurgence of diseases like polio, measles, typhoid, yellow fever, meningitis, tetanus and cholera, the agencies said. The causes for the disruptions include lockdowns that have impeded the movement of health care workers and patients, fear of coronavirus transmission in mass vaccination gatherings, inadequate vaccine supplies due to transportation delays and insufficient protective gear for health care workers, the statement said. In some places, health care workers assigned to vaccination campaigns have been redeployed to respond to the coronavirus, officials said. The pandemic, coming on top of other immense public health challenges, “has showed the vulnerabilities of many countries in different manners,” said Dr. Richard Mihigo, coordinator in Africa for the World Health Organization’s immunization and vaccines development program. “Countries have been almost on their knees, paralyzed,” he continued. “It becomes very clear that they need to have a much more resilient health system in place to control any outbreak or to prepare for any outbreak that may come.” The coronavirus took hold in Latin America well after it had started pummeling most of the rest of the world. During the first few months of the year, health officials had more immediate problems to contend with, including dengue. In 2019, the disease, transmitted by the Aedes aegypti mosquito, had ravaged Latin America, which suffered its worst dengue epidemic on record with more than 3 million cases and more than 1,500 deaths. The outbreak hit Honduras particularly hard, overwhelming a public health system that had already been weakened by budget cuts and pervasive corruption and was barely equipped to meet usual demands, much less an epidemic of record size. By the end of 2019, Honduras had suffered about 61 percent of the dengue deaths in Central America. The highest number of dengue cases occurred in the department of Cortés, where efforts to control its transmission were further hampered by a lack of trained personnel and by the region’s ubiquitous criminal gangs, which for months blocked government health care workers from gaining access to some of the hardest-hit neighborhoods. Dengue remains a major concern in Latin America and the Caribbean this year. According to the latest statistics from the Pan American Health Organization, about 1,426,000 cases have been recorded in the region so far, fewer than during the same period last year. But regional health officials fear this may be an undercount caused by the focus on the coronavirus and the disease it causes, Covid-19. “Covid has been able to sometimes deviate attention from other pressing problems,” said Dr. Marcos Espinal, director of the department of communicable diseases at the Pan American Health Organization, based in Washington, D.C. On Tuesday, Dr. Carissa F. Etienne, the director of the Pan American Health Organization, said the Americas, with more than 2.4 million Covid-19 cases and more than 143,000 deaths, had become the epicenter of the pandemic. In Honduras, the number of dengue cases this year is already outpacing last year’s tally — with the worst, perhaps, yet to come, officials said. The rainy season is just beginning, bringing more pooling and flooding and creating more potential breeding sites for mosquitoes. “We’re expecting a much greater proliferation of the mosquito between July, August and September,” said Dr. Piedad Huerta, representative of the Pan American Health Organization in Honduras. Health officials are now bracing for a repeat of last year’s crisis in Honduras, when the hospital systems in some regions were overflowing with gravely sick dengue patients, many of them children. Only this time, there is the additional problem of Covid-19. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “It puts a double burden on the health services,” Dr. Huerta said. “Without a doubt, I think it isn’t easy for the country to be able to manage both things in a very efficient manner. It’s a very big challenge.” The Honduran government has put out a call to contract more health care workers to deal with the growing coronavirus threat, officials said, while imposing stringent measures to try to control its spread, including closing the country’s borders, mandating a blanket curfew and severely restricting the ability of people to leave their homes. Dr. Nolasco, regional health director in the northern province of Cortés, said she has already been provided with more than 200 supplemental workers — doctors, nurses, microbiologists and others — to staff quick-response medical teams and conduct door-to-door education campaigns, cornerstones of her public health program to confront both the coronavirus and dengue. But while she no longer has a problem with the criminal gangs, as she did last year, her teams are still having difficulty accessing some areas. Residents of certain neighborhoods have banded together to block the entrance of health care workers out of fear that they might be carrying the virus. Dr. Nolasco said she and her staff members have been driven away by mobs wielding machetes and throwing stones. In one incident, workers trying to enter a neighborhood were doused with bleach, she said. Some people afflicted by Covid-19 have been fearful of seeking out attention because they believe the disease is shameful and are embarrassed. Others are in denial that it is even a real phenomenon, she said. Some patients, seriously sick with Covid-19, are seeking medical attention after it is too late. “People are arriving at the emergency room to die,” she said. “The fight now is education.” Dr. Espinal said he worries about countries in Latin America and the Caribbean becoming overwhelmed by the coronavirus and “taking their eyes off” other health problems.  “Latin America has a great history of declining morbidity of infectious diseases,” Dr. Espinal said. “We don’t want to go back or to lose that achievement.”BEIRUT, Lebanon — In northern Yemen, more and more people are falling ill and dying after having trouble breathing, yet the Iran-backed group that controls the region, the Houthis, has acknowledged only a few coronavirus deaths. In southern Yemen, where two groups that previously fought the Houthis together have turned on each other, mortality rates have more than tripled compared with last year. The coronavirus appears to have slammed into Yemen, a country already staggering from five years of war, competing power centers, a health care system in ruins, widespread hunger and outbreaks of cholera and other infectious diseases. But the denial of the outbreak in the Houthi-controlled north, the absence of clear authority in the divided south and the drying-up of aid everywhere have hobbled any hope of limiting the virus’s spread, leaving health care workers and hospitals ill-equipped to cope with it and the public confused and suspicious of efforts to combat it. Yemen was already facing what has been called the world’s worst humanitarian crisis before the virus hit. The war, in which a Saudi-led military coalition is battling the Houthis, has taken 100,000 lives. Saudi-led airstrikes have killed thousands of civilians and destroyed hospitals and schools, while United Nations officials have accused the Houthis of diverting humanitarian aid. The pandemic has generated rumors that patients were being euthanized at hospitals, causing many Yemenis to shy away from treatment. Yet when they can no longer avoid the hospital, they are regularly turned away for lack of beds, protective equipment and medical supplies. The authorities in many places are too weak to prevent large crowds from gathering at prayers, funerals and marketplaces, or residents from traveling within the country. The confusion and doubt are compounded by the secrecy surrounding the outbreak — officially, the country has only 282 confirmed cases and 61 deaths. “In Yemen, we think there’s no coronavirus because we don’t trust our own health system,” said Salah Mohammed, a school security guard in the southern port city of Aden. “They talk about a curfew to prevent the spread of the disease. Great. But why do they allow people to move freely around the country if there’s a curfew?” With little testing available and the government and hospitals in disarray, it is difficult to measure the virus’s true spread in Yemen. What numbers are known, however, are grim. As of last week, tests had confirmed more than 500 coronavirus cases just in Sana, the Houthi-controlled capital, said a doctor who advises the Health Ministry there. The deputy health minister is among those infected, and a former president of Sana’s flagship university is among the nearly 80 dead. Yet the Houthi authorities have acknowledged only four cases in their territory, leaving public health officials, health care workers and aid groups to sound the alarm about an outbreak whose severity the authorities are playing down. Some Health Ministry employees have been pleading with senior officials to make the true numbers public so that emergency medical workers and residents understand the gravity of the threat, said the doctor, who asked to remain anonymous because the authorities had threatened colleagues who had tried to go public. On Thursday, the Health Ministry in Sana asserted in a statement that other countries’ decisions to publicize their coronavirus case counts had “created a state of fear and anxiety that was more deadly than the disease itself.” The ministry offered no numbers of its own. “We don’t have to adhere to what the world wants us to,” Yousif al-Hadhiri, a ministry spokesman, said in an interview on Friday. He blamed the World Health Organization and international aid groups for being “lazy” and failing to deal with the outbreak. The reason for the secrecy is unclear. But one result is that the virus is likely to spread further, analysts said. “The Houthis aren’t just shooting themselves in the foot,” said Osamah al-Rawhani, the executive director of the Sana’a Center for Strategic Studies, a Beirut-based think tank focused on Yemen. “They’re shooting people. The people who are in power haven’t recognized or revealed the right information to the public. And secrecy makes people do the wrong things because they’ve gotten the wrong message.” The coronavirus is ravaging the other side of the front lines as well, where forces opposed to the Houthis are also reporting dubiously low numbers. There, however, the main problem is not denial, but lack of governance and a health care system in meltdown. In Aden, which served as the interim seat of Yemen’s internationally recognized government until a separatist group seized it last month, burial data showed that 950 people had died in the city in the first 17 days of this month, more than triple the 306 recorded for all of May 2019, according to an analysis by Abdullah Bin Ghouth, an epidemiology professor at Hadramout Universitywho advises the minister of health in Aden. The spike in deaths suggests that the official virus death toll is a vast undercount. At a hospital for coronavirus cases that Doctors Without Borders has set up in Aden, the only dedicated Covid-19 facility in southern Yemen, 173 patients have been admitted, more than 68 of whom have died, the group said. In other countries, 80 percent of patients did not need hospitalization, suggesting that many more people may be infected than those who went to the hospital. Yemen’s health care system, already overrun with outbreaks of cholera and other serious diseases, is gasping. Most doctors and nurses have not been paid in years, leading many to leave the public health system. Those who stayed are now being asked to treat coronavirus patients without protective gear. Azzubair, an emergency room doctor at a hospital in Dhamar Province, south of Sana, said he and his colleagues had been given only cheap, flimsy masks and gowns despite treating an average of six suspected Covid patients a day. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “We can’t help but deal with possible Covid-19 cases on a daily basis,” said Azzubair, who asked to be identified only by his first name to avoid reprisals. “It’s like being in the monster’s jaws. By the time you realize you’re dealing with a suspected coronavirus case, it’s too late. You don’t really understand why they’re handling this issue in such secrecy.” In the south, only a few hospitals are accepting coronavirus cases, with other facilities refusing patients or closing down altogether because they lack protective equipment or staff are abandoning their posts. Doctors Without Borders, which operates Covid-19 centers with a total of 25 intensive-care beds across the country, does not have enough masks, gowns or medical staff to open more, said Claire Ha-Duong, the head of the group’s mission in Yemen, and turns away patients every day. Funding has fallen far short of the need. International donors suspended or cut much of their funding before the pandemic over concerns that the Houthis were keeping aid from going where it was needed. Lise Grande, the top United Nations official in the country, said the Houthis had since agreed to concessions that she hoped would reopen the spigot. For any public health response to stick, however, Yemenis need to accept the need for it at a time when trust in the powers that be is at a low ebb. One persistent rumor darting around Yemen is that people who go to the hospital receive lethal injections to put them out of their misery. In Houthi territory, armed personnel have fired into the air to keep people away as medical teams take people suspected of being infected into quarantine, residents said. In Aden, a city of half a million, the recent power transfer has left no authority capable of mounting an organized public-health campaign. There are no quarantine centers and no restrictions on movement or gathering, and residents have protested against attempts to impose them. Yahya, 36, a Sana resident who asked to be identified only by his first name to avoid running afoul of the Houthis, buried three relatives who died with coronavirus-like symptoms. He partly blamed those in charge: If officials had been transparent about the size of the outbreak, he said, people would have taken the virus more seriously. He, too, had begun to show symptoms, but said he had refused to go to a hospital or a quarantine center. “I wouldn’t go anywhere, even if it’s a Movenpick,” he said, referring to the five-star Sana hotel that shut down during the war and has now been converted into a quarantine facility. “There’s no trust anymore.” Saeed al-Batati contributed reporting from Al Mukalla, Yemen, and Shuaib Almosawa from Sana.The residents of Bernal Heights, a dense little neighborhood built around a grassy hill in the south of San Francisco, have been under lockdown a long time — since March 17, to be exact, when the city became among the first in the United States to shut down. With incomes and freedom lost, and boredom and anxiety setting in, the neighborhood turned inward. This has led to a flurry of new activity. Neighbors in the upper-middle-class community have formed a small newspaper for children. Socially distanced street dance parties and cocktail hours have taken over, block by block, as the sun sets. Some people have created a new micro-social safety net, turning bookshelves into sidewalk food banks and garages into medical-supply distribution centers. Email lists and text chains for each block are buzzing. And as sheltering in place eases, some of the changes in Bernal Heights are turning permanent. It’s a sign of how Covid-19 has taken us back in time. Televisions had killed stoop culture. Those little stages for gossip, flirting and catching up went quiet as people retreated to the living room after work. Then phones killed the living room TV time and homes got quiet, too, each family member retreating to a bedroom or a far end of the sofa. Now we have returned to the stoop. For all the pain that the virus has caused the 25,000 or so who live in Bernal Heights, it has also brought them together as a community — a pattern that is playing out in neighborhoods around the country. “The scale of life has changed,” said Francesca Russello Ammon, an associate professor of city and regional planning at the University of Pennsylvania. “Your world has shrunk. The neighborhood and the block become really important.” In a one-bedroom apartment on Wright Street, Ryan Stagg, 27, turns on the oven to bake the sourdough country loaf he has prepped the night before. A little while later, he revs up the countertop toaster oven for sourdough cinnamon rolls and brown butter chocolate chip cookies — the specialty of his fiancée, Daniella Banchero. When the virus hit, the couple were hitting their stride. Ms. Banchero was cooking at Piccino, a hip restaurant in the Dogpatch area of San Francisco that is teeming with start-ups. Mr. Stagg was just opening Pollara, a new Roman pizza place in Berkeley, Calif. He was laid off. She was furloughed. “We were finally getting a little bit of success,” Mr. Stagg said. They started baking bread for neighbors, dangling each loaf in a basket, over the fence and down to the sidewalk. It was free. Demand grew. Their landlord was unwilling to reduce their rent, so they started to charge $9 for a big sourdough loaf and expanded the menu, adding cinnamon rolls ($3), cookies ($2) and crumb cakes. Their woodworker friend who lives down the road and was out of work welded them a boom arm. An artist a few blocks further painted them a sign. In recent days, they have started using a commercial kitchen in a restaurant that’s been shuttered. And they applied to start a proper registered business: The Bernal Bakery. Natalie Mead, who works at Instagram, was home on medical leave for chronic migraines when the lockdown happened. She was ready to help. One thing her house has that is rare in the neighborhood is a deep front garden. So she decided to make a scavenger hunt for children. “I just went down into my basement and started looking around for anything fun, and it took me awhile since I don’t have kids,” Ms. Mead, 28, said. “But I found some Hot Wheels I still had from when I was a kid.” She hid them in the garden and wrote in big chalk letters on the sidewalk: “I spy five Hot Wheels. “ Neighborhood children (and some adults), bored from staring at Zoom, were hooked. Soon, items to keep the game going were pouring in. “People have brought over a lot of collections — stress ball collection, dinosaurs that their kids aren’t playing with anymore, action figures, billiard balls, little miniature board games,” Ms. Mead said. “This week it’s Smurfs.” For social distancing reasons, neighbors usually leave the prizes to hide under her front stairs. Ms. Mead said she hears 10 to 20 families a day coming through her garden for the scavenger hunt. The hunters arrive first thing in the morning, when many children are often still in their pajamas. “I have to keep myself from coming out and saying hi all day now,” she said. Chris Colin, a freelance journalist, came up with the idea of a kids’ newspaper two days into the school cancellations. “I looked up and realized that there were not only two children in my house with nothing to do but I just felt this, like a disturbance in the force,” he said. Grown-ups have wine. Kids are struggling. “The idea was not just to occupy them but to give them a way to explore what the hell has happened to their world at a very local level, a very personal level,” he said. Mr. Colin emailed some parents in the neighborhood asking if their children would contribute articles. He expected a couple of submissions. He stopped counting after 100. And so the paper, called Six Feet of Separation, was born. In each issue, Mr. Colin accepts short reflections and recipes, pieces on loneliness or adventures. No writers above the age of 17 need apply. One 14-year-old data journalist organized a bunch of children to climb to the top of Bernal Hill in different shifts to count the number of people walking up and determine peak crowd hours. He has started accepting “foreign correspondents,” who write missives from well beyond Bernal Heights. “My editorial policy is, ‘Yes,’” Mr. Colin said. He carefully formats each newspaper as a PDF and then blasts it out over email. He publishes when he has enough articles, every week or so. Parents then print out copies at home. Now the paper is expanding through word of mouth among parents. A representative from AT&T found Mr. Colin. They are donating to fund its expansion around the country. The food bank is just some bookshelves that Colleen Irwin, a nurse practitioner at San Francisco General Hospital, put in front of her house. But every day it’s full of fresh and canned food. She started it after talking to a neighbor who told her there were day laborers in Bernal Heights who had not had anything to eat. She asked if he was hungry right then, and he said he was. “So I text the Pussy Chicks,” she said, referring to her group of politically active friends, who named themselves after the iconic headgear of the 2017 Women’s March. “And of course people stopped what they were doing, they went in their cupboards, and so it started the next day. And I started talking to a neighbor, Dan, who was walking by with a dog, and I said, ‘Could you build a bookcase?’” In the end, someone donated the shelves. She made a poster that read “Emergency Food Bank” and covered it in glittery paper. She handed out postcards to those who had orange and lemon trees in their backyards, asking for citrus donations. “Everybody says yes,” Ms. Irwin said. She estimated that at least four times a day, the bookshelf fills up and empties out. “It’s a dynamic little thing,” she said. “Little kids come by and the parents have them bring stuff and put it in there, and then the kids come back later and say, ‘Hey Ma, the chili, it’s gone.’” Misa Perron-Burdick, an obstetrician-gynecologist in Bernal Heights, has many low-income patients. She wanted the women who see her to leave with supplies to shelter in place. So she reached out to friends and neighbors and set up an Amazon wish list and a PayPal account. “It just snowballed. We get about 10 deliveries of supplies a day,” Dr. Perron-Burdick said. “Everything happens in the garage.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Neighbors are shopping, donating supplies, and helping to sort, stock, and deliver goods. From the garage, they pack individual care packages and head out for delivery. Many of the volunteers were recently laid off themselves. The corner-store owner even made a deal to source products wholesale for her. Dr. Perron-Burdick wants to hold onto some of the changes. “I don’t want to stop relying on my neighbors for things, and I don’t want my neighbors to stop relying on me for things,” she said. “I hope that we don’t go back to the way we were.” Some neighbors have banded together to shop on a rotation, taking care of the Target run or the grocery run for a half-dozen homes at a time. Others have bulk ordered groceries — 50-pound bags of flour, 30 pounds of blueberries, a giant salmon — to share. There’s a Google map of houses with rainbows in the window for kids to “scavenger hunt” and count the rainbows from the safe distance of the sidewalk. There is a “window pane block party” for people to “introduce themselves” by putting a sign on their window. One resident posts new jokes in the window every day. Joyce McKinney and her husband are in the vulnerable-age category, and young people have volunteered to run errands for them, which did not happen before. The other day, she said, an unsolicited bottle of wine and a six pack of I.P.A. showed up on their doorstep. J.T. Williams is a trial attorney who in 2016 moved from Texas to San Francisco. His dream had always been to sing opera, and here he would do it. In four years, he has performed in more than 100 shows. Now, every day from 5 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., Mr. Williams, a dramatic bass-baritone, stands on his balcony and sings. He likes dramatic arias, like “Il Pagliacci Prologue,” “Cortigiani” from “Rigoletto,” “Nemico” from “Andrea Chenier” and “Eri Tu” from “Un Ballo in Maschera.” He ends most evenings with the “Toreador Song” from “Carmen.” There are too many events on different blocks to fully document the stoop cocktail scene. Some groups do masked singalongs or poetry readings. Every Saturday, a garage door rolls up and Sam Cooke’s “Let the Good Times Roll” plays at full blast. On Easter, a neighbor wore a bunny costume and walked around waving at children. Around 8 p.m. there’s a drum circle on Bennington Street. On Sundays, there is a sing- and dance-along on Moultrie Street. “Many of us didn’t know each other despite living within 50 yards,” said Sarah Gordon, a participant in the dance-along. She said she and her neighbors have learned the Electric Slide.Patrick Kingsley, an international correspondent, and Laetitia Vancon, a photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles to explore the reopening of the European continent after coronavirus lockdowns. Read all their dispatches. GENEVA — The first people arrived before 2 a.m. By 4 a.m., more than 100 people stood waiting in the darkness outside the ice-hockey stadium. By 7 a.m., the line stretched for more than a mile, heading north to the river, then west down the riverbank, then all around a sports center parking lot, then past the squash courts, the boxing club, the theater, under the Pont de Saint-Georges, before doubling back up a riverside corniche. By early afternoon last Saturday, nearly 3,000 residents of Geneva, one of the world’s richest cities, had filtered through the stadium to receive a food parcel worth about $25. Some carried babies. Some were in wheelchairs. Some had waited for more than six hours. In medical terms, Geneva has not been as gripped by the coronavirus crisis as other areas of Western Europe. In the city and its surrounding suburbs, fewer than 300 residents have died in a population of half a million. But in economic terms the crisis has been ruinous for Geneva’s underclass — the undocumented and underpaid workers often forgotten about in a city better known for its bankers, watchmakers and U.N. officials. Thousands of people working in the shadows of the Swiss economy lost their jobs overnight in March, as hotels, restaurants and families fired their undocumented cleaners and maids in response to a lockdown enforced by the central Swiss government. Unable to draw on state support, most were then forced to rely on charity to survive. Ultimately, that demand led volunteers and city officials to set up a weekly food bank at the ice-hockey stadium near the river. “If you wanted to pictogram Geneva, what would you put?” said Laura Cotton, a Swiss-British hospital decorator who volunteers at the stadium. “Money, money, money. And, OK — cheese and chocolate.” “But Covid has showed the flip-side,” Ms. Cotton added. The coronavirus infection rate has plummeted in Geneva in recent weeks, allowing the authorities to markedly ease social distancing restrictions. But the economic impact on the city’s poorest remains dire. Sukhee Shinendorj, a 38-year-old from Mongolia, was already living on the cusp of poverty even before coronavirus reached Switzerland. He earned about $1,600 a month as a restaurant cleaner — barely enough to feed his two children in expensive Geneva. Then in March the restaurant where he worked shut, prompting his boss to fire him. Now Mr. Shinendorj fears losing his apartment, and relies on the stadium handouts for food. On Saturday, he woke up at 1 a.m., and walked two miles to the stadium to try and beat the line. But there were already several people waiting. “Catastrophe,” Mr. Shinendorj said of his situation. “It’s a catastrophe.” Behind him in the darkness, a giant Rolex logo shone from the watchmaker’s headquarters across the street. The scenes at the stadium have been jarring for some Genevans, forced for the first time to recognize profound social inequalities they previously ignored or dismissed. Geneva is home to several arms of the United Nations, including the World Health Organization, the International Organization for Migration and the U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights. But the ethos of those institutions has not been entirely embedded within the city at large. While Swiss citizens and businesses received financial support during the lockdown from the authorities, undocumented foreign workers were left to fend for themselves. Even foreigners with official work permits were wary of applying for state help, fearful that it would make it harder for them to renew their permits in the future. Others said they were simply unaware of the possibility. Nubiany Rocha, a pregnant Brazilian nanny, arrived at the stadium at 5 a.m., pushing her 8-month-old daughter’s carriage. Ms. Rocha had a valid work permit until 2022, she said, but didn’t know that might make her eligible for state aid. A group of seasoned activists first spotted Geneva’s need for the food aid. In late March, campaigners from Caravane De Solidarité, a group originally founded in response to the 2015 refugee crisis, began handing out food in the street. But that led to the arrest of one of the group’s leaders, for flouting social distancing regulations. After a public backlash, the city authorities stepped in, permitting several groups to distribute food from several disused schools. But as the lines outside the schools kept lengthening, it was clear a bigger venue was needed. So in early May, city officials allowed the volunteers to base themselves at the Patinoire des Vernets, an ice rink just outside the city center. The international aid group Doctors Without Borders has joined the effort, bringing its expertise from countless war zones to help manage the operation. “It’s very strange,” said Dr. Roberta Petrucci, a medical coordinator for Doctors Without Borders, who lives nearby. “I never thought I’d see this a few hundred meters from where I live,” said Dr. Petrucci, who is more accustomed to working in crises in Syria, Yemen, Iraq, Congo and Liberia. The worsening impact of the economic collapse on the city’s poor is illustrated by the number of food parcels given away at the stadium last Saturday — 300 more than the previous week. At a nearby homeless shelter, set up by city authorities at the start of the crisis, staff members said they initially welcomed people who had already been living in the streets. But now they are sheltering a new kind of visitor: People who’ve lost their homes as a result of the economic side-effects of the pandemic. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Numbers are still small — only about 20 people fall into this category, or 10 percent of the residents at the shelter. But most of them arrived in the last two weeks. The stadium handouts also tell a more hopeful story about the city, said Charlemagne Hernandez, a co-founder of Caravane De Solidarité. The vast operation, which relies almost entirely on volunteers and donations, is the product of decades of activism in the city, which has created a more tolerant culture than in other Swiss cantons, Mr. Hernandez said. On a Friday evening, the donors to the food bank included some of the city’s wealthiest residents, who brought their donations to the stadium in the trunks of their Porsches, Teslas and Mercedes. “It has something to do with the humanitarian tradition in Geneva,” Mr. Hernandez said. “That’s what we do better than any other Swiss city.” As he left the stadium, shortly after 8 a.m., Mr. Shinendorj, the Mongolian cleaner, had a bag of food, but still no job. He said he planned to spend the next 12 hours walking through the city, going door to door to ask for work. “Before, the sun was shining,” he said. “Now the sky is black.”Regístrate para recibir nuestro boletín con lo mejor de The New York Times. ¿Cómo te va? ¿Qué hay de nuevo? ¿Cómo la estás pasando? ¿Qué tal tu vida? Ya no sé cómo responder a estas preguntas. ¿Cómo me va? Todavía podemos recordar un tiempo en el que respondíamos con mentiras blancas corteses y automáticas. Uno siempre estaba “bien”, o “genial”, o algunas veces “OK”. La veracidad de la respuesta era irrelevante en un mundo donde uno podía ocultar las angustias localizadas de su universo personal. El hecho de que el coronavirus haya suplantado por completo la charla trivial en nuestro contrato social ilustra muy bien la enormidad de este momento. ¿Es posible mentir tras un compulsivo “¿Cómo estás?” en un momento como este? Ahora, el espacio vacío al principio de mis conversaciones ha sido reemplazado por un inventario de las muchas tragedias, misterios y esperanzas generadas por el ciclo de noticias del coronavirus y por una meditación más espiritual de —en palabras de mis amigos y familiares— “lo loco que es todo esto”. Una llamada habitual a mi padre comienza con un repaso cordial de la abultada cifra de muertos, el profundo colapso económico y el terror paralizante que ambos experimentamos en nuestra incursión del fin de semana al supermercado. Después de esa purificación, volvemos al propósito de nuestra llamada telefónica. En el futuro previsible, no se espera que nadie se encuentre bien. La textura provocativa de la charla trivial de la era del coronavirus nos proyecta a lo profundo de nuestros sentimientos: podemos entrar en pánico de manera más libre y abierta. Ya no hay espacio para el artificio. En ese sentido, probablemente ahora seamos ciudadanos más honestos de lo que fuimos en el pasado. Sin embargo, he empezado a extrañar la naturaleza displicente de nuestros indicadores lingüísticos previos a la COVID-19. Me estoy dando cuenta de que la charla trivial es un lubricante necesario para el funcionamiento de la sociedad. Deborah Tannen, profesora de Lingüística de la Universidad de Georgetown y autora de You Just Don’t Understand, cree que los seres humanos consiguen un equilibrio cuando hablan sobre nada en específico. Comprueba que somos capaces y estamos dispuestos a ser amistosos con los otros, y que los parámetros de nuestro intercambio solo estarán limitados por las cosas en las que podemos estar de acuerdo. Sin importar el lugar en el que estés en el mundo, resulta descortés expresar una inquietud existencial con la primera impresión. La pandemia ha roto esa regla de oro. “Si todos fuéramos extraños y no intercambiáramos palabra a menos que tuviéramos algo importante o personal que decir, no tendríamos muchas conversaciones”, afirmó Tannen. “Esto aplica para cada cultura. Al igual que dar la mano o hacer la señal de despedida, tenemos maneras físicas y verbales para indicar ‘estamos juntos en esto’, ‘ambos somos humanos’”. Quizás esa es la razón por la que la ausencia de la charla trivial ha sido una experiencia tan desconcertante. Personas que apenas conozco me muestran voluntariamente sus nervios exaltados desde el segundo en que empezamos a conversar. Cada entrevista, cada reunión de trabajo y cada interacción en una tienda está signada por estas nuevas normas. En su mejor momento, la charla trivial nos permitía escapar de las presiones globales que nos acosaban. Era una oportunidad para perderse en el entorno de la cortesía y pretender que todo estaba bien. La charla trivial aseguraba que nuestros peores miedos no interferirían con los placeres simples de tener compañía. Me gustaría volver a ser capaz de hablar de otra cosa. Tannen le atribuye este fenómeno a una anomalía en la comunicación estadounidense. En algunas partes de Asia Oriental, la versión semántica del saludo “¿Cómo estás?” se traduce en “¿Ya comiste arroz?”. Al igual que su contraparte estadounidense, ese saludo está diseñado para ser interpretado ceremonialmente y no de manera literal (los hongkoneses tienden a responder con un “Sí, ya”). Sin embargo, gramaticalmente, “¿Ya comiste arroz?” es también más neutral y específico comparado con el introspectivo “¿Cómo la estás pasando?”. La pandemia cercenó el matiz ritual de nuestra charla trivial de su significado literal. “¿Ya comiste arroz?” siempre tiene la misma respuesta. “¿Qué tal va tu vida?”, como hemos podido constatar, es una interrogante mucho más volátil. “Dadas las circunstancias en las que estamos justo ahora, las personas realmente se están preguntando cómo lo están pasando otras personas”, afirmó Tannen. “Todos, de alguna manera, estamos lidiando con una situación caótica y disruptiva. No preguntar algo específicamente relacionado con eso o no contestar de una manera que considere esa situación sería irreal y hasta se podría decir que inapropiado. Asumo que si estuvieras en un país donde la frase de entrada fuera ‘¿Ya comiste?’, la situación sería diferente”. Varias personas que conozco ya están empezando a entender eso. Mi novia comienza sus llamadas semanales de trabajo con un simposio de chismes. Ella y sus compañeros de trabajo ventilan algunos chismes escandalosos que recopilaron cerca de la máquina virtual de café de la oficina antes de dedicarse a la agenda del día. Otros amigos han creado sus propios métodos para romper el hielo —preguntas relajadas sacadas del primer día de clases como “¿cuál es la mejor película que has visto recientemente?” o “¿qué libro estás leyendo?”— al inicio de sus encuentros por Zoom, como una barrera para evitar el discurso pandémico. Esta es nuestra manera de hacer charla trivial, evitando a toda costa realizar la pregunta temida de “¿cómo estás?”. A estas alturas, la mayoría ya sabemos la respuesta. Tannen apoya esas estrategias. Si, en sus palabras, no quieres “abrir las compuertas”, entonces atenúa tu saludo con algo positivo, ligero y que todos hagan. “‘¿Qué es lo mejor que has comido?’ y no ‘¿Comiste algo esta semana que haya resultado ser decepcionante?’”. Esa es la esencia de las charlas triviales, conversaciones ligeras sobre el clima, el fin de semana y los Knicks. Es irónico el alivio que ahora encontramos en una de nuestras responsabilidades sociales más fastidiosas. Es irónico lo mucho que añoramos hablar de nada importante. Quizás sea una señal. Las cosas habrán oficialmente regresado a la normalidad cuando podamos decir que estamos bien, sin realmente sentirlo. Luke Winkie es un escritor de San Diego. Ha colaborado con Vox, The Washington Post y The Atlantic.Commercial air travel has plummeted in the pandemic, but interest in private jet service is surging, particularly among people who have not paid to fly privately before. For years, jet service providers have ferried corporate executives and wealthy leisure travelers who paid high fees for the privacy and security. Now, those same companies are shifting to meet rising demand from people worried about getting on a commercial flight. Over the Memorial Day weekend, one of the busiest travel times in the United States in years past, traffic in the private jet industry was 58 percent of the volume from the same time last year, according to Argus, a company that tracks aviation data. But commercial flights fared worse over the holiday, plunging to 12 percent of the 2019 level. Five weeks ago, private flights had fallen to 20 to 25 percent what they were the same time last year, said Doug Gollan, founder of Privatejetcardcomparisons.com, a research site for consumers. “Now to be back to 60 percent of pre-Covid levels shows the people who have access to private travel are getting back out there,” he said. NetJets, the largest private jet operator in the world, is seeing a rush in interest from new customers, said Patrick Gallagher, its president. “May is on track to be the best month of new customer relationships that we’ve seen in the past 10 years,” Mr. Gallagher said. Competitors are experiencing the same rise. Magellan Jets has seen an 89 percent increase in new customers from mid-March to this past week, said Anthony Tivnan, its president. He added this was coming off a strong 2019, when the company’s revenue was up 34 percent from 2018. Companies that carved out a niche with private international flights are also reporting an increase. Thomas Flohr, founder and chairman of VistaJet, which has longer range jets, said the company’s refueling landings in Anchorage, a major stop for transcontinental flights to Asia, were up 250 percent since the coronavirus outbreak. “The number of fuel stops we had there in the last 60 days is unheard of,” Mr. Flohr said. “It was the East moving West, and then when the pandemic shifted, it was the West moving East.” Unlike commercial airlines, the private jet industry sells its services by the hour. Private jets are faster and can fly directly to most airports, while flying commercial may involve connecting flights. Service providers make money by selling charter flights, jet cards with flight hours and fractional shares of jets and individually owned planes. But as executives curtail their business travel during the pandemic, new wealthy fliers and existing customers are driving a private aviation boom. In some cases, they are actually flying and in others, they are stocking up on private flight hours. The desire is akin to hoarding toilet paper and flour at the start of the pandemic: The extra allotment provides peace of mind, even if it is never used. “Everyone from boutique companies with five to six planes to NetJets is in a good mood,” Mr. Gollan said. “There were a huge amount of people who had the wealth to fly private but never bought into the pitch of business efficiency,” he said, adding that wealthy people are now thinking less about the cost of flying privately then about the safety of flying commercially. Marco Fossati, a member of the multibillion-dollar family that owns Star, the Italian food conglomerate, said he had little need to fly privately since he became less active in the family business. But the coronavirus caused him to rethink his plans. “At this moment, with the Covid-19, if you can afford it, fly private,” he said from Miami, where he has been since the stay-in-place orders were issued in March. Mr. Fossati’s stance illustrates a change from just a few months ago: The wealthiest are less concerned about the perception of flying privately. Sentient Jet, a private aviation company that offers flight hours, reported that it sold 5,000 hours in April, or the equivalent of about $30 million in flying time, significantly more than the $25 million it sells in a typical month. More than 2,500 of those hours were bought by people new to private aviation. Andrew Collins, chief executive of Sentient Jet, said three-quarters of his company’s flights since March had been by individuals and families, up from 40 percent before the pandemic. Mr. Collins said he had not expected the increase. In the 2008 financial crisis, private flying fell off quickly and took years to rebound. But the current crisis was set off by health concerns, not the financial markets, and demand for private flying has continued. In April, he expected to book 200 to 300 flight hours, but flight time was actually just under 1,000 hours. “We’re seeing 50 percent new customers,” he said, as people buy cards to use now or save for later. Worries over the environmental impact of flying privately may have taken a back seat as well. “Concerns about opulence and concerns about environmental issues are gone,” said Mr. Gallagher of NetJets. Many wealthy people put up with flying commercial because they had benefits like first class, TSA PreCheck and a status that allowed them various perks. “But now,” he said, “there are a lot of people out there who don’t want to fly commercial if they’re part of an aging population or have underlying health concerns.” A person on the average commercial flight has about 700 points of contact with other people and objects, according to a recent analysis by the consulting firm McKinsey, but private flights have only 20 to 30. For travelers concerned about the environment, the private jet companies offer programs to offset carbon emissions. Terrapass, which has partnered with Magellan, can calculate carbon offsets based on the size and age of a plane and where its flying. Magellan includes carbon offsets in jet cards greater than 50 hours. New fliers may be driving some of the increase in sales, but existing clients are refilling their jet cards with more hours. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “We’re seeing members purchase larger increments, so someone at 50 hours is renewing at 75 hours,” said Mr. Tivnan of Magellan Jets. These fliers want to lock in availability for themselves and family members, should they need it, he said. The prices are not cheap. Magellan’s entry-level jet card for a Hawker 400XP, which seats six to eight people, is $130,000 for 25 hours. For the 14-passenger Gulfstream 450, it’s $313,950. But tax breaks are available. The CARES Act, the economic stimulus package passed in late March, waived the 7.5 percent excise tax on all private jet flights and hours bought this year. That savings adds up. The same 25 hours on the Gulfstream 450 would have been $25,000 more expensive before the tax break. Owners who put their planes into chartered service can also take advantage of tax exemptions. The 2017 tax overhaul allows an owner who uses a plane at least 50 percent for business purposes to deduct the entire purchase price in the first year of owning the jet. But that business purpose could be putting the jet into the market for other fliers to use. Experts caution, however, that the supply may catch up to the demand. The price for chartering a plane to fly in the United States — as opposed to buying flight hours — is low now. A one-way chartered flight from New York to Los Angeles, for example, would typically cost around $30,000 for a jet that seats eight people, said Jean De Looz, head of Americas for MySky, which helps jet owners manage costs. But that has fallen to $12,000 to $17,000. “Operators are trying to get some cash flow,” he said, so they are offering cheaper rates. But there are only so many private planes, and the number of people who want to use them is growing. If more people buy planes outright, fewer will be available for chartered service. There are fewer than 1,300 planes for sale built in the last 20 years — the time frame that banks use in financing the purchase of a jet. “The numbers are tiny,” said Dan Jennings, chief executive of the Private Jet Company, a brokerage firm. Of course, that type of economic imbalance is predicated on commercial aviation continuing to be hobbled by health fears. Even now, a billionaire like Mr. Fossati is weighing his options to fly from Miami to Switzerland. He is waiting to see what safety protocols will look like for commercial carriers, but he has also asked for quotes to fly on a private plane. “Chartering a plane for two to three hours is one thing, but over the ocean, that’s very expensive,” he said. “Being rich doesn’t mean you have to throw away money.”As unemployment claims pass 40 million and the anxious people who file them grow more desperate, an altruistic instinct has emerged among those who are more financially secure. But the sheer breadth of the pain is almost overwhelming, and the appeals are everywhere. And the impulse is to help — now — when confronted with a personal plea. So what is the very best way for people with more money than they need to quickly hand it over to those in need, so they can use it for food, shelter and other necessities? It isn’t easy to find a satisfying answer. Sites and services like GoFundMe can connect donors with real people, but they may lack vetting of recipients, their back stories or their plans. They also may not make it possible to be identified or anonymous, depending on your preference as a giver or a beneficiary. Donors with large amounts to give may want to use tax deductions to increase what they can afford to donate, but may not be able to get them through one-off cash transfers. The elusiveness of perfect solutions has inspired a variety of social entrepreneurs to pursue various forms of direct giving. If you’ve sent money via DonorsChoose to help a teacher pay for a classroom project, you get the basic idea: Give a little money, know exactly where it’s going, have some sense of who’s getting it and have someone between you and the recipient to provide at least some verification. The goal is to provide a charitable option that lives somewhere between handing money over to a large, faceless nonprofit group and just Venmoing people who say on Twitter that they need help. Now that the pandemic has left millions more people with acute needs, two existing organizations and one new entrant are offering some of the most satisfying ways of providing few-strings-attached assistance. Modest Needs Foundation and GiveDirectly, both nonprofit organizations, are using years of experience to pay people’s bills or hand them money to pay for things themselves. And the 1K Project is facilitating money transfers, although without the tax deductions the other two can offer donors. First, a few words for the wary. Cash transfers have been the subject of a fair bit of study, particularly on transfers outside the United States. GiveWell, an extremely particular, research-driven nonprofit group, evaluates how much good other charitable organizations do. Its extended take speaks to a few findings: Recipients tend not to spend more on “temptation goods” like tobacco and alcohol but do increase what they lay out for more and better food. Many people also invest in infrastructure upgrades, like replacing thatch roofs with iron. GiveWell recommends a handful of charities, including GiveDirectly, which began its coronavirus efforts in March with the same basic goals it set for its work outside of the United States: Give $1,000 to poor people and let them decide what to do with it. GiveDirectly partnered with Propel, a company that helps recipients of SNAP (the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program once known as food stamps) manage their benefits. They receive a message at random offering the money, a bit like a lottery that they don’t have to enter. It is not actually legal for a nonprofit group to help you transfer money directly to specific individuals if you want the amount to be a tax deductible donation, though GiveDirectly does post videos from grateful recipients. Michael Faye, a co-founder and the president, who has a Ph.D in economics, said in an interview that the organization wouldn’t want to allow that anyway — research indicates that donors might choose people based on physical appearance rather than pure need. Donors can, however, direct their money to specific hard-hit cities. So far, GiveDirectly has sent $1,000 each to about 82,000 people. Its goal is to reach 100,000, though it is likely to continue the efforts if donations keep coming in. Modest Needs, a nonprofit organization, operates on a smaller scale, with a slightly different model. Recipients need to find their way to the group and apply for help paying particular bills. It requires documentation of the need and pays bills directly, without giving money to the applicant. Keith Taylor, a former humanities professor, started the organization with the intent to help people cover a out-of-the-blue emergency expenses. In practice, he said, people often turn to Modest Needs after they’ve paid for the emergency and can no longer cover food or shelter or that month’s car payment. Modest Needs posts requests for help on its website, but by the time they are there, the organization has verified that they are legitimate. All that’s left is for donors to give. In the last two months, requests for help have more than quadrupled: 539 people or families are currently waiting for $842,000 in donations. More than half of the people who have received help in the past are now among the group’s donors. Some of them give as little as $2 per month, but those that do give regularly have often been doing it month-in, month-out since they received their own assistance. The 1K Project sprang from the minds of two venture capitalists, Minda Brusse and Alex Iskold. In conversation and on their site, they speak of quick-scaling, self-organizing systems, complex networks and a sort of human blockchain. In practice, they aim to find needy people through a rapidly expanding network of trusted referral sources, vet them with the help of volunteers and pair donors of $1,000 per month for three months with recipients. (Neither reveal their full names to one another. Donors and recipients at GiveDirectly and Modest Needs rarely if ever do, either.) Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The 1K Project is not a nonprofit organization, so people who itemize their deductions won’t get a tax break for helping a family through its service. It uses private GoFundMe pages to transfer funds to recipients, so 1K is never in possession of donor funds itself. (1K charges no user fees of its own, though GoFundMe levies payment processing fees. GiveDirectly and Modest Needs are also fee-free, though as with any nonprofit group, a small portion of donations may help cover some administrative expenses.) So far, it’s helped about 250 recipients, mostly families with dependents. Many referrals come from despondent small-business owners trying to help their employees who have lost their jobs or had their income severely cut back. We should never stop reminding ourselves that these sorts of makeshift stopgaps are often not necessary elsewhere at the scale they are in the United States, where people must queue up in cars at food banks and ping websites hundreds of times or find a fax machine just to register for assistance. My conversation with Ms. Brusse and Mr. Iskold felt marked by a sort of low-grade hum of urgency with a side of frustration over the quantity and speed of the available help in the United States. So I had to ask: In addition to trying to help, are they also trying to make some kind of a point about politics or nonprofit groups or the world as it is — or as we might wish it to be? They demurred. “We find ourselves in this unique moment in time where help isn’t reaching people fast enough, and we want to be a bridge to when other support and employment is available,” Ms. Brusse said. “The truth about this,” Mr. Iskold added, “is that this whole thing is just a massive heartbreak.”WASHINGTON — The Supreme Court on Friday turned away a request from a church in California to block enforcement of state restrictions on attendance at religious services. The vote was 5 to 4, with Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. joining the court’s four-member liberal wing to form a majority. “Although California’s guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote in an opinion concurring in the unsigned ruling. “Similar or more severe restrictions apply to comparable secular gatherings, including lectures, concerts, movie showings, spectator sports and theatrical performances, where large groups of people gather in close proximity for extended periods of time,” the chief justice wrote. “And the order exempts or treats more leniently only dissimilar activities, such as operating grocery stores, banks and laundromats, in which people neither congregate in large groups nor remain in close proximity for extended periods.” Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr., Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh noted dissents. “The church and its congregants simply want to be treated equally to comparable secular businesses,” Justice Kavanaugh wrote in a dissenting opinion joined by Justices Thomas and Gorsuch. “California already trusts its residents and any number of businesses to adhere to proper social distancing and hygiene practices.” “The state cannot,” Justice Kavanaugh wrote, quoting from an appeals court decision in a different case, “‘assume the worst when people go to worship but assume the best when people go to work or go about the rest of their daily lives in permitted social settings.’” The court’s ruling was its first attempt to balance the public health crisis against the Constitution’s protection of religious freedom. And it expanded the Supreme Court’s engagement with the consequences of the coronavirus pandemic, after rulings on voting in Wisconsin and prisons in Texas and Ohio. The case was brought by the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, Calif., which said Gov. Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, had lost sight of the special status of religion in the constitutional structure. “The Covid-19 pandemic is a national tragedy,” lawyers for the church wrote in their Supreme Court brief, “but it would be equally tragic if the federal judiciary allowed the ‘fog of war’ to act as an excuse for violating fundamental constitutional rights.” The brief, filed May 23, asked the justices to block a ruling the day before from a divided three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, saying that the shutdown orders did not single out houses of worship for unfavorable treatment. The majority said state officials had struck an appropriate balance. “We’re dealing here with a highly contagious and often fatal disease for which there presently is no known cure,” the majority wrote in an unsigned opinion that went on to quote a famous dissent from a 1947 Supreme Court decision. “In the words of Justice Robert Jackson, if a ‘court does not temper its doctrinaire logic with a little practical wisdom, it will convert the constitutional Bill of Rights into a suicide pact.’” In dissent, Judge Daniel P. Collins wrote that California had failed “to honor its constitutional duty to accommodate a critical element of the free exercise of religion — public worship.” “I do not doubt the importance of the public health objectives that the state puts forth,” Judge Collins wrote, “but the state can accomplish those objectives without resorting to its current inflexible and overbroad ban on religious services.” The appeals court ruled on May 22. That same day, President Trump made remarks on the subject at a news briefing. “Today, I’m identifying houses of worship — churches, synagogues and mosques — as essential places that provide essential services,” he said, adding: “The governors need to do the right thing and allow these very important, essential places of faith to open right now, for this weekend. If they don’t do it, I will override the governors.” Three days later, Mr. Newsom issued additional guidance for houses of worship, requiring them to “limit attendance to 25 percent of building capacity or a maximum of 100 attendees, whichever is lower.” In a second Supreme Court brief, the church said the guidance again discriminated against religious groups. “Plaintiffs’ sanctuary seats 600 persons, and each service normally brings in between 200 and 300 congregants,” the brief said. “Some of the larger houses of worship in California can seat 1,000 congregants or more. But under California’s guidelines, plaintiffs will only be permitted to welcome 100 congregants, with no explanation as to the justification for this arbitrary cap. In contrast, there is no percentage limitation for manufacturing and warehousing facilities — simply a social distancing requirement.” “A review of California’s sector-specific guidelines shows that the only two industries with percentage caps are retail and houses of worship,” the brief said, “and retail is set at a 50 percent cap. Offices, manufacturing, food packaging, museums, and every other sector has no percentage cap.” The court also acted on a second case on Friday, that one brought by two Chicago-area churches, Elim Romanian Pentecostal Church and Logos Baptist Ministries. They said an order from Gov. J.B. Pritzker, a Democrat, discriminated against houses of worship. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The order, lawyers for the churches told the Supreme Court, imposes “a unique 10-person limit on religious worship services that is not imposed on customers or employees of ‘big box’ retail stores, liquor stores, restaurants, office buildings, warehouses, factories or other businesses and activities which, like worship services, have been deemed ‘essential’” by Mr. Pritzker. Lower courts had refused to block the order, saying the distinctions it drew were sensible. “Gatherings at places of worship pose higher risks of infection than gatherings at businesses,” wrote Judge Robert W. Gettleman of the Federal District Court in Chicago. “The congregants do not just stop by Elim Church. They congregate to sing, pray and worship together. That takes more time than shopping for liquor or groceries.” A unanimous three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit, in Chicago, refused to stay Judge Gettleman’s ruling while the churches pursued an appeal. In a preliminary and unsigned assessment of the case, the panel wrote that “the executive order does not discriminate against religious activities, nor does it show hostility toward religion.” “It appears instead to impose neutral and generally applicable rules,” the panel wrote. “The executive order’s temporary numerical restrictions on public gatherings apply not only to worship services but also to the most comparable types of secular gatherings, such as concerts, lectures, theatrical performances or choir practices, in which groups of people gather together for extended periods, especially where speech and singing feature prominently and raise risks of transmitting the Covid-19 virus.” “Worship services,” the panel wrote, “do not seem comparable to secular activities permitted under the executive order, such as shopping, in which people do not congregate or remain for extended periods.” On Thursday, Mr. Pritzker announced that he was lifting the 10-person limit on religious gatherings. That made the case moot, the state’s lawyers wrote in a Supreme Court brief. In response, the churches urged the court to rule, saying the governor remained free to change his mind. “Churches are one whim away from being once again subjected to the restrictions they challenge in this case and which the governor obviously still favors,” lawyers for the churches wrote. In its order turning down the churches’ request on Friday, the Supreme Court noted the new guidance, adding that it would allow the churches to file “a new motion for appropriate relief if circumstances warrant.”This live briefing has ended. Click here for the latest global updates. President Trump told reporters on Saturday that he was postponing a Group of 7 meeting scheduled to be held in the United States next month. Earlier Saturday, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany, said she would not attend in person, citing concerns about the coronavirus. Mr. Trump also announced that he wants to invite Russia to rejoin the group.  Making the announcement while returning from the SpaceX launch in Florida, he said he also planned to invite South Korea, Australia and India to the summit, with an adviser adding that the idea was to bring together traditional allies to discuss China. He said he now wants to hold the meeting in September.  “I don’t feel that as a G7 it properly represents what’s going on in the world. It’s a very outdated group of countries,” Mr. Trump said. But his decision to say he will unilaterally invite Russia — which was indefinitely suspended in March 2014 after the annexing of Crimea — is certain to inflame other member nations. Holding the summit in June would have underscored Mr. Trump’s message that America can reopen and that the worst of the coronavirus crisis has passed, even as many public health experts warned that a rush to do that could lead to a new wave of infections. But given that most international and even diplomatic travel has been on hold for months, his proposal struck many foreign policy experts as fanciful. World leader summits like the G7 typically involve hundreds of officials and support staff, as well as elaborate security. In March, Mr. Trump had announced that the June summit would take place virtually as the coronavirus outbreak was spreading around the world and international travel was curtailed. But he changed plans this month, saying he might invite the leaders of Britain, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan to Washington, as a demonstration of a return to normalcy. Earlier Saturday, Ms. Merkel’s spokesman said in an emailed statement that she “thanks President Trump for his invitation to the G7 summit in Washington at the end of June. As of today, considering the overall pandemic situation, she cannot agree to her personal participation, a trip to Washington.” The United States Supreme Court on Friday turned away a request from a church in California to block enforcement of state restrictions on attendance at religious services. The vote was 5 to 4, with Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. joining the court’s four-member liberal wing to form a majority. It was the court’s first attempt to balance the public health crisis against the Constitution’s protection of religious freedom. It also it expanded the court’s engagement with the consequences of the pandemic, after rulings on voting in Wisconsin and prisons in Texas and Ohio. “Although California’s guidelines place restrictions on places of worship, those restrictions appear consistent with the free exercise clause of the First Amendment,” Chief Justice Roberts wrote in an opinion concurring in the unsigned ruling. Justices Clarence Thomas, Samuel A. Alito Jr., Neil M. Gorsuch and Brett M. Kavanaugh  dissented. The case was brought by the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, which said Gov. Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, had lost sight of the special status of religion in the constitutional structure. “The Covid-19 pandemic is a national tragedy,” lawyers for the church wrote in their Supreme Court brief, “but it would be equally tragic if the federal judiciary allowed the ‘fog of war’ to act as an excuse for violating fundamental constitutional rights.” In defiance of the court’s ruling, a contingent of California evangelical churches said they would hold services in person on Sunday morning without regard to potential violations of state limits on attendance. In Fresno, the Cornerstone Church website showed registration to be full for its Pentecost service.   And the Water of Life Community Church in Fontana, Calif., plans to hold a church service Sunday morning followed by a news conference with three pastors, the group’s attorney, and the city’s mayor, Acquanetta Warren (a Republican who is also a member of the church). Although the church’s occupancy is 3,200, it intends to limit attendance to 320 people, which exceeds the state’s guidelines allowing no more than 100 congregants.  Many of the most populous cities in the United States have begun moving cautiously toward reopening key businesses.  Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Friday that he expected New York City, where more than 20,000 people have died from the virus, would soon meet several benchmarks that would allow retail, nonessential construction and manufacturing to resume in some capacity.  Washington and Los Angeles also announced plans to continue their reopenings by allowing restaurants, hair salons and barbershops to open, with new safety guidelines. The reopenings come as the trajectory of the virus has evolved, both in the United States and across the world. New hot spots are emerging in rural areas, and in smaller cities where regulations have been lifted in recent weeks.  Globally, as the virus caseload approaches six million, a number of countries have moved to ease restrictions, even as new outbreaks continue to flare up, including in regions where it had been contained: In South Korea, which successfully brought an early outbreak to heel, more than 800 schools have either closed or pushed back reopening. The government also closed museums, parks and many other public facilities in the Seoul area on Friday. In Brazil, even with new cases still trending upward and over 465,166 people infected, officials announced that São Paulo, the largest city in South America, would begin to reopen this week. In Iraq, all travel between provinces has been stopped for a second time. Baghdad was almost completely still on Friday, and stay-at-home orders were enforced by neighborhood blockades. In Israel, where schools reopened weeks ago, more than 100 new cases were reported on Friday, the level that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had warned would prompt the reinstatement of a strict lockdown. In Britain, where more outdoor social gatherings will be permitted starting Monday and some schools are scheduled to reopen, at least three members of the government’s top scientific advisory panel have warned publicly against relaxing restrictions. Mayor Eric M. Garcetti of Los Angeles said on Saturday that the city’s coronavirus testing centers had closed that afternoon “because of safety concerns” after protests condemning the death of George Floyd escalated.  Mr. Garcetti mentioned the 3 p.m. closures at a news briefing where he declared an 8 p.m. curfew.   “Go home,” Mr. Garcetti said. “Let us put the fires out. Let us learn the lessons. Let us re-humanize each other.” The death of Mr. Floyd, 46, after being pinned down by a Minneapolis police offer, and the unrest it has provoked has tugged at painful memories in Los Angeles of the beating of Rodney King in 1991 and the riots that occurred the following year after the acquittal of the four police officers involved in the case. Mr. Garcetti said he would not be calling for the deployment of the National Guard, which patrolled the streets of Los Angeles during those riots. “This is not 1992,” he said. The curfew is needed to clean up debris and restore order, Mr. Garcetti said.  Before the riots started in Los Angeles on Saturday afternoon, several hundred people reflecting the diversity of the city — white, black, Latino, Asian-American — had protested peacefully. transcript China has total control over the World Health Organization despite only paying $40 million per year compared to what the United States has been paying, which is approximately $450 million a year. Chinese officials ignored their reporting obligations to the World Health Organization and pressured the World Health Organization to mislead the world when the virus was first discovered by Chinese authorities. Countless lives have been taken and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe. We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization, and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs. The world needs answers from China on the virus. We must have transparency. The European Union said on Saturday that it would continue to back the World Health Organization after President Trump announced on Friday that he was pulling the United States’ support, and the bloc urged him to reconsider his decision. “The W.H.O. needs to continue being able to lead the international response to pandemics, current and future,” the president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, and the bloc’s top diplomat, Josep Borrell, said in a joint statement. “Actions that weaken international results must be avoided,” they added. “We urge the U.S. to reconsider its announced decision.” Jens Spahn, the health minister of Germany, said on Twitter that the U.S. decision was “disappointing” and urged overhaul of the W.H.O. Mr. Trump has said the health organization helped China cover up the emergence of the coronavirus and was deliberately slow to react in the early stages of its spread out of deference to or fear of Beijing. He has repeatedly said that the spread of the virus around the world, and the ensuing death toll, is ultimately the fault of China and the W.H.O., taking no responsibility for the more than 100,000 deaths it has inflicted in the United States. The E.U., which is a major funder of the organization, said it wanted “at the earliest appropriate moment, an impartial, independent and comprehensive evaluation to review lessons learned from the international health response to the coronavirus.” American public health officials have also reacted with alarm to Mr. Trump’s decision.  “We helped create the W.H.O.,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has worked with the organization since its creation in 1948. “Turning our back on the W.H.O. makes us and the world less safe,” he added. Republican Senator Lamar Alexander, chairman of the Senate health committee, said in a statement on Friday that he disagreed with the president’s decision to withdraw from the W.H.O. “Withdrawing U.S. membership could, among other things, interfere with clinical trials that are essential to the development of vaccines, which citizens of the United States as well as others in the world need,” he said. He added that withdrawing could also “make it harder to work with other countries to stop viruses before they get to the United States.” The organization itself had no immediate response on Saturday. The virus has infected more than 6,118,200 people in at least 177 countries. The Romanian prime minister, Ludovic Orban, paid a fine on Saturday for breaking his own coronavirus restrictions, after a photo widely shared on social media showed him with other Cabinet members smoking in his office and not wearing a mask. Mr. Orban paid 3,000 lei ($690) for the breach, Reuters reported, citing the state news agency Agerpres. None of the officials in the image wore masks, which were thrown on the table, according to Reuters.  In a statement, Mr. Orban admitted to breaking the lockdown rules on May 25, his 57th birthday, when some Cabinet members gathered at his office after work.  His fine comes the same week that Prime Minister Boris Johnson defended his closest aide, Dominic Cummings, for breaching Britain’s lockdown rules by driving across the country to visit relatives, even when he was falling ill with the coronavirus. In April, Mr. Cummings drove to visit his parents in Durham, in the north of England. He said there was no other way to get care for his young child after he and his wife began showing symptoms of the virus. “He followed the instincts of every father and every parent, and I do not mark him down for that,” Mr. Johnson said at a news briefing. “I believe that in every respect, he has acted responsibly, and legally, and with integrity.” But that account came under question after The Observer and the Sunday Mirror reported that Mr. Cummings and his family had been spotted elsewhere on Easter Sunday.  As states have moved to cautiously lift restrictions on workplaces, critical questions are emerging about the role of public transit in helping employees return.  Federal and state leaders have laid out guidelines under which businesses can safely begin operating again, but in many places the transportation systems that get workers and customers to the businesses are still viewed as risky. Advice the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention issued this week urged employees against using mass transit, instead recommending options like individual car-based commuting, which previously was widely discouraged as environmentally unsustainable.  The economic viability of many transit systems is also uncertain, as riders have avoided already-strained systems in recent months, and states and cities are facing daunting budget shortfalls.  In New York City, ridership is down more than 90 percent, and the subway system was already on the brink of a financial crisis in April, poised to lose $8.5 billion even after service cuts and a $3.8 billion federal bailout. This week, Amtrak announced it would need close to $1.5 billion in federal funds to maintain “minimum service levels.” As part of the CARES act, Transportation Secretary Elaine L. Chao announced $25 billion in grant funding last month aimed at propping up struggling transit systems nationwide.  Many city officials have framed the Covid-19 pandemic as an opportunity to rethink urban design and move away from transit models built around car traffic. Cities like Boston, Minneapolis, and Oakland, Calif., have closed off some streets to drivers, encouraging pedestrian and bike traffic.  Health officials in Missouri are scrambling to contact “mass numbers of unknown people” after an attendee at crowded pool parties at the Lake of the Ozarks over Memorial Day weekend tested positive for Covid-19. The health department in Camden County, where the parties took place, said in a news release on Friday that the unidentified person, a resident of Boone County, tested positive last Sunday after arriving at the lake area the day before. Videos and photos posted on social media showed throngs of people mingling in close quarters. When images of the event surfaced, Lyda Krewson, the mayor of St. Louis, said, “It’s irresponsible and dangerous to engage in such high risk behavior just to have some fun over the extended holiday weekend.” The Camden County Health Department said in its release that the person was “likely incubating illness and possibly infectious at the time of the visit.” It released a timeline of the person’s movements and asked those who may have been in the area to seek tests and self-isolate if they had symptoms including “fever, cough, shortness of breath, body aches, headache, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and loss of taste or smell.” Health officials in St. Louis and in Kansas had already urged partygoers to self-isolate for 14 days. The owner of one of the places listed on the timeline, a bar and restaurant called Backwater Jacks, previously said that no laws were broken, though the images appeared to show people violating Gov. Mike Parson’s state order requiring social distancing, according to The Associated Press. The Camden County statement said an investigation was underway by the Boone County Health Department, with Lake area health departments assisting. India on Saturday extended a nationwide lockdown until the end of June, but lifted many restrictions outside hot spots, allowing places of worship, restaurants, hotels and malls to reopen. Though the number of infections in India is still skyrocketing, officials said easing the lockdown was necessary to rescue an ailing economy. The restrictions, which were imposed more than two months ago, have been brutally hard on migrant workers and poor people. The country’s Home Ministry said the new rules, which would take effect on June 8, were part of a broader plan to reopen. Movie theaters and schools will remain shut, but people are now free to move around outside “containment zones,” areas with a high number of infections. “This battle will stretch on, but we are on the way to victory, and to be victorious is our common resolve,” Prime Minister Narendra Modi wrote in a letter to the country on Saturday. Officials began lifting some restrictions last month, hoping to ease suffering in India, a nation of 1.3 billion. But in recent weeks, as industry has resumed and more people have poured onto the streets, the country has emerged as a worrisome outbreak zone. India’s number of daily new infections is among the highest in the world, surpassed only by Brazil, the United States and Russia. The country has reported more than 170,000 total infections and 4,971 deaths. India’s struggles with the virus stand out, as other countries in southern Asia have recently held infections low enough to reopen more aggressively. Thailand has begun reopening restaurants, with other businesses like some salons and gyms cleared to resume operations on June 1.  Buddhist amulet markets, where people trade in the tiny talismans, have also been authorized to open with social-distancing measures. Unlike India, though, Thailand disproportionately relies on the tourist economy as a source of revenue, and the country has suffered as tourists have been banned since incoming commercial flights were suspended in early April. The ban on tourists will extend at least through the end of June, jeopardizing as many as 8.4 million jobs.  As New York City looks toward reopening on June 8, Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Saturday that state officials were focusing on controlling hot spots in the city and preparing its hospitals to deal with a potential second spike.  Since late March, the city has been all but paralyzed under the devastating weight of the outbreak, which has forced thousands of businesses to shutter and almost 900,000 people to lose their jobs. Under Phase 1 of reopening, retail stores will be allowed to open for curbside or in-store pickup and nonessential construction and manufacturing can resume, sending as many as 400,000 people back to work. In the coming week, officials will focus on ensuring the city’s 11 public hospitals and more than 100 private hospitals have “surge and flex” capacity to deal with a potential uptick in new virus patients, Mr. Cuomo said on Saturday. Mr. Cuomo said officials will also target the 10 ZIP codes in the city with the highest infection rates, distributing masks and hand sanitizers and opening an additional testing site in each ZIP code.  On Saturday, Mr. Cuomo also signed a bill to give death benefits to the family members of public employees who died because of the coronavirus. “It is the least that we can do,” he said. President Shinzo Abe on Monday lifted Japan’s state of emergency, but his government is urging people to continue avoiding what it calls the “3 Cs” — closed spaces where crowds meet in close proximity. A group of Japanese amusement parks has also issued its own guidelines for how to prevent the virus from spreading. Among the tips? Keep your voice down on roller coasters. That’s not a joke: The Japanese news media has lately helped to popularize the notion that talking loudly may be linked to increased aerosol transmission of the pathogen. But is that true?  Scientists who study the transmission of respiratory illnesses like influenza say that infections typically happen when a healthy person comes into contact with respiratory droplets from an infected person’s cough, sneeze or breath. Some emerging scientific research, however, suggests that the rate of transmission may also be linked to how — and at what volume — you speak. A 2019 study in the journal Scientific Reports, for example, found that the rate of particle emission increased as speech grew lower, regardless of language. It also said that “speech superemitters” consistently released “an order of magnitude more particles than their peers.” And in January, a study in the journal PLOS One found that certain vowels and consonants — “i” and “d,” for example — were linked to higher  particle emission rates, among other speech patterns.  How all of that may affect coronavirus transmissions, or not, has yet to be studied, a team of scientists from the University of California, Davis, wrote in a recent ScienceDaily editorial.  Among the questions to be studied further, they wrote, is why some people are “superemitters”; how far droplets travel once expelled from one’s mouth; and how fast they fall to the ground. With early-phase reopening plans in many states allowing crowds back into public parks and open spaces for the summer, visitors have increasingly been forced to reckon with opposing views on how to stay safe while exercising. Not helping matters is the byzantine patchwork of advisories that different cities and states have put in place. In most places, no concrete rules require those exercising outdoors to wear face coverings, though carrying a mask as a precaution and keeping a healthy distance is recommended more or less everywhere. Many runners and cyclists find it challenging to inhale through masks as their heart rate rises, prompting some to do without. This has raised questions about how to work out safely, particularly if you’re planning on venturing into a crowded area.  There is no scientific consensus around the importance of wearing a mask while exercising, primarily because so little relevant research has been completed. And to date, many of the most basic questions — such as whether heavier breathing increases the risk of spreading the virus (or the social-distancing radius that should be observed) — remain unanswered.  Even so, runners can balance safety and personal comfort with a few widely agreed-upon measures, like wearing face gaiters or avoiding running directly behind someone for prolonged periods.  Other tips? Refrain from spitting, take a wide berth around others when passing, and think twice before yelling at anyone who may be flouting the rules.  In Canada, a growing number of shop workers are back on the job, after the easing of government orders that had closed most stores across the country except in British Columbia.  But returning to work is likely to feel uneasy for many, even if it means they are not among the three million Canadians who have lost their jobs during the outbreak. In the meatpacking industry, staying on the job has brought not only widespread illness but also death. In High River, Alberta, a town in the foothills of the Rockies, a meatpacking plant owned by Cargill, which is based in Minnesota, has Canada’s largest single outbreak. More than 1,500 coronavirus infections and three deaths have been linked to the outbreak in the plant, most of them employees.  Another meatpacking plant, in Brooks, Alberta, owned by JBS of Brazil, is linked to hundreds of cases. And about 40 federal meat inspectors who work in those plants have become infected as well, the union that represents them said. The High River plant was temporarily closed for cleaning and to allow the installation of, among other things, plastic shields. New safety protocols were also introduced. The structure of the meatpacking industry in the 21st century creates significant economic pressure to keep plants running. Sven Anders, an agricultural economist at the University of Alberta, said the two plants in Alberta plus a Cargill facility in Guelph, Ontario, processed upward of 95 percent of Canada’s beef production, much of which is exported to the United States. A Cambodian major general has died of the coronavirus while on a U.N. peacekeeping mission in Mali, Cambodian officials said Saturday, the second such death among peacekeepers stationed around the world. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The major general, Sor Savy, 63, who died on Friday, was deployed to the troubled African nation in April last year. Before the pandemic hit, forcing the United Nations to delay troop rotations, he and his team had been scheduled to return home last month.  U.N. Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said on Friday that Covid-19 had claimed its first two victims among the peacekeepers but did not identify them by name. A peacekeeper from El Salvador died of the illness on Thursday. More than 95,000 men and women serve in 13 U.N. missions around the world. U.N. officials say there are 137 confirmed cases of the virus among peacekeepers, most of them in Mali. Cambodia contributes about 800 troops to the U.N. missions, including 300 in Mali. Two other Cambodian peacekeepers stationed there tested positive, Cambodian officials said. “Sor Savy’s death is a huge sacrifice of a Cambodian soldier in a humanitarian mission under the U.N. umbrella and the loss of a bright Cambodian soldier,”  a spokesman for Cambodia’s Defense Ministry, Chhum Socheat, said in a Facebook post on Saturday. Several outposts of the U.N.’s peacekeeping mission in Mali have been sealed off to stop the spread of coronavirus.  These include two bases in the ancient northern city of Gao and the riverside town of Mopti, both of which used to be tourist hubs but whose more recent visitors often wear military uniforms or the well-known blue peacekeepers’ helmets. The U.N. said even stricter measures could be imposed, and Gao and Mopti had their lockdowns extended to June 4 and June 11. Sui-Lee Wee is a New York Times correspondent who until recently was based in Beijing, where she covered gender, health care and other issues in China. This is her story of moving back to Singapore. “Hey, who are those men?” my 4-year-old son, Luke, said on a video call with his nanny in Beijing, as he peered at masked movers carting boxes. Our nanny was coordinating the packing of our furniture into storage because my family was stuck in Singapore, about 3,000 miles away.  Back story: In March, China banned all foreign residents from returning, leaving us stranded in Singapore. My husband, Tom, and I did not want to pay rent on two apartments, so we decided we would pack up the only home my two kids had ever known. The only problem was that desperately homesick Luke did not know this yet. “They’re helping us fix some stuff,” Tom explained to him. “What? All the doors are broken?”  “Yep.” A week earlier, our nanny had done a walk-through of our apartment and sent several video clips of our possessions: the pink hand-me-down balance bike that Luke never rode, Liam’s crib, Luke’s fire-engine bunk bed. All of it felt frozen in time. Our Pompeii. I couldn’t decide how to broach the topic with Luke. I had always told him about what was happening in the world (within reason), but Beijing was his world. and he still asked repeatedly: “Why are we staying in Singapore for SO LONG?” So while I was giving him his bath, I dove in. “Hey, you know the men you saw on the video today? They were moving our stuff into a big storeroom.” Pause. “And maybe one day, we can go back and get them again.” “Oh, OK,” Luke responded.  That’s it? I thought. It was a reminder not to foist my anxieties onto my children. The kids, hopefully, will be all right. After a dengue epidemic sickened over 100,000 people and left 180 dead in Honduras last year, officials braced for another surge in the mosquito-borne disease this year and wondered how they would manage. Then the coronavirus arrived, pitching the nation into a grueling, two-front public health battle — a crisis mirrored in numerous nations, particularly in the developing world. In the Caribbean and Latin America, where the number of coronavirus cases has been rising sharply, at least nine countries have paused some immunization activities, threatening efforts to control diseases like polio, tuberculosis and measles. Dengue is also bedeviling nations in Southeast Asia, including Indonesia, another country hard hit by the coronavirus. And in Africa, health officials are concerned about recent outbreaks of yellow fever, cholera, measles and Ebola, among other diseases. Vaccination programs in at least 68 countries have been “substantially hindered,” according to a statement released last week by the World Health Organization, UNICEF and Gavi, a public-private partnership that helps provide vaccines to developing countries. And the suspensions could affect about 80 million children under the age of 1. The pandemic “has showed the vulnerabilities of many countries in different manners,” said Dr. Richard Mihigo, the coordinator in Africa for the World Health Organization’s immunization and vaccines development program.   Many countries, he said, “have been almost on their knees, paralyzed.” A troop of monkeys has attacked a lab technician in a town near India’s capital, snatching blood samples of three coronavirus patients who were being treated at a university hospital. The technician in Meerut, outside New Delhi, was carrying the samples for routine tests at Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College on Tuesday when the monkeys struck.  It got widespread media coverage in India, most of it alarmed: Aggressive monkeys are a problem all over, and many viewers were upset that potentially dangerous medical samples were vulnerable. “Monkeys have been a big menace here,” said Dr. S.K. Garg, the college’s principal. “Earlier, patients themselves would feed them, and now it seems they are short of food and getting desperate.” Video footage appeared to show a monkey chewing at the samples while perched atop a tree, then dropping part of the booty to the ground below. Dr. Dheeraj Raj, a senior administrator at the college, said that the hospital planned to suspend the technician because he had shot videos of the monkeys instead of returning to work. “These are sensitive times,” he said.  Our Berlin-based reporter Patrick Kingsley and Laetitia Vancon, a Times photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles around Europe to document changes on a continent emerging from coronavirus lockdowns. Here is the latest dispatch, from Geneva. Read them all. The first people arrived before 2 a.m. By 4 a.m., more than 100 people stood waiting in the darkness outside the ice-hockey stadium. By 7 a.m., the line stretched for more than a mile, and by early afternoon last Saturday nearly 3,000 residents of Geneva, one of the world’s richest cities, had filtered through the stadium to receive a food parcel worth about $25. In medical terms, Geneva has not been as gripped by the coronavirus crisis as other areas of Western Europe. But the crisis has been ruinous for the undocumented and underpaid workers often forgotten about in a city better known for its bankers, watchmakers and U.N. officials — and most of those on lower incomes have had to rely on charity to survive.  Ultimately, that demand led volunteers and city officials to set up a weekly food bank at the ice-hockey stadium near the river. Among those lining up last weekend was Sukhee Shinendorj, a 38-year-old from Mongolia, who was living on the cusp of poverty even before the pandemic. He had woken up at 1 a.m. and walked two miles to the stadium to try to beat the line. But several people were already there waiting. “Catastrophe,” he said of his situation. “It’s a catastrophe.” Behind him in the darkness, a giant Rolex logo shone from the watchmaker’s headquarters across the street — a stark juxtaposition in a city that is being forced to recognize its profound social inequalities.  Read Patrick Kingsley’s full dispatch from Geneva, along with the other dispatches in the series. The pandemic continued to wreak havoc on the college admissions testing industry this week, as the website used to register for the SAT was overwhelmed by pent-up demand for testing and the ACT, the rival testing company, announced virus-related cost cutting. Registration opened on Thursday for students seeking to take the SAT in August, September and October, after spring test dates were cancelled because of the virus. As students rushed to register, the website for the College Board, which administers the test, was so mobbed that many applicants were not able to get through. Anxious students and their parents complained on Twitter that the server had crashed, and said they were afraid they would be shut out. The College Board responded to the tweets on Friday afternoon, a day after the barrage of complaints had begun, telling users to “expect interruptions and delays.” The registration problems were the latest in a series of setbacks for the testing companies. A growing number of colleges have made submitting SAT or ACT scores optional during the pandemic. Just last week, the prestigious University of California system decided to phase out the use of the ACT and SAT over the next five years, a potential blow to the finances as well as the reputation of the testing companies. In a sign of the coronavirus’s financial impact, the ACT announced Thursday that it was asking its employees to volunteer for cost-cutting measures, including reducing their work hours, taking leaves of absence or resigning with severance pay. It said there would be no raises next year and some fringe benefits would be reduced. The coronavirus appears to have slammed into Yemen, a country staggering from five years of war, competing power centers, a health care system in ruins, widespread hunger and outbreaks of cholera and other infectious diseases. But a denial of the outbreak in the Houthi-controlled north, the absence of clear authority in the divided south and the drying-up of aid everywhere have hobbled any hope of limiting the virus’s spread. With little testing available and the government and hospitals in disarray, it is difficult to measure the virus’s true spread in a country where war has taken 100,000 lives, airstrikes have killed thousands of civilians and destroyed hospitals and schools, and U.N. officials have accused the Houthi rebels of diverting humanitarian aid. And while some Health Ministry employees have pleaded with senior officials to release the true numbers so that emergency medical workers and the public can understand the gravity of the threat, the ministry said this week that other countries’ decisions to publicize their coronavirus counts had “created a state of fear and anxiety that was more deadly than the disease itself.” “The people who are in power haven’t recognized or revealed the right information to the public,” said Osamah al-Rawhani, the deputy director of the Sana’a Center for Strategic Studies, a Beirut-based think tank focused on Yemen. “And secrecy makes people do the wrong things because they’ve gotten the wrong message.” As the world tries to get a handle on the coronavirus and emerge from paralyzing lockdowns, public health officials have repeated a mantra: “Test, test, test.” But Japan went its own way, limiting tests to the most severe cases.  Medical experts worried that would blind the country to the spread of infection, allowing cases to explode and swamping hospitals. But Japan’s medical system has not been overwhelmed, and its government never forced businesses to close, although many chose to. This week, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared Japan’s battle against the outbreak a resounding success and took the country off a sort of “lockdown lite” that had lasted only a month and a half. “By doing things in a uniquely Japanese way, we were able to almost completely end this wave of infection,” Mr. Abe said, adding that what he called the “Japan model” offered a path out of the global pandemic. It’s still unclear, though, exactly what accounts for Japan’s achievement and what other countries can learn from it. Critics say Japan undercounted coronavirus deaths. And some warn that further waves of infection could undermine the government’s self-congratulatory pronouncements. The police in Britain are to take no further action in the death of a ticket kiosk worker at one of London’s busiest railroad stations who tested positive for the coronavirus after being spat on and coughed at while at work by a man who claimed to have the virus. Detective Chief Inspector Sam Blackburn of the British Transport Police said in a statement on Friday that they were “confident” that the episode at Victoria Station had not led to the death last month of the employee, Belly Mujinga, 47. The case had become a symbol of the hazards facing transit workers in London. Dozens have died, including more than 30 bus workers. The city’s mayor, Sadiq Khan, has urged transit passengers to wear face coverings but it is not mandatory to do so. The Transport Police said they had reviewed CCTV footage of what happened to Ms. Mujinga and interviewed those involved — including a potential suspect, a 57-year-old man from London. They concluded that “there is no evidence to substantiate any criminal offenses having taken place, and that the tragic death of Belly Mujinga was not a consequence of this incident.” Worker safety is likely to be a top priority for Andy Byford, the former New York transit leader who is about to take charge of London’s main transportation agency. The agency, Transport for London, recently accepted a government bailout of 1.6 billion pounds, about $2 billion, on conditions including the restoration of full services within four weeks. Are you finding it difficult to sit down and read? You’re not alone. Here are a few strategies that can help you get more out of your next book. Reporting was contributed by Ian Austen, Hannah Beech, Emily Cochrane, Ben Dooley, Melissa Eddy, Alan Feuer, Jenny Gross, Rebecca Halleck, Anemona Hartocollis, Maggie Haberman, Shawn Hubler, Makiko Inoue, Andrew Jacobs, Yonette Joseph, Annie Karni, Adam Liptak, Ruth Maclean, Apoorva Mandavilli, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Raphael Minder, Zach Montague, Sun Narin, Andy Newman, Richard C. Paddock, Robin Pogrebin, Suhasini Raj, Peter Robins, Alissa J. Rubin, Choe Sang-Hun, Marc Santora, Kai Schultz, Kirk Semple, Somini Sengupta, Daniel Slotnik, Rory Smith, Matina Stevis-Gridneff, Anton Troianovski, Vivian Wang, Sui-Lee Wee, Sameer Yasir and Vivian Yee.   HONG KONG — Protesters have deleted their social media accounts, afraid that their messages could be used against them under China’s new national security laws. Young parents have scoured the internet for instructions on emigration. Organizers have planned rallies, only to cancel them at the last minute in the face of impenetrable police blockades. Hong Kong’s protest movement — which last year cowed the local government and humiliated the authorities in Beijing who direct it — is in crisis. The tactics that had pushed officials to retreat at times are suddenly inadequate against an aggressive police force, fear of the coronavirus and a Chinese Communist Party that has run out of patience. Many protesters feel they have exhausted their options. “It’s the beginning of the end,” said Michael Mo, a protest organizer and local official. The Chinese government’s plan to impose security laws on Hong Kong that could curtail the city’s civil liberties has left the freewheeling and decentralized opposition movement seeking not only a next move, but a new vision. Its campaign for democracy was always a long shot, targeting a local government whose leadership is only accountable to Beijing. But China’s direct intervention has made the challenges even more explicit, forcing a more fundamental reckoning about how to fight back, what the goal is — and whether it is even worth it to try. Further complicating their calculus, the protesters, a jumble of students, teachers, politicians and activists, find themselves at the center of a fight between China and the United States. China’s leader, Xi Jinping, sees the security push as necessary to protect the country’s sovereignty, while President Trump has cast it as an encroachment on civil liberties, moving on Friday to strip away some of Hong Kong’s privileges with the United States. Some protesters say they will continue to march, futile though it may be, while others who had thrown Molotov cocktails say they now prefer boycotts or strikes. Some want to preserve Hong Kong’s relative autonomy from China, while others have joined the once-taboo call for outright independence. Many are pinning their hopes on the United States’ pressure on China, but others fear they will become pawns in their rivalry. What binds many of the protesters together, more than anything, is weariness and dread. Their demands for universal suffrage — which would allow for direct elections of Hong Kong’s chief executive and all lawmakers — and for a more accountable police force remain unmet, despite months of demonstrations. Now that Beijing has escalated the fight, many protesters realize that they may not be able to do the same. “We tried almost everything we could think of last year,” said Alex Tang, 32, a labor organizer. “Maybe we will come up with something better later. But in this moment, the people just feel tired.”  Updated May 27, 2020 In the summer of 2019, Hong Kong protesters began fighting a rule that would allow extraditions to China. These protests eventually broadened to protect Hong Kong’s autonomy from China. The protests wound down when pro-democracy candidates notched a stunning victory in Hong Kong elections in November, in what was seen as a pointed rebuke of Beijing and its allies in Hong Kong. Late in 2019, the protests then quieted. Those peaceful mass rallies that occurred in June of 2019 were pointed against the territory leadership of Hong Kong. Later, they devolved into often-violent clashes between some protesters and police officers and lasted through November 2019. The current protests are aimed at mainland China. This latest round of demonstrations in Hong Kong has been fueled largely by China’s ruling Communist Party move this month to impose new national security legislation for Hong Kong. To China, the rules are necessary to protect the country’s national sovereignty. To critics, they further erode the relative autonomy granted to the territory after Britain handed it back to China in 1997. The rules would take direct aim at the anti-government protests and other dissent in Hong Kong. They are expected to prevent and punish secession, subversion as well as foreign infiltration — all of which Beijing has blamed for fueling unrest in the city. The legislation would also allow the mainland’s feared security agencies to set up their operations publicly in Hong Kong for the first time, instead of operating on a limited scale in secrecy. In trying to pass this legislation, Beijing is bypassing the Hong Kong government, and the legislation is being pushed by China’s rubber-stamp legislature, the National People’s Congress. The movement’s wounded condition has been most evident in the place where it first showed its strength: the streets. Protests against the national security laws in the past week drew thousands, demonstrating that months of pandemic-induced stasis had not dampened their anger. But the turnout fell far short of the hundreds of thousands — and at times, more than a million — who attended some of last year’s marches. Many demonstrators have been deterred by the police’s increasingly forceful response. Last year, peaceful protesters were given wide latitude, and when clashes erupted, they raged for hours. Protesters lobbed bricks and gasoline bombs, while officers responded with tear gas and rubber bullets. Now, swarms of anti-riot officers, under the command of a new police chief appointed by Beijing, scatter even peaceful demonstrators with water cannons and pepper spray from the outset. On Wednesday, protesters called off a rally at the legislature after hundreds of police officers preemptively surrounded the complex. When the protesters poured into the streets instead, the police detained them en masse, in some cases within an hour. More than 360 were arrested on Wednesday on top of 180 earlier in the week. Organizers have acknowledged that for some, the cost of protesting may now be too high. “My gut feeling is that it might let really peaceful protesters, average Joes, stay at home instead,” Mr. Mo said of the pending security laws. “They are afraid of being arrested, harassed by police.” Google searches for the word “immigration” in Hong Kong spiked after the national security announcement, an indication that some residents may be searching for an exit strategy. So many protesters, fearing future arrests, deleted their accounts on Telegram, a messaging app, that others began urging people to stay online. “If you are timid, you will lose your whole life,” a widely circulated message said. “Only if you bravely face everything will there be a turning point.” But the alternatives to street protests seem increasingly risky. Activists suggested that labor unions and boycotts of pro-Beijing businesses could offer new avenues for resistance. That approach had worked in August, when large numbers of air traffic controllers called in sick, forcing the cancellation of more than 200 flights. In February, even as the coronavirus made large gatherings impossible, a medical workers’ strike helped force the government to close parts of the border with the mainland. Some protesters fear that the security laws, which will be sweeping in scope, could target unions and nongovernmental organizations, many of which formed out of last year’s protests. The language of the security plan, which China’s legislature approved on Thursday, is broad: China could impose laws punishing any “acts and activities” that threaten national security, according to state media. The Global Times, a state-run tabloid, suggested that tweets critical of Beijing could run afoul of the rules. Officials in Hong Kong and Beijing have dismissed fears of overreach, promising to uphold Hong Kong’s relative autonomy. But on the mainland, the party has accused church leaders, union leaders and other organizers of undermining state security. Timing is also not on the unions’ side. The pandemic has further battered Hong Kong’s economy, and some workers are reluctant to strike when unemployment is high, said Mr. Tang, the labor organizer, whose union of information technology workers is one of the newly formed groups. That could change if the global recession, on top of a crackdown, worsens the deep income inequalities fueling many young protesters who feel that they have little to lose. “If you just give them some time, and the environment is getting worse, they may just say, ‘Screw it. I’ll go out anyway,’” Mr. Tang said. In perhaps the clearest sign of how Beijing’s latest move has forced many protesters to reassess their strategy, calls for independence for Hong Kong — once a fringe idea — have become common at recent demonstrations. Historically, most democracy supporters had dismissed the idea of independence as impractical and needlessly divisive, pointing to Hong Kong’s cultural and economic ties with China. They pushed instead to preserve the city’s high degree of autonomy enshrined in the “one country, two systems” political formula enacted in 1997 after Britain returned Hong Kong to China. But activists said the new push by Beijing proved that the status quo was untenable, and that it had jolted awake protesters who thought they could work within the system. “Maybe they still had some hope in the coming election, or they still had some optimistic expectation in the future of the movement,” said Ventus Lau, 26, a prominent organizer who identifies as a member of the protests’ “radical” wing, referring to legislative elections in September. The brazenness of the security laws, which bypassed Hong Kong’s government, was “a very good reminder” for those people, he continued. “We’re already facing the darkest hour,” Mr. Lau said. “And we will continue to fight.” Still, independence remains a deeply fraught, risky topic. Beijing has said that the national security laws would target secession. Candidates for elected office can be disqualified for supporting independence. Several protesters who have joined the recent pro-independence chants said the calls were largely symbolic. “When I call for independence, I am simply expressing a wish for the things I am supposed to have,” such as human rights and free expression, said Win Kwan, a 50-year-old clerk at Sunday’s protest. “We keep coming out to marches and protests, but it seems like we hadn’t gotten anything.” Many protesters’ true hope, they said, rested with the international community, as they no longer believed that Hong Kongers’ own actions would have any effect on Beijing. In addition to appealing to the United States and Britain, other protesters have lobbied the United Nations and European Union to condemn the Communist Party. Many protesters welcomed the United States’ move this week announcing that it no longer saw Hong Kong as significantly autonomous from China — a designation that, though intended to punish the mainland, would also jeopardize the city’s position as a global commercial hub. Mr. Trump moved forward on Friday with plans to revoke the city’s special status with the United States, as well as to sanction Chinese and Hong Kong officials seen as responsible for the erosion of freedoms in the semiautonomous region. It is unlikely that such moves would sway the party. Beijing sees many of the city’s activists as colluding with hostile foreign forces bent on using Hong Kong to infiltrate the mainland — a threat that the security laws expressly seek to quash. The protesters know they are in for a long fight. “Just because we might not see the results in our lifetime doesn’t mean that our efforts would disappear,” said Alice Chan, a 35-year-old high school teacher who attended Sunday’s protest. “Everything we do now is building the foundation for the generations to come.” Elaine Yu contributed reporting.This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. President Trump says the United States will cut ties with the World Health Organization. New York City is expected to start reopening on June 8, Gov. Andrew Cuomo said. The Federal Reserve chair said the central bank crossed “red lines” to support growth. Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas. Corporate workers may barely recognize the offices they return to. Instead of open-floor layouts optimized for space, they are likely to see desks six feet apart, plastic barriers and common areas without seating. Those precautions are among the sweeping new recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on preventing the coronavirus from spreading in workplaces. The advice covers the basics, like daily temperature checks and face coverings, as well as issues like ventilation (more open windows) and communal snacks (not OK). The agency also upended years of advice on commuting, urging people to drive to work alone, instead of taking public transit or car-pooling. To make this feasible for employees, the C.D.C. suggested companies offer reimbursement for parking or single-occupancy rides. But some of the recommendations may be difficult, if not impossible, to follow, such as social distancing in elevators. To avoid the cost and trouble of remaking their offices,  many employers may decide it’s simply easier to continue work-from-home arrangements. A transmission mystery: Scientists don’t yet know how much exposure to the coronavirus is needed for a person to become infected. But predictions have proved particularly tricky because it behaves so differently from other viruses. With the flu and H.I.V., for example, high levels of pathogens usually correspond with more-severe symptoms and a higher likelihood of infecting others. But with the coronavirus, asymptomatic people seem to have viral loads as high as those who are seriously ill. The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription. Economists are mostly in agreement that the U.S. economy will soon begin to rebound as businesses reopen. But what will the shape of that recovery look like? Jeanna Smialek, who writes about the economy for The Times, surveyed the options. The “V” The best possible scenario is a swift rebound in the second half of this year that would bounce us back to pre-coronavirus levels and create a “V”-shaped recovery. Unfortunately, economists say, this is mostly wishful thinking. Corporations and states have already cut their budgets, which will slow growth, and unemployment and economic output tend to drag for a while after a large shock. The “L” Pessimists will tell you that our current economic situation will drag on for months, creating an “L”-shaped recovery — that is, very little progress at all. This is unlikely, though, because the economy is already showing signs of recovering. Consumer confidence is up slightly, unemployment claims are slowing, and data collected by Google shows an uptick in the number of people moving around, which may translate to more economic activity. The checkmark, the swoosh or the wave The Congressional Budget Office predicts a checkmark-shaped recovery, in which growth begins to rebound in July and stretches through September. The slope of the checkmark could change based on a number of variables, like a vaccine breakthrough or more government support for the economy. If the recovery happens more quickly, it would look like a Nike swoosh. Without a vaccine, states could reopen and pull back with new outbreaks, lending a wave shape to the recovery. As states and countries figure out how to resume public life, professional sports leagues are also beginning to announce their returns. Baseball: There was hope earlier this month that Major League Baseball could return this summer for a half-season, but a bitter dispute over pay is threatening to derail the whole thing. (In the meantime, get your fix with the South Korean league.) Football: The N.F.L. has released a full schedule of games starting Sept. 10. The league is pressing ahead with the reopening of training facilities, and some teams are preparing to play in partly empty stadiums. Basketball: The N.B.A. is in talks to restart its season in late July at Walt Disney World in Florida, which would act as a single site for games, practice and housing. But much remains undecided, including what format the season would take. Hockey: The N.H.L. announced plans to play a 24-team playoff tournament as soon as July, hosted in empty arenas in two cities. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Soccer: Germany’s Bundesliga has returned, minus the fans, and the English Premier League plans to do the same on June 17. In the U.S., the National Women’s Soccer League is planning an ambitious 30-day tournament starting in late June. New York City is expected to begin loosening restrictions on June 8. Under the first phase, nonessential stores could open for curbside pickup, and nonessential construction and manufacturing could resume. In Italy, many older people have centered their anxieties — unfairly, some experts say — on the public gatherings of teenagers and young adults, fearing they could cause a second wave of infections. Worried about its economy, India is loosening tough restrictions and may eliminate them entirely this weekend — even as its infection rate soars. Illinois is expected to enter its third phase of reopening in the coming days, bringing back barbershops, salons, retail stores and other businesses with some limitations, even as new cases continue to rise. Here’s a roundup of restrictions in all 50 states. Get financial guidance. Listening to these podcasts about money can help you weather the storm created by the virus. Get timely advice from experts, hear other people’s struggles, and learn new approaches for things like budgeting. Stream something new. The Times’s chief movie critics rounded up their picks for the best films of the year (so far) — and all of them can be watched online. Grow a butterfly. Demand for caterpillar kits has surged during the pandemic. Watch how the insects transform over several weeks, and then release the butterflies, which are good for the environment. Japan has bucked the conventional wisdom around the virus: It has reported fewer deaths than other major nations and ended a state of emergency while conducting relatively few tests. After an influential study was published last week on the possible dangers of hydroxychloroquine, the World Health Organization halted research on the drug. But more than 100 scientists have questioned the validity of that study. As China, the U.S. and Europe restart their economies, The Times examined what their recovery plans mean for climate change. Spain is giving 850,000 households a minimum income guarantee of about $515 to $1,130 per month. House Democratic leaders said they plan to substantially scale back the summer schedule because of the pandemic. My husband, Ed, came up with a weekly bingo game to complete various challenges, such as going for a hike, trying a new recipe, playing a game outside and many other fun items. He invited his brothers, their wives, their kids and grandkids, and created a Google photo album to put pictures of ourselves doing the challenges. It has become so fun to wake up each morning and see what new pictures and videos have been added. — Joni Caverly, Parker, Colo. Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. Tom Wright-Piersanti contributed to today’s newsletter.Last week I spoke with one of Canada’s leading experts about the effects of working from home. But the coronavirus shutdown has also created a class of people who still go to their regular workplaces but may not want to be there. There has been no obvious reluctance among health care workers, who have courageously been working all along. At several long-term care centers in Quebec and Ontario, caregivers and residents have been dealing with major coronavirus outbreaks, a situation made worse by the failures of management that were highlighted again this week in a horrifying report by the Canadian military on five homes in Ontario. And now, a growing number of shop workers are back on the job, after the easing of government orders that had closed most stores in Canada except in British Columbia. The latest reopenings came this week in Montreal. Masks and plastic shields may provide some protection. But the return to work, even if it means not being among the three million Canadians who have lost their jobs during the outbreak, will most likely feel uneasy for many. It’s a source of anxiety that even the bonus pay some now receive for continuing to work may not offset. In the meatpacking industry, staying on the job has brought not only widespread illness but also death. In High River, Alberta, a town in the foothills of the Rockies, a meatpacking plant owned by Cargill, which is headquartered in Minnesota, has Canada’s largest single outbreak. More than 1,500 coronavirus infections and three deaths have been linked to the outbreak within the plant, most of them employees. Another meatpacking plant, in Brooks, Alberta, owned by JBS of Brazil, is linked with hundreds of cases. And about 40 federal meat inspectors who work in those plants have become infected as well, says the union that represents them. The union representing the plants’ workers, the United Food and Commercial Workers Union, told me that many of  the employees were either recent immigrants or temporary foreign workers. (The union also noted that Cargill works with it to gain permanent immigration status for the latter.) Neither plant is particularly automated. Employees stand shoulder-to-shoulder in the noisy plants, disassembling carcasses. Outbreaks in the meatpacking industry have also been common in the United States. My colleagues on the Business desk, Ana Swanson, David Yaffe-Bellany and Michael Corkery, have produced a harrowing, in-depth report about a pork plant in Iowa. [Read: Pork Chops vs. People: Battling Coronavirus in an Iowa Meat Plant] The High River plant was temporarily closed for cleaning and to allow the installation of, among other things, plastic shields. New safety protocols were also introduced. But the structure of the meatpacking industry in the 21st century creates significant economic pressure to keep plants running. Sven Anders, an agricultural economist at the University of Alberta, told me that the two plants in Alberta plus a third Cargill facility in Guelph, Ontario, processed upward of 95 percent of Canada’s beef production, much of which is exported to the United States. Calgary Stampede, canceled this year, isn’t a nostalgic throwback, he said: The cattle industry that it celebrates is still a vital segment of Alberta’s economy. Giant plants — the one in Brooks has more 2,600 employees — have become the foundation of the beef industry, Professor Anders said. They bring substantial cost reductions, but they also create working conditions that are ideal for spreading disease. He said he doubted that the coronavirus would bring a return to small-scale meatpacking plants. That, Professor Anders said, might backfire on consumers. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “It’s a bit hypocritical to come back now and criticize the massive size of this industry because don’t we all want to buy a rib-eye steak two dollars cheaper if we could?” he said. For the first time since early March, I recently left my home office to go reporting rather than working by phone or through the various forms of the internet. It wasn’t much of an excursion: a quick bike ride to Parliament Hill to listen to the Dominion Carillonneur of Canada. Despite the pandemic and the closing of the Center Block for renovations, Dr. Andrea McCrady is still going up to the belfry. The Spanish flu hadn’t ebbed when the 1919 Stanley Cup finals were played. And that push to return to sport, Kurt Streeter wrote, came at the cost of the death of Joe Hall of the Montreal Canadiens. Kent Monkman, a Cree artist, has always been provocative. Catherine Porter spoke with some members of the Indigenous community who said that his latest work crossed the line. The invasive Asian giant hornet has reappeared in British Columbia. Canada’s largest newspaper, The Toronto Star, will have new owners who have pledged to uphold its tradition of championing liberal causes. The question now is how they will reverse its financial decline. Dan Bilefsky and Tracy Sherlock reported on the further souring of relations between Canada and China after a Vancouver court decision left Meng Wanzhou, financial officer of the Chinese technology giant Huawei, a step closer to being extradited to the United States to face fraud charges. A native of Windsor, Ontario, Ian Austen was educated in Toronto, lives in Ottawa and has reported about Canada for The New York Times for the past 16 years. Follow him on Twitter at @ianrausten. We’re eager to have your thoughts about this newsletter and events in Canada in general. Please send them to nytcanada@nytimes.com. Forward it to your friends, and let them know they can sign up here.After spending weeks accusing the World Health Organization of helping the Chinese government cover up the early days of the coronavirus epidemic in China, President Trump said on Friday that the United States would terminate its relationship with the agency. “The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government,” Mr. Trump said in a speech in the Rose Garden. “Countless lives have been taken, and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe.” In his 10-minute address, Mr. Trump took no responsibility for the deaths of 100,000 Americans from the virus, instead saying China had “instigated a global pandemic.” There is no evidence that the W.H.O. or the government in Beijing hid the extent of the epidemic in China, and public health experts generally view Mr. Trump’s charges as a way to deflect attention from his administration’s own bungled attempts to respond to the virus’s spread in the United States. A spokeswoman for the W.H.O. in Geneva, where word of Mr. Trump’s announcement first landed at 9 p.m., said the agency would not have a response until Saturday. In April, when he was asked about Mr. Trump’s accusation that the W.H.O. was “China-centric,” Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the organization’s director-general said: “It is wrong to be any ‘country-centric.’ I am sure we are not China-centric. The truth is, if we are going to be blamed, it is right to blame us for being U.S.-centric.” Public health experts in the United States reacted to Mr. Trump’s announcement with alarm. “We helped create the W.H.O.,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has worked with the organization since its creation in 1948. “We’re part of it — it is part of the world,” Dr. Frieden said. “Turning our back on the W.H.O. makes us and the world less safe.” The Infectious Diseases Society of America “stands strongly against President Trump’s decision,” said Dr. Thomas M. File, its president. “We will not succeed against this pandemic, or any future outbreak, unless we stand together, share information and coordinate actions.” It is not clear whether the president can simply withdraw the United States from the World Health Organization without Congressional approval. “The president can’t unilaterally withdraw us,” said Lawrence O. Gostin, director of the World Health Organization Collaborating Center on National & Global Health Law at The Georgetown University Law Center. “It’s a nonstarter,” he added. “This is literally a whim of one man, without any consultation with Congress, in the middle of the greatest health emergency of our lifetime.” The reaction among Democrats in Congress was swift and negative. Representative Ami Bera, Democrat of California and the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asia, the Pacific, and Nonproliferation, called Mr. Trump’s announcement “shameful and irresponsible.” The W.H.O. “is not a perfect organization,” he said on Twitter, “but leaving will make the United States and the world less safe. President Trump is ceding American global leadership and handing it over on a golden platter to China.” Representative Nita Lowey, Democrat of New York and the chairwoman of the House Appropriations Committee, said: “The president wants to blame everyone else — the W.H.O., Twitter, the media — when his own shortcomings as a leader are contributing to harm and further dividing us here at home and among global partners.” The administration’s response to the emergency has been fumbling and inadequate, many public health experts say, especially when compared to China’s. The coronavirus has been the leading cause of death in the United States since mid-April, killing roughly 100,000 citizens to date. By comparison, only 4,600 Chinese citizens have died of the infection. About 20,000 Americans are infected each day, while China virtually ended its outbreak by April. On most days China records zero to five new infections, usually in travelers from abroad. The W.H.O. was founded in 1948 as part of the postwar creation of the United Nations and is the world’s premier global health organization. Mr. Trump supported and generously funded the organization as it fought an Ebola outbreak in Africa for three years, but abruptly turned on the W.H.O. a few weeks ago, when he began accusing the organization of doing too little to warn the world of the spread of the coronavirus. In fact, the agency issued its first alarm on Jan. 4, just five days after the local health department of Wuhan — at the time a city few non-Chinese had even heard of — announced a cluster of 27 cases of an unusual pneumonia at a local seafood market. The W.H.O. followed up with a detailed report the next day. On Jan. 20 and 21, a W.H.O. field team visited China and reported that there could be human-to-human transmission of the new pneumonia-causing virus. Almost simultaneously, China’s leading epidemiologist, who had just completed his own investigation on behalf of the Beijing government, confirmed during a Jan. 20 interview on state television that transmission to doctors was occurring in Wuhan, although he said on a recent interview with CNN that local officials had lied about it and even tried to mislead him. Within three days, Beijing had shut off all travel out of Wuhan. Mr. Trump did not order any restrictions on travel from China until Jan. 31. The United States has been by far the W.H.O.’s largest donor since its inception. The budget for the W.H.O. is about $6 billion, which comes from member countries around the world. In 2019, the last year for which figures were available, the United States contributed about $553 million. The American government and private donors, including the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Bloomberg Philanthropies and Rotary International, have wielded enormous influence on W.H.O. policies. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. For example, although the war on smallpox that was begun in the 1960s was at first largely a Soviet initiative, the W.H.O. chose American doctors, including Dr. William Foege and Dr. Donald A. Henderson, to lead the global campaign. The agency also chose American-made vaccines over Soviet ones for the war on polio. For many years, the American government, working on behalf of the Western pharmaceutical industry, pressured the W.H.O. not to publicly fight for lower drug prices that might threaten the patent monopolies of American companies. That changed in the early 2000s, when many American companies began sub-licensing their patents and technology to generics makers in India and elsewhere. No American has ever been director-general of the W.H.O., but that is because of a decades-old understanding that the World Bank and the United Nations Children’s Fund would always be run by Americans, while the leadership of some other U.N. agencies, including the W.H.O., would be taken in turn by other nations. The C.D.C. and many other branches of the American government have worked with the W.H.O. for decades. Along with the C.D.C., doctors from the American military and even the Army’s 82nd Airborne Division worked in cooperation with the W.H.O. to fight the 2014 West African Ebola epidemic — partly in an effort to keep it from reaching the United States. The W.H.O. provides essential diplomatic cover when American government agencies work in foreign countries. All countries that belong to the U.N. are also de facto members of the ruling body of the W.H.O. Asked for comment Friday, a C.D.C. official said the agency did not know what impact the announcement would have on its 72-year-old working relationship with the W.H.O., and referred all further questions to the White House. As he began facing harsh questions about his handling of the disease here, Mr. Trump swiftly diverted the blame to the W.H.O., threatening in a letter earlier this month to pull funding if it did not “commit to major substantive improvements in the next 30 days.” In fact, under Dr. Tedros, the agency has been in the middle of major reforms for several years, focusing more of its attention on pandemics and less on the causes championed by wealthy donors, including tobacco, lung cancer and obesity. Last month at the World Health Assembly — the annual meeting of the health ministers of all U.N. member nations that serves as the agency’s governing board — other member states rebuffed Mr. Trump’s demands. They voted instead to conduct an “impartial, independent” examination of the W.H.O.’s pandemic response. Mr. Trump’s Rose Garden address came as cities across the United States were convulsing with protests over recent cases of police brutality against black Americans. He did not take questions after delivering his speech, even as assembled reporters shouted for him to address protests in Minneapolis.New York City, long the epicenter of the global coronavirus crisis, is poised to start reopening in slightly more than a week, setting the stage for a slow and tentative recovery after two months of suffering, social isolation and economic hardship. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Friday that he expected the city to meet several benchmarks that would permit millions of virus-weary residents to enjoy the first signs of a normal life as early as June 8. Retail stores could open for curbside or in-store pickup, and nonessential construction and manufacturing could resume, part of an initial phase that could send as many as 400,000 people back to work. As other parts of the nation, including less populated sections of New York State, have reopened, New York City, which lost more than 20,000 lives to the virus, has taken longer to recover. It required a gargantuan effort to even reach the point where officials were comfortable with loosening the restrictions on movement and commerce that were put in place in March. Deaths in New York have dropped to only dozens a day, rather than the 700 or 800 a day that were taking place in April, and the number of virus patients on intensive care in the city’s public hospitals has fallen by more than half. That progress largely came because many New Yorkers followed the rules, and have been wearing face coverings and maintaining social distance as requested. The rewards of vigilance have been manifest not only in decreasing fatalities, but also in the declining number of people testing positive for the virus and of those requiring hospital stays because of it. “I am proud of the way New York is figuring it out,” Mr. Cuomo said. But even with the strides the city has made, the road to normalcy will no doubt be steep and rocky. Since February, nearly 900,000 local jobs have vanished and thousands of businesses have closed their doors — some forever. Revenues from sales taxes are expected to drop by $1 billion, part of an estimated $9 billion budget shortfall that could push officials into risky borrowing and force drastic cuts to essential city services. Even as summer nears, once bustling swaths of Midtown Manhattan remain all but abandoned, marred by vacant streets and shuttered storefronts. The subway system is limping along at record low ridership. Tourism has evaporated. Broadway theaters plan to remain dark at least until Labor Day, and many industry leaders say they may stay closed until January. Under the first phase of reopening, much of the city would still be shut down, with restaurants and bars limited to takeout and delivery service, and offices, gyms, movie houses and grooming salons all closed. Mayor Bill de Blasio, appearing virtually with Mr. Cuomo on Friday, seemed optimistic as he called the plan to begin reopening in June “the gateway to the next big step.” But neither he nor the governor has figured out certain crucial details yet, perhaps most notably how to get millions of commuters safely back onto public transit. On Thursday, Mr. de Blasio said that between 200,000 and 400,000 people in New York could return to work under the first phase of recovery. But when questioned on Friday if the city was prepared for the coming spike in commuters, he appeared to dodge the issue, saying that many city dwellers would simply walk or bike to their jobs while others would drive or take taxis. “For the next few months, people are going to make their own choices,” the mayor said. “Some people are going to be comfortable with mass transit, some are not. We just have to be honest and real about that.” While Mr. Cuomo insisted that the subways were safe, he also said that it would be up to riders themselves not to create a public health risk by violating social distancing protocols. “We will need a cooperative public where if you’re on a subway platform and you see it is crowded, ‘OK, wait for the next one,’” he said. Both leaders cautioned that while the dangers of the virus had receded, New Yorkers needed to continue taking measures to keep its spread in check. More than 5,000 people in the city tested positive for infection last week alone — a steep drop from early April, when 40,000 people a week were testing positive, but still a significant number. Officials have required each of the state’s 10 regions to meet seven health-related metrics before beginning the reopening process. New York City, the only region that has yet to do so, has not reached the benchmark of having 30 percent of its hospital beds available — it was close, at 28 percent — nor has it deployed enough contact tracers to adequately track the spread of the disease. The city currently has 1,700 contact tracers in place who will act as disease detectives, getting in touch with those who came in contact with a person with the virus in order to map potential vectors of infection. Having a robust contact tracing program is crucial to quelling the outbreak and paving the way to reopening. But in a sharp departure from tradition, the city took the project away from public health officials and gave it to the public hospital system. Despite such lingering problems, New York has come a long way since the first dark days of the pandemic, when ambulance sirens wailed around the clock and hospitals were so swamped with incoming patients that some were dying untreated in emergency rooms. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. After an initial shock, New Yorkers accustomed themselves with unexpected speed to the new realities of wearing nitrile gloves to walk their dogs and standing on strips of masking tape spaced six feet apart while waiting to pay for their groceries. Reopening the city could prove tricky, however, especially if residents — inured to social distancing rules — are suddenly thrust back into contact with their neighbors in coffee shops or on packed subway platforms. Tensions have already emerged from time to time as prickly city dwellers have gotten used to policing one another about their sense of personal space and mask-wearing habits. Under Mr. Cuomo’s plan, New York City will have to remain at Phase 1, the lowest level of openness, for at least two weeks as health officials make sure that new infections do not creep up and that hospitals maintain their state of readiness. State officials are planning to distribute free face coverings to businesses in the city that are preparing to reopen and to set up a hotline that employers can call for what the governor described as “practical questions.” Much of upstate New York was given permission on Friday to enter Phase 2, which allows most stores, offices and hair salons to open, with restrictions on capacity and social distance. New York City, however, was nowhere near such freedoms, and it remained unclear how and when it could get there. “Nobody has been here before,” Mr. Cuomo said, acknowledging that even he was unsure how the city would move forward. “Nobody can give you the answers,” he confessed. “They don’t even know the questions.” Azi Paybarah and Katie Van Syckle contributed reporting.This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic. Read about others here. Harold and Marion Wernig had what their three daughters described as a “fierce” love. They could argue like the Bickersons one minute, and in the next be holding hands like teenagers. They might get frustrated with each other, but woe to anyone else who criticized one of them. “They would defend each other until their dying day,” said their oldest daughter, Margaret Ann Kern. Their youngest daughter, Linda Maynard, recalled her mother telling her, “The reason our marriage lasted is because we fight.” They met on a blind date at an ice cream parlor in Richmond Hill, Queens, and were married in 1953. He was 20. She was 18. Like so many who came of age in the Eisenhower era, the Wernigs left the city for the suburbs, raising their children on Long Island. They lived in a three-bedroom ranch house in Blue Point, N.Y., with cedar shake shingles, a big bay window and a fireplace. Mr. Wernig, a master craftsman who worked as an electrician, built the house himself. Mr. Wernig set up a workshop in the basement, where he kept his tools meticulously organized. Ms. Wernig, who worked as a secretary for the Internal Revenue Service, was famed in her family for her cooking. He took care of all the outside stuff, she took care of the inside stuff. Decades passed. The couple retired and moved to Florida. The family grew to include nine grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren. But through it all, the Wernigs were never apart. In February, when they moved into an assisted living facility in Sayville, N.Y., to be closer to their children, they were handed a questionnaire. Asked what is the most important thing to know about you, Ms. Wernig replied, “I don’t want to be away from my husband.” Only death, on April 19 at Long Island Community Hospital in Patchogue, N.Y., could separate them. He was 87. She was 85. The cause was the coronavirus, said their middle daughter, Patricia Johnson. Harold Herbert Wernig was born on Aug. 18, 1932, in Queens. Marion Isabel Sganga was born on July 29, 1934, in Brooklyn.  In later years, they loved to watch tennis and golf on TV, and to play cards, especially a game called Hand and Foot. It became a family tradition. They taught the game to their children and grandchildren. Mr. Wernig began showing signs of sickness in early April. Days later, he was taken to the hospital. Ms. Wernig followed him there the next day. Soon both were on ventilators. When Ms. Wernig was taken off the ventilator, her family expected her to die right away. But she held on for 60 hours, dying at 2 a.m. Mr. Wernig’s ventilator was removed later that day and he stopped breathing within a half-hour. Their children eventually made peace with losing both parents at once. “Now, we tend to feel comfort in that,” Ms. Johnson said. “And comfort in the sense that they were together. It was their day. They stayed together, they went together.” That day, April 19, was the couple’s 67th wedding anniversary.This article was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting. WASHINGTON — With the coronavirus pandemic further isolating the prison at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, the Trump administration is coming under increasing pressure to find ways to let the most isolated men among the 40 wartime prisoners communicate with their lawyers. Only one of the five men accused of plotting the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks has so far been able to speak with his lawyer during the pandemic, through a special video link between a Pentagon building outside Washington and the courtroom at Guantánamo. Then on Friday, a federal judge ordered the Justice Department to report back in 30 days on how another prisoner — a Somali man who has never been charged with a crime — could hold a classified phone call with his lawyer. Judge Reggie B. Walton of the United States District Court in Washington set the deadline in a status conference by telephone in the case of Guled Hassan Duran, 46, a Somali man, who is seeking release through a federal habeas corpus petition. Mr. Duran, who is identified in military records as Gouled Hassan Dourad, was captured in Djibouti in 2004 and has been at Guantánamo since 2006. Politico quoted the judge as telling the government lawyers that if there is no way to hold classified phone calls, “the government may have to bring him here to the United States while the pandemic is in play.” A Justice Department lawyer, Terry Henry, was quoted as reminding the judge that, by law, the government is forbidden from bringing Guantánamo prisoners to the United States. At issue is how to balance the insistence of the defense lawyers that they continue to consult with their clients, even as some proceedings are delayed because of the pandemic, and the insistence of the government that 14 of the 40 men held at Guantánamo could disclose classified information if they were allowed routine telephone calls. Those 14 prisoners were held at secret C.I.A. sites before their transfer to Guantánamo more than a decade ago. The intelligence agencies argue that they continue to know national security secrets, including where they were held and perhaps the identities of their captors. They are only allowed written communications through secure channels with their lawyers when the lawyers are not at Guantánamo. The other 26 prisoners held at Guantánamo have been able to speak with their lawyers by telephone for years, including throughout the public health crisis. Lawyers representing the prisoners regularly visit the base during normal times, but those trips came to a halt in March, after the military discontinued its weekly legal shuttles there because of the pandemic and limited travel to essential personnel. The prison also adopted a policy of requiring lawyers to isolate themselves for two weeks on the base, once legal visits are restored. Among those most directly affected are the five defendants accused of helping plot the Sept. 11 attacks. Prosecutors in that case proposed one-hour weekly video chats between the defendants and their lawyers linking two classified facilities — a teleconference suite at military commissions headquarters in Alexandria, Va., and the courtroom at Camp Justice at Guantánamo. Gary D. Sowards, the death penalty defense lawyer for Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who is accused of being the mastermind behind the Sept. 11 attacks, lives in Manhattan and had asked for a monitored phone call on the grounds that it was too dangerous to travel from one virus hot spot, New York City, to another, outside Washington D.C. The chief war court judge, Col. Douglas K. Watkins, has ordered prosecutors in the Sept. 11 case to explain why the defendants cannot get the same telephone calls as other prisoners. Only one lawyer in the case has used the war court teleconference facilities. Walter B. Ruiz, the capital defender for Mustafa al Hawsawi, said on Friday that his conversation with his client lasted two hours on Wednesday — with mixed results. The camera angle made it impossible to see and discuss documents Mr. Hawsawi had at the defense table in front of him, Mr. Ruiz said. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Mr. Ruiz said he and two linguists on their side of the video conference had to huddle — closer than the six-foot distance mandated under social-distancing guidelines — to see and be seen. But the prisoner, he said, “seemed to be in good spirits.” Mr. Hawsawi appeared on camera in a beige cloth mask, which he removed for the meeting. Soldiers serving as guards wore gloves, masks and plastic face shields. “The most practical and adequate thing is to go down to the jailhouse and sit down face to face and go over documents,” Mr. Ruiz said. “That is the standard that we should have. But given the circumstances, I like being able to see each other.”RIO DE JANEIRO — The embattled president of Brazil stood outside his mansion on Thursday, indignant and angry, wearing a necktie patterned with assault rifles. The day before, the police had raided properties linked to several of his most die-hard supporters as part of an investigation into an online network distributing disinformation, one of an array of criminal and legislative inquests focused on him, family members and close allies. “We won’t have another day like yesterday. Enough!” the president, Jair Bolsonaro, said of Wednesday’s raid during a news conference outside his official residence. “We have reached the limit!” As the investigators encircling him and his associates draw closer, Mr. Bolsonaro has lashed out and even raised the specter of a constitutional crisis by suggesting that the federal police should not carry out “absurd orders” of the Supreme Court. The increasingly belligerent stance adopted by the president and his allies toward the investigations has led to rising political turmoil at a time of national crisis, with the fast-spreading coronavirus sending the economy into a tailspin and causing the deaths of more than 27,000 people. Mr. Bolsonaro’s handling of the pandemic has come under intensifying criticism, amplifying the sense that he is a leader under siege, who is finding it increasingly difficult to govern. Brazil now has the world’s second-highest number of confirmed virus cases, after the United States, job losses are mounting and analysts are warning that the country could plunge into a deep recession. While there are a number of open investigations into the president and his circle, the raids this week seemed to particularly enrage him and his supporters. The Supreme Court has been investigating the spread of what it calls fake news and the orchestration of defamation campaigns against its justices, and on Wednesday, the federal police raided properties in six states, seizing computers, phones and documents. Some of the properties were linked to activists, businessmen and politicians closely aligned with Mr. Bolsonaro and his right-wing views. The raids were applauded by the president’s critics. “The Supreme Court is playing an important and historical role to safeguard democracy,” said José Carlos Dias, a former justice minister. But Mr. Bolsonaro said the raids were interfering with his ability to lead. “We have to draw limits,” he told reporters on Thursday. “I ask, for the last time, let the government work.” His political allies also rushed to his defense. Mr. Bolsonaro’s education minister, Abraham Weintraub, compared the raids to Kristallnacht and the media to Nazis, drawing vehement criticism from the American Jewish Committee. The president’s son, Eduardo Bolsonaro, a federal lawmaker, warned that the country was approaching what he called a “moment of rupture.” “It’s no longer an opinion about if, but when this will happen,” he warned, without being more specific about what sort of rupture he envisioned. In his election campaign, Mr. Bolsonaro benefited from a well-organized disinformation effort relying on social media platforms and text messaging apps. Critics say his supporters continued to use these tools after Mr. Bolsonaro took office in order to spread fake news and attack state institutions, including insulting Supreme Court justices who have opposed his policies. Eloísa Machado, a law professor at Fundação Getulio Vargas University in São Paulo, said the investigation has revealed “an organized scheme” involving members of Congress, political advisers, bloggers and financiers “to spread threats to the Supreme Court and against democracy.” These online communities are also the subject of investigations by a congressional committee, the nation’s electoral court and the Federal Court of Accounts, an auditing body tied to Brazil’s Congress. Adding to the pressure on Mr. Bolsonaro, the Supreme Court recently opened a probe into allegations that Mr. Bolsonaro had attempted to assert improper control over the federal police for political gain. Last week, Celso de Mello, a Supreme Court justice who is overseeing the investigation, released a video of an April cabinet meeting that has been offered as evidence that Mr. Bolsonaro was trying to meddle with the federal police to shield his friends and family. In the video, Mr. Bolsonaro suggested, using coarse language, that it was his right to replace security officials rather than see his “whole family — for fun — or a friend of mine” face problems. “If you can’t replace the official, change his boss,” he said. “You can’t change the boss? Change the minister. End of story. We’re not kidding around.” Mr. Bolsonaro said later that he was talking about his family’s personal security detail, not the federal police. Investigators have revealed little about the inner workings and coordination of the online disinformation networks they have been scrutinizing. But the congressional inquiry has found evidence that a staff member in the office of Mr. Bolsonaro’s son, Eduardo, had helped to coordinate a Facebook page that ran negative campaigns against the president’s political enemies. Former allies of the president also testified that he maintained what they referred to as a “bureau of hate” where his aides helped to coordinate an online network that manufactured and disseminated false, damaging news about public figures. Mr. Bolsonaro has denied this allegation. Maria Hermínia Tavares de Almeida, a political scientist at the University of São Paulo, says there is much Brazil has yet to understand about the group that supports Mr. Bolsonaro. “Brazil has created a minority extreme-right group, which now has a national expression,” she said. “They are not giving up.” The president has said the investigations into the online networks are an effort to muzzle his supporters and a transparent attack on their freedom to criticize political opponents and mock policies they disagree with, like the social distancing measures intended to curb the coronavirus. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “The goal of this proceeding is to target those who support me,” he told reporters on Thursday. “They want to remove the media that I have in my favor.” Even some of Mr. Bolsonaro’s opponents and critics have questioned the legality of the Supreme Court’s latest inquiry, calling into question the credibility of the highest court. Brazil’s prosecutor general, Augusto Aras, a key ally of the president, filed a request on Wednesday with the Supreme Court to block the investigation. He said that even though some of the evidence the court has gathered is “cutting,” it represents “the dissemination of opinions and world views, protected by freedom of expression.” In the ruling in which Alexandre de Moraes, a Supreme Court judge, ordered the raids, he said the networks had engaged in activities ranging from the promotion of hashtags like #NationalShameSupremeCourt to making calls for a military coup. The political tumult around Mr. Bolsonaro has exhausted political resources that could be used to save people’s lives during the current health crisis, said Vitor Lourenço, a community activist in Duque de Caxias, one of the cities that has been hardest hit by the coronavirus. “In the middle of this pandemic, with 1,000 people dying a day, the government is holding cabinet meetings to discuss their own political crisis,” he said. “The neglect continues.” Mr. Bolsonaro has been dismissive of the disease, defying social distancing guidelines, resisting calls for stricter quarantine measures and relentlessly pushing for a quick reopening of the economy even as the outbreak has shown little sign of relenting. Calls for Mr. Bolsonaro’s impeachment and ouster have been growing as the public health, political and economic crises all seem to spin further out of the president’s control. But even though Mr. Bolsonaro’s disapproval rating hit new highs this week, according to a poll by Datafolha, his support base has remained stalwart, with about a third of respondents saying he has done a “good” or “great” job. Mr. Bolsonaro’s economy minister, Paulo Guedes, acknowledged the seriousness of the country’s situation on Friday, appealing for unity across the political spectrum. “We need cooperation,” Mr. Guedes said during an online seminar. “If there is a fight on board, the boat will sink.” Manuela Andreoni reported from Rio de Janeiro, Letícia Casado from Brasília and Kirk Semple from Mexico City.Even as emergency government aid gave incomes a boost in April, coronavirus lockdowns caused Americans to shut their wallets, prompting the biggest monthly drop in consumer spending on record. Personal income rose 10.5 percent, lifted by nearly $3 trillion in government transfer payments, mostly in the form of $1,200 checks that millions of households received from the federal government. But with stores closed and most Americans under stay-at-home orders, there wasn’t much opportunity to put that money to work, causing consumption to fall by 13.6 percent. That combination of a cash infusion and nowhere to spend it caused the savings rate to soar to 33 percent, up 12.7 percent from March and the highest level since the government began tracking the information in 1959. The data, reported Friday by the Commerce Department, is further evidence of an economy at a virtual standstill last month. There are preliminary signs that conditions have moderated since then, but the pain continues for many Americans. On Thursday, the Labor Department reported that 2.1 million more workers filed for unemployment insurance last week, bringing the total since mid-March to more than 40 million. Given the plunge in consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of economic activity, many economists expect a drop of 40 percent or more in gross domestic product in the second quarter. Unemployment is already in double-digits, and each report seems to bring data unimaginable a few months ago. “The numbers were wild,” Gregory Daco, chief U.S. economist at Oxford Economics, said of Friday’s report. “It’s not every year you get these kinds of crazy swings. It requires a bit of coolheadedness to understand what is transitory and what is permanent.” Government payments, which pumped up personal income, he said, “are a one-time shot. If you take these benefits out, then you are left with a massive loss of income.” The $1,200 federal checks made the biggest difference last month, but the government’s $600 in additional weekly unemployment benefits has been significant, too. That supplement to state payments is set to expire in late July. Lingering fear is likely to restrain spending on social activities and discretionary items for a while. There are signs that spending has rebounded slightly in May, Mr. Daco said, but there is a long way to go before activity returns to precrisis levels. “You might see strong growth numbers on spending, but we’re coming out of a deep hole,” he said. The rise in personal income shows how critical the huge stimulus package passed in March was as the pandemic devastated private-sector jobs. Without it, the economic damage would have been even worse, experts say. “This is an unambiguous triumph of countercyclical government spending, which will save the U.S. economy a heap of trouble in the medium to long term,” said Troy Ludtka of Natixis CIB Americas, a corporate and investment banking firm. “If the private sector retrenches, government needs to pick up the slack. This is exactly what data for the month of April depicts.” April represents the deepest point of the current economic downturn, said Michael Gapen, chief U.S. economist at Barclays. “The personal spending data was much weaker than we anticipated, and it spread across virtually all major categories,” he said. But there were reasons for optimism in the report, namely in the income and savings data, he said. “The potential good news is that there’s a large pool of savings that consumers can draw on to support spending as states reopen,” he said. “April should be the trough, and we expect May and June to look better, setting the economy up for a decent rebound in the second half of the year.” In a separate report Friday, the University of Michigan reported that its gauge of consumer sentiment ticked up to 72.3 in May from 71.8 in April. The measure remains 20 points below its 12-month average. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “The fact that sentiment stabilized is encouraging,” Mr. Daco said. “But once the stimulus from the federal government fades out, we will be left with depressed incomes. This is a large amount of money for many people.” Allie Radice is one of the unlikely savers who has benefited from federal payments but worries about how long they will last. She successfully applied for unemployment insurance after her work as a dancer as well as a server in the catering industry in Manhattan dried up in March. With the $600 extra weekly benefit from the federal government factored in, her unemployment payments exceed what she earned in shows and catering. She received the $1,200 federal stimulus payment as well. But she has been holding off on big purchases. She spent some of the $1,200 on rent and banked the rest. Now Ms. Radice is saving in case the government doesn’t extend the $600 weekly payments beyond late July, when they are set to expire. She has limited her acquisitions to dance supplies: pointe shoes, a ballet barre and vinyl flooring. “I don’t feel the need to spend,” she said. “There’s nowhere to go out or any reason to get dressed up.” In the meantime, Ms. Radice, 32, is taking online dance classes and voice lessons. “I intend to keep working on my craft,” she said. “I’m still paying rent, but there is unemployment for that. If I didn’t have that unemployment insurance, I’d be in a sticky situation.”At any party, there’s a moment of awkwardness, when the dance floor is still empty and guests are arriving. But then, something clicks. Maybe the lights dim. Maybe the D.J. plays That Song and the room becomes a hydra, moving together to the beat. The party has truly started. “The reason a club is so much fun, for me and for other people, is because there’s something so magical about experiencing music together,” said Louis Mandelbaum, 33, a pop music-focused D.J., writer and actor based in Brooklyn who goes by D.J. Louie XIV. “It’s one of the most ethereal human traits.” You can still find that joy in quarantine. In real life, the people who have the most fun are the people who just let themselves go. So, in your apartment, do the same thing. Set up a private event on Zoom or another platform with your friends, and then livestream a D.J.’s set, so you’re all sharing the same music. Then, just groove. Here are some tips to find the vibe, no matter what age you are. For kids and teenagers, these live-streamed sets might be their only avenue to listen to some of the best D.J.s right now. They won’t be exposed to any drugs or alcohol at these parties, so there’s no need for ID. It’s among the cleanest fun around (assuming the songs don't have explicit lyrics). And for adults, the virtual party can offer a calmer and less performative way to dance with friends. You don’t need to worry about getting in, or your friends bailing on you if they find someone cute. But you still get to dance. Already, a lot of D.J.s are streaming. Esquire compiled a list of some of the most famous D.J.s spinning during the quarantine, like D.J. D-Nice, who has taken the internet by storm. “It got me thinking into how amazing the accessibility of these parties are,” said Robin Krupnick, 23, a graphic designer who lives in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. Ms. Krupnick, who regularly goes to clubs, usually supports local artists, whose shows might cost $25 to $50 to stream. But now, she is also tuning into the techno shows of big name artists. “I was watching D.J.s that I’d have to pay a couple hundred dollars to see,” she said. If going out is already your thing, check in with some of your favorite local artists. They’re probably spinning. You could just stream and Zoom, though if the D.J. puts his or her Venmo handle up, you’d do well to tip them. Shilpa Sabharwal, a 32-year-old artist who goes by D.J. Scarlett, streams for free, but charges for a private session. A party for kids might require some advance planning on your part, as few D.J.s cater specifically to children. If you are making your own playlist, pick songs that you know children will like, including oldies they might know from their parents, or a Disney favorite. When in doubt, just play “Let It Go.” The music quality will be the most important factor. It’s what makes a party tick. A D.J. can get a streaming device that pumps sound from the mixer directly into their phone. As a listener, if you have external speakers, connect your device and crank the sound up loud. Any Bluetooth speaker, Mr. Mandelbaum said, “will do the trick. You don’t need anything special.” Or wear your headphones. That’s what Genevieve Robles, a 34-year-old talent director who lives in Downtown Brooklyn, sometimes does. (If you have nosy neighbors or thin walls, that might be something you want to do, too.) “It’s even funnier, probably as an onlooker, because I am dancing through my apartment,” she said. “Or I’ll sing at full volume, karaoke style, which is probably hilarious.” If you’ve got wireless headphones, they might be better: you don’t want to get tangled. In a bind, you can put your phone in a glass cup. The sound will still be kind of tinny, but at least it will be loud. The more you can do to make the party feel like an occasion, the happier you will be. Ms. Sabharwal, who is based in West New York, N.J., asks her fans to connect the stream to their televisions and turn off their life (you’ll need a Bluetooth-enabled TV or a HDMI cord). She has lights in her setup that flicker, which can help create a club environment. Or, she said, “if you can invest in a $15 rinky-dink strobe light thingie from Amazon, go for it.” Clothes: You don’t have to get dressed up, but you could. It might actually make it feel more real. “You don’t want to look like you’re in quarantine, right?” said Kerry Hayes, 33, who goes by the name Nero Lamek and is a co-founder of Xystance, a livestreaming platform for up-and-coming D.J.s.  Emily Cohn, the 25-year-old writer and director of “CRSHD,” a movie about a college student attending a party in hopes of losing her virginity, hosted a dance party to celebrate the film’s virtual theatrical premier. She asked her guests to wear red, pink and white, which was the color scheme of the in-person party she hosted when “CRSHD” had its premiere at last year’s Tribeca Film Festival. Her friends rose to the occasion. Emma Orlow, 25, a guest at the party who is also the associate food and drink editor at Time Out New York and a contributor to T Magazine, set her Zoom background to a disco ball-studded dance floor. “It’s a rare moment to feel really attractive and beautiful and sexy in quarantine, not because anyone is even looking at you, but because you’re having this really freeing moment with your body,” she said. At Ms. Cohn’s party for the first few minutes, people were just bobbing their heads in their individual Zoom frames. But then, the music picked up and she started using Zoom’s functions to bring the crowd alive. She started spotlighting people, pinning their video chat to the whole stream, so they had the opportunity to show off. The party really started. If you’re the party’s host, make sure you’ve practiced spotlighting before the soiree starts (you need to go to “manage participants” on the Zoom Room Controller) and keep your eye on the display to see who is dancing up a storm. The difference between a good D.J. and a great D.J. is her ability to read the room. Before the quarantine, spinning was part-psychology, part-musicology. Now, the “room” is hundreds of different spaces. The D.J., streaming on Instagram or Twitch, cannot see anyone’s face. It’s more like posting a video than engaging in videoconferencing, so they’re just reading the likes and comments. It’s hard to take the temperature. So they rely on the streaming platform’s chat function. It’s the new dance floor, the way to request songs and communicate as a group. “I’m commenting straight for four hours,” Ms. Robles said. Some fans share how they’re multitasking: dancing while doing the dishes, doing a two-step in the kitchen. Ms. Robles takes her phone with her as she dances through the apartment, to keep up with the comments. “It’s literally like a chat room,” she said. This is not the same thing as an in-person party. But, in quarantine, it’s worth it to be silly. Just shake it out. “It’s one of the places that I feel most connected during this time,” Ms. Robles said. “There’s this shared love for the music.” At the very worst, you’ll have gotten some exercise. And — you’ve got a good anecdote to boot. Who doesn’t love a nutty night-out story? This time, you’ve got a nutty night-in story.When experts recommend wearing masks, staying at least six feet away from others, washing your hands frequently and avoiding crowded spaces, what they’re really saying is: Try to minimize the amount of virus you encounter. A few viral particles cannot make you sick — the immune system would vanquish the intruders before they could. But how much virus is needed for an infection to take root? What is the minimum effective dose? A precise answer is impossible, because it’s difficult to capture the moment of infection. Scientists are studying ferrets, hamsters and mice for clues but, of course, it wouldn’t be ethical for scientists to expose people to different doses of the coronavirus, as they do with milder cold viruses. “The truth is, we really just don’t know,” said Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University in New York. “I don’t think we can make anything better than an educated guess.” Common respiratory viruses, like influenza and other coronaviruses, should offer some insight. But researchers have found little consistency. For SARS, also a coronavirus, the estimated infective dose is just a few hundred particles. For MERS, the infective dose is much higher, on the order of thousands of particles. The new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, is more similar to the SARS virus and, therefore, the infectious dose may be hundreds of particles, Dr. Rasmussen said. But the virus has a habit of defying predictions. Generally, people who harbor high levels of pathogens — whether from influenza, H.I.V. or SARS — tend to have more severe symptoms and are more likely to pass on the pathogens to others. But in the case of the new coronavirus, people who have no symptoms seem to have viral loads — that is, the amount of virus in their bodies — just as high as those who are seriously ill, according to some studies. And coronavirus patients are most infectious two to three days before symptoms begin, less so after the illness really hits. Some people are generous transmitters of the coronavirus; others are stingy. So-called super-spreaders seem to be particularly gifted in transmitting it, although it’s unclear whether that’s because of their biology or their behavior. On the receiving end, the shape of a person’s nostrils and the amount of nose hair and mucus present — as well as the distribution of certain cellular receptors in the airway that the virus needs to latch on to — can all influence how much virus it takes to become infected. A higher dose is clearly worse, though, and that may explain why some young health care workers have fallen victim even though the virus usually targets older people. The crucial dose may also vary depending on whether it’s ingested or inhaled. People may take in virus by touching a contaminated surface and then putting their hands on their nose or mouth. But “this isn’t thought to be the main way the virus spreads,” according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. That form of transmission may require millions more copies of the virus to cause an infection, compared to inhalation. Coughing, sneezing, singing, talking and even heavy breathing can result in the expulsion of thousands of large and small respiratory droplets carrying the virus. “It’s clear that one doesn’t have to be sick and coughing and sneezing for transmission to occur,” said Dr. Dan Barouch, a viral immunologist at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston. Larger droplets are heavy and float down quickly — unless there’s a breeze or an air-conditioning blast — and can’t penetrate surgical masks. But droplets less than 5 microns in diameter, called aerosols, can linger in the air for hours. “They travel further, last longer and have the potential of more spread than the large droplets,” Dr. Barouch said. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Three factors seem to be particularly important for aerosol transmission: proximity to the infected person, air flow and timing. A windowless public bathroom with high foot traffic is riskier than a bathroom with a window, or a bathroom that’s rarely used. A short outdoor conversation with a masked neighbor is much safer than either of those scenarios. Recently, Dutch researchers used a special spray nozzle to simulate the expulsion of saliva droplets and then tracked their movement. The scientists found that just cracking open a door or a window can banish aerosols. “Even the smallest breeze will do something,” said Daniel Bonn, a physicist at the University of Amsterdam who led the study. Observations from two hospitals in Wuhan, China, published in April in the journal Nature, determined much the same thing: more aerosolized particles were found in unventilated toilet areas than in airier patient rooms or crowded public areas. This makes intuitive sense, experts said. But they noted that aerosols, because they are smaller than 5 microns, would also contain much less, perhaps millions-fold less, virus than droplets of 500 microns. “It really takes a lot of these single-digit size droplets to change the risk for you,” said Dr. Joshua Rabinowitz, a quantitative biologist at Princeton University. Apart from avoiding crowded indoor spaces, the most effective thing people can do is wear masks, all of the experts said. Even if masks don’t fully shield you from droplets loaded with virus, they can cut down the amount you receive, and perhaps bring it below the infectious dose. “This is not a virus for which hand washing seems like it will be enough,” Dr. Rabinowitz said. “We have to limit crowds, we have to wear masks.”WASHINGTON — President Trump said Friday that his administration would “begin the process” of ending the American government’s special relationship with Hong Kong, including on trade and law enforcement, and that he was withdrawing from the World Health Organization, as part of a broad effort to retaliate against China. But the president was unclear about the speed and full scope of the actions, and his remarks left many questions unanswered. Stock markets rose after Mr. Trump’s speech in the White House Rose Garden, suggesting that investors had feared the president would take even more draconian steps against China, the world’s second-largest economy. Mr. Trump voiced a range of grievances against China’s “malfeasance,” angrily denouncing the country’s trade and security practices and its crackdown on civil liberties in Hong Kong, as well as its influence at the W.H.O. As punishment, the president said he would begin stripping away Hong Kong’s privileges with the United States, including an extradition treaty and commercial relations, with few exceptions. He said that Hong Kong would be subject to export controls that prevent China from gaining access to certain types of advanced technology, but he did not specify whether the tariffs that apply to imports from the mainland would be expanded to Hong Kong. “My announcement today will affect the full range of agreements we have with Hong Kong,” the president said, including “action to revoke Hong Kong’s preferential treatment as a separate customs and travel territory from the rest of China.” Mr. Trump’s announcement came largely in response to Beijing’s move this week to put in place broad new national security powers over Hong Kong. On Wednesday, Secretary of State Mike Pompeo announced that he was reporting to Congress a determination that Hong Kong no longer had significant autonomy under Chinese rule. Mr. Pompeo’s finding amounted to a recommendation that the United States should reconsider its special relationship with Hong Kong. The president said the new security law for Hong Kong “extends the reach of China’s invasive state security apparatus into what was formerly a bastion of liberty.” He added that Chinese and Hong Kong officials deemed responsible for the rollback of liberties in the territory would be subject to sanctions. There was no immediate response from officials in Beijing or Hong Kong. Global Times, a state-run Chinese newspaper, said in an unsigned editorial early Saturday that Mr. Trump’s moves would only strengthen China’s position and further unite its people against the United States. “Washington is making a bigger gamble, but America’s economy is not as fat as it once was, and it still coughs from the coronavirus,” the editorial read. “Their extreme tactics amount to nothing more than the slow suicide of a superpower.” Mr. Trump’s decision could have significant implications for Hong Kong and its 7.5 million residents, many of whom have fought to preserve individual liberties and rule of law — both central to the territory’s status as a nexus of global capitalism — in the face of growing pressure from the Chinese Communist Party. Mr. Trump’s actions could further erode international confidence in Hong Kong’s ability to maintain its singular identity and its advantages in serving as a base for Chinese and foreign companies. But several analysts reacted with caution given the many unknowns surrounding what actions, precisely, Mr. Trump would take. “Although there was a lot of fire and brimstone in the president’s remarks, there were few details,” said Scott Kennedy, an expert on China economic policy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. “This could be devastating or of limited consequence depending on how the U.S. proceeds.” American corporate executives and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which represents American businesses in Hong Kong, have cautioned the Trump administration against acting hastily to alter the special relationship, in which the American government gives the territory advantages with regard to tariffs, export controls, visas and law enforcement cooperation that mainland China does not enjoy. A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman said this week that China would take “all necessary countermeasures” against actions by other nations over the Hong Kong issue. China relies on Hong Kong as a first stop for financial and commercial transactions. Many relatives of top party officials do business and own property there, so they are invested in maintaining positive global perceptions of the territory’s status. And many Chinese companies raise capital by listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. Some experts warned that Mr. Trump’s actions might ultimately give Chinese officials a greater opening in their efforts to consolidate control of the territory. “The United States has very few options that would help Hong Kong resist Beijing’s efforts to curtail its autonomy,” said Jessica Chen Weiss, a government professor at Cornell University. A confrontation between the two powers over Hong Kong, she added, “would probably do more to hurt Hong Kong than persuade Beijing to alter course.” Relations between the United States and China are at their worst point in decades. Now, after two years of fights over trade and technology, Hong Kong and the coronavirus pandemic have emerged as new sources of conflict, accelerating the downward spiral of the relationship between the world’s two largest economies. Flanked by top national security and economic officials, Mr. Trump delivered a scathing indictment of Chinese behavior that echoed an emerging line of attack in the president’s re-election campaign, as he seeks to deflect blame for his administration’s failure to stem the pandemic that has killed more than 100,000 Americans. It was unclear from Mr. Trump’s announcement whether he was issuing a formal executive order to entirely end the special relationship with Hong Kong. The administration can take piecemeal actions — for example, imposing the same tariffs on goods from Hong Kong that the United States does on products from mainland China — before completely severing ties. “Export controls, tariff treatment, visas and other measures are all on the table, but the potential impact on China, Hong Kong and U.S. businesses is unclear without more details,” Wendy Cutler, the vice president of the Asia Society Policy Institute, said in an emailed statement. Apart from the Hong Kong issue, Mr. Trump and White House officials announced several actions aimed at punishing China. Among them: blocking entry into the United States for graduate or higher-level students associated with institutions that support “China’s military-civil fusion strategy,” which some American officials say encourages technology theft. The New York Times reported this week that American officials had decided to cancel visas for graduates of Chinese universities with military ties, which would affect thousands of Chinese students, less than 1 percent of the total number from China studying in the United States. The visa ban is the first imposed on a category of Chinese students, who make up by far the largest foreign student population in the United States. The president also said he was directing his advisers to look into a failure to meet accounting standards by Chinese companies that are listed on American stock exchanges. Chinese law limits the access of auditors to financial information in China, and lawmakers of both parties have complained this puts American investors at risk. And Mr. Trump also said he was “terminating” the United States’ “relationship” with the W.H.O., which he portrayed as a puppet of the Chinese Communist Party. The president, who previously halted funding to the organization, repeatedly blamed the organization and China for mishandling the coronavirus outbreak after the pandemic spread to the United States. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Allies of the W.H.O., which gets most of its funding from America, defended the organization and its response to the pandemic, saying it was among the earliest public health voices warning of the danger from the virus. Mr. Trump was joined in the Rose Garden by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo; Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin; the United States trade representative, Robert E. Lighthizer; the national security adviser, Robert C. O’Brien; Peter Navarro, director of trade and manufacturing policy; and the director of the White House’s National Economic Council, Larry Kudlow. Mr. Pompeo had earlier called the new Chinese national security law on Hong Kong a “death knell” for the territory, a global financial and commercial hub that, in theory, has semiautonomy until 2047 under an international treaty that Britain and China signed in 1984. Because of that, an American law passed in 1992 established the special relationship. China’s sometimes violent efforts to crack down on a pro-democracy protest movement in Hong Kong have prompted a debate within the Trump administration and among its allies over how forcefully to respond. National security hawks, including Mr. Pompeo and Mr. O’Brien, say it is essential for the United States to check China’s authoritarianism and defend democratic principles. Economic officials and business groups fear a political confrontation that could upend global markets. Mr. Trump himself has alternated between effusive praise for President Xi Jinping of China and angry broadsides about China’s trade practices and its handling of the initial coronavirus outbreak. In his remarks on Friday, Mr. Trump notably did not mention the Chinese leader by name. “This is a desperate effort by President Trump to distract America from his disastrous management of the coronavirus pandemic and repeated failures to hold the government of China to account when it mattered most,” said Antony Blinken, a former deputy secretary of state and foreign policy adviser to Mr. Trump’s likely Democratic presidential opponent, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. Mr. Blinken charged that Mr. Trump had been “soft on China regarding pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong in hopes of securing a trade deal,” noting that Mr. Trump had previously complimented Mr. Xi’s response to the demonstrations. Some investors had feared that Mr. Trump might announce more extreme actions on Friday, like scrapping his trade deal with China. Tensions over Hong Kong have risked spilling into the broader economic relationship, potentially reigniting a trade dispute that led to steep tariffs, roiling stock markets and disrupting company supply chains for much of the past two years. After a prolonged negotiation, the United States and China ushered in a truce in January with the signing of a Phase 1 trade deal, an agreement that included a commitment by China to buy more American agricultural and other goods. But the pandemic has led China to fall far behind schedule in the $200 billion of additional purchases it promised to make before the end of 2021. Through March, China imported just $19.8 billion of the promised American goods, well below a target of $43.2 billion, according to tracking by Chad Bown, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. Mr. Trump and his advisers have grown increasingly dissatisfied with that arrangement. But they face a difficult choice: stick with the deal and risk looking feckless in an election year, or walk away from a pact they counted as Mr. Trump’s signature achievement with China and risk inflicting more pain on farmers who were expected to benefit from it. For the moment, they are hoping that tougher statements will goad the Chinese into action. Stephen Vaughn, a former trade official who is now a partner at King & Spalding, insisted that China had more to lose. “If China complies with the deal, the president gets the benefit of the deal,” he said. “If China does not comply with the deal, China will face enforcement, and history shows enforcement hurts China more than it hurts the United States.” Alan Rappeport contributed reporting from Washington, and Amy Qin from Taipei, Taiwan.This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic. Read about others here. For years, one of Alberto Rottura’s well-heeled customers habitually paid the same amount for his weekly haircut: $18, without tip (none was necessary, his wife had advised, since Mr. Rottura owned the salon). Finally, the customer volunteered some advice: “Alberto,” he said, “why don’t you raise your rates?” “I did,” Mr. Rottura replied. He had, in fact, been too gentlemanly to tell his loyal customer, whom he considered a friend. Since then, and until 10 weeks ago when Mr. Rottura fell ill, the customer had paid $50 for his haircuts. Mr. Rottura died on May 25 in Manhattan. The cause was complications of Covid-19, his son Gianluca Rottura said. Mr. Rottura and his Solingen scissors attracted a faithful clientele who valued his talent and his generosity, and his discretion even more. He arrived alone from Italy in 1960 as a teenager. He opened his own salon, became an American citizen and traveled with Judy Garland as her personal hairdresser. He returned to the Upper East Side of Manhattan to capture a boldface roster of clients in salons on Sutton Place, Madison Avenue and, most recently, Lexington Avenue, at Liz Hair Stylist. His clientele included the real estate developer Jerry Speyer and his wife, Kathryn Farley, the chairwoman of Lincoln Center; the authors Mary Higgins Clark and Tom Wolfe; and assorted Ferragamos, Fendis and Borgheses. During the 2000s, he cut the hair of New York City’s top two elected officials, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, a customer since the 1970s, and the Public Advocate Betsy Gotbaum. “I gave his children their first haircut,” Mr. Rottura said of Mr. Bloomberg in an interview with The New York Times in 2008. Mr. Rottura steered clear of politics, focusing more on what was on a customer’s head than inside it. “I’m always very careful with what I ask the mayor,” Mr. Rottura said. “But I don’t have a problem telling him a dirty joke.” Alberto Rottura was born on Sept. 4, 1942, in Acquaro, a village of 2,000 people in Calabria. His father, Luigi, made wine and olive oil. His mother, Giovanna, was a homemaker. Alberto began working in a barbershop as a teenager, got through school to the 10th grade and sailed from Naples to New York on the S.S. Constitution when he was 17. He studied hairdressing in London and Paris and returned to New York when he was 23 to open his first salon. He started the restaurant Sistina on Second Avenue (it has since moved to East 81st Street, managed by his nephew Giuseppe Bruno). It was awarded two stars by Bryan Miller of The Times when it opened in 1984. Mr. Rottura cut hair six days a week and worked at the restaurant seven nights. He left Sistina and two years later, in 1997, he established a wine boutique, In Vino Veritas, on First Avenue, which is run by his sons, Gianbruno and Gianluca, who survive him along with his wife, Liliana, two grandchildren, a brother and a sister. Mr. Bloomberg, in a phone interview, hailed him as “the ultimate immigrant.” “Alberto was honest, scrupulous, hardworking, the kind of person we want to come to this country,” Mr. Bloomberg said. “He worked for everything he ever got and gave it all to the next generation."CONWAY, S.C. — The first mention of the coronavirus pandemic was a joke. A master of ceremonies was explaining to a crowd of more than 100 people why the keynote speakers — home-state Senators Lindsey Graham and Tim Scott — were running a bit late. “You have to understand, they haven’t got to do any politicking for a while,” said the M.C., Robert Rabon of the Horry County Republican Party. “They’re like a kid in a candy store — they’re going wild!” And with that passing mention, South Carolina Republicans returned to the normal rhythm of the campaign trail, coronavirus all the same. The outdoor gathering here on Thursday was a send-off event for Cleo Steele, a longtime Republican Party operative in Horry County, who is retiring to Ohio. Speakers shared the same microphone. Local and state political candidates greeted voters with handshakes and squeezed tight for pictures. Of all the people gathered outside the county Republican office — many of them senior citizens — fewer than a dozen wore masks. “Social distancing guidelines are recommended,” the invitation had said. “Hand sanitizer and face masks will be available.” In reality, according to interviews with more than a dozen attendees, the event was an active rejection of behavior that the hyper-conservative crowd has come to associate with liberal enemies in recent months — wearing masks and gloves, staying six feet away from other people, avoiding physical touch. To treat the coronavirus as something to be feared, they said, was a political act incongruous with their values. Dwayne “Duke” Buckner, who is challenging Mr. Graham in the Republican Senate primary next month and came to the event to meet voters, said he had recently stopped adhering to public health guidelines, which he described as overly burdensome. “You can quote me on this,” Mr. Buckner said. “When the good Lord calls you home, a mask ain’t going to stop it.” August Savello, 49, said he followed Dr. Steven Hotze, a Republican activist who has published videos such as “Coronavirus Mass Hysteria,” and preferred to do his own research rather than listening to state and federal public health officials like Dr. Anthony S. Fauci. “A virus is a virus is a virus, and there’s viruses around us all the time,” he said. “My father had it and he’s 79 years old. He said it was like a bad flu.” That the event was held the same week that the pandemic’s death toll in the United States crossed 100,000 reflected the different realities of the virus along political, racial and geographic lines. In densely populated urban centers, more likely to be inhabited by Democrats and racial minorities, high infection rates have completely upended daily life and made social distancing largely nonnegotiable. Here in coastal Horry County, which includes Myrtle Beach and is overwhelmingly Republican, news of relaxed restrictions on social gatherings was treated with relief. State data shows that Horry County has nearly 400 confirmed cases of coronavirus, below the state’s per capita average. Black South Carolinians, meanwhile, have contracted more than half of the state’s total cases, though they make up less than 30 percent of the state’s population. The crowd at the event was almost all white. Michael LaPierre, a right-wing Senate candidate who came to the event with dozens of supporters who pestered Mr. Graham, said he had no reservations about extending handshakes and taking pictures, or as he put it, “pressing flesh and kissing babies.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “We wipe our hands and take precautions,” said Mr. LaPierre, who is 70 and lives with his 99-year-old mother-in-law. “But I spent 28 months in Vietnam and crashed six times in a helicopter. I’m going to die when I’m going to die.” During the program, Ms. Steele, seated in a wheelchair, was presented with commendations from Mr. Graham and Mr. Scott, as well as awards from local and state Republicans. Speakers posed for pictures with the honoree, hugging her close as they applauded her years of service. Aides to Mr. Graham and Mr. Scott wore masks. The senators did not. Behind the outdoor podium, a full-fledged marketplace of pro-Trump merchandise attracted a gaggle of customers. In the center sat a bronze bust of the president, which some rubbed for luck and posed with for pictures. At the program’s conclusion, Mr. Rabon called up more than a dozen state and local candidates, who introduced themselves to the audience, shared a portion of their political platform, and returned to the crowd for meet-and-greets. “Candidates — State House, State Senate, and the House — line up,” Mr. Rabon said. “Don’t take a long time.” He coughed into the microphone, and passed it to the first speaker.FRANKFURT — About eight million people around the world earn their living making cars and trucks. It’s becoming clearer that not all of them will come out of the pandemic with jobs. The French carmaker Renault announced an emergency cost-cutting plan on Friday that is likely to serve as a grim template for an industry that was in deep trouble even before the coronavirus brought sales nearly to a standstill. Renault said it would cut nearly 15,000 jobs worldwide, or about 8 percent of its work force, and pull out of China. The company also vowed a drastic reduction in production as it tries to deal with “the major crisis facing the automotive industry.” Renault has been hit hard by the pandemic. Its sales in the European Union, the company’s most important market, fell almost 80 percent in April, when dealerships were closed and most buyers were not leaving their homes. “It’s not just Renault,” said Peter Wells, director of the Center for Automotive Industry Research at Cardiff University in Wales. “There are too many factories, too many models, too many dealers. A crisis like this is ruthless in exposing the vulnerabilities of these companies.” Nissan, Renault’s partner in a global automaking alliance, said Thursday that it would close factories in Indonesia and Spain as it reduces the number of cars it produces by a fifth. The announcement came after Nissan reported a loss for the fiscal year ending in March of 671 billion yen, or $6.3 billion. Volvo Cars said last month that it would cut 1,300 white-collar jobs in Sweden, its base. Other carmakers, such as Fiat Chrysler and PSA, which makes Peugeot, Citroën and Opel vehicles, will be under pressure to make similar cuts. American carmakers cut thousands of jobs last year and have not announced new rounds of layoffs caused by the pandemic. Recently they have been gearing up production after factories were closed to prevent spread of the coronavirus. Starting Monday, General Motors plans to have three sport-utility vehicle plants running two shifts per day instead of one, while three truck plants will go from two shifts to three. The increase is a response to reports from dealers that supplies of certain models are running thin. Toyota, Honda, BMW and other foreign automakers have also restarted plants in the United States. Both G.M. and Fiat Chrysler have begun restarting production in Mexico this week. While plants are again producing vehicles, automakers have not yet eased back on some of the cost-cutting measures they put in place when the virus began spreading rapidly in March. Those include executive pay cuts and suspension of shareholder dividends. But with demand unlikely to recover to pre-pandemic levels for years, even the American automakers will not be able to avoid further painful cuts, Mr. Wells said. Automaker job cuts reverberate far beyond the companies, afflicting other businesses like parts makers, dealers, car insurance providers, repair shops, and pubs and sandwich shops situated outside factory gates. Because of the massive economic fallout, plant closures face stiff resistance from labor unions and political leaders. The unrest has already begun to manifest itself in Europe. In Barcelona, some of the 3,000 workers who will lose their jobs at the Nissan facility burned tires outside the factory and marched in protest. Workers at a Renault plant in Maubeuge, in northern France, walked out immediately after the job cuts were announced on Friday morning. The automaker is considering merging the plant in Maubeuge, where over 2,000 people work, with a nearby plant in Douai to produce electric cars and light commercial vehicles. Renault said it would also make cuts in marketing and research and development, and halt expansion of factories in Romania and Morocco. Fabien Gâche, a representative of the hard-line C.G.T. union at Renault, said Friday that the carmaker was cutting jobs but had no “firm, resolute strategy.” “It is a continuation of what we have seen at Renault for about 15 years, unfortunately,” Mr. Gâche said at a news conference. Labor strife adds to the upfront costs of corporate austerity and reduces the overall savings. Renault said it would spend 1.2 billion euros, or $1.3 billion, on severance pay and other expenses related to the plan announced Friday. Automakers are in a delicate situation because they are asking for government aid even as they put thousands of people out of work. Renault’s announcement of job cuts came only three days after the French government pledged €8 billion to encourage sales of electric cars and help carmakers develop new digital technologies. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The French government owns 15 percent of Renault, and it is unlikely that the company formulated the cost-cutting plan without consulting political leaders. French President Emmanuel Macron said nothing about the Renault plan Friday. His office declined to comment. About a third of the job cuts would be in France, Renault said. The company, with about 180,000 employees worldwide, will reduce the number of cars it produces annually to 3.3 million, from four million, an acknowledgment that the auto industry has too much idle factory space to meet consumer demand for its vehicles. The economic crisis caused by the pandemic has prompted carmakers to focus on the markets where they are strongest. But they may also be cutting themselves off from growth. Renault said Friday that it would pull out of China, selling its share in a joint venture with Dongfeng Motor. Nissan said this week that it would pare back its presence in Europe and concentrate on Japan, China and the United States as part of a plan to more clearly delineate the division of labor in the Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi alliance. Renault brand cars were never very popular in China. But China is also one of the few places with potential for substantial growth. Rates of car ownership are still low in China compared to the United States and Europe, where sales have been essentially stagnant for years. Ford, G.M. and Fiat Chrysler have all reported steady recoveries in China, where the virus outbreak originated. “I think that China market came back relatively quicker than people had expected,” Mike Manley, Fiat Chrysler’s chief executive, said in a conference call this month. But he predicted a more uneven recovery in Europe, especially in hard-hit countries like Italy, the strongest market for Fiat brand cars. Neal E. Boudette contributed reporting from Ann Arbor, Mich., and Aurelien Breeden from Paris.As countries begin rolling out plans to restart their economies after the brutal shock inflicted by the coronavirus pandemic, the three biggest producers of planet-warming gases — the European Union, the United States and China — are writing scripts that push humanity in very different directions. Europe this week laid out a vision of a green future, with a proposed recovery package worth more than $800 billion that would transition away from fossil fuels and put people to work making old buildings energy-efficient. In the United States, the White House is steadily slashing environmental protections and Republicans are using the Green New Deal as a political cudgel against their opponents. China has given a green light to build new coal plants but it also declined to set specific economic growth targets for this year, a move that came as a relief to environmentalists because it reduces the pressure to turn up the country’s industrial machine quickly. What course these giant economies set is crucial if the world is to have a fighting chance to head off the blistering heat, droughts and wildfires that are the hallmarks of a fast-warming planet. Just as their recovery plans are taking shape, though, the political pressure on world leaders switched off: On Thursday, the United Nations announced that the next round of global climate talks, which had been slated for Glasgow in November, would be delayed. That meeting is now scheduled for November 2021, more than a year and a half away. The delay comes at a time when the scientific consensus says the world has very little time left to avert climate catastrophes. The Glasgow talks are the most important climate meeting since the Paris Agreement was adopted in 2015, after 20 years of negotiations. Under the Paris pact, which was largely designed to work through peer pressure among nations at annual meetings, world leaders were expected to announce revised targets this year for reducing emissions. That peer pressure is now suspended for a year. Advocates for climate action urged national leaders to not squander the time. “If the necessary climate action can be embedded in recovery efforts then this year will have been a year when we pivoted for good,” said Rachel Kyte, a former United Nations climate official and now the dean of the Fletcher School at Tufts University. “If we are distracted from climate action and fumble in the recovery, then we will have pivoted to an even darker road.” Not only has the Glasgow meeting been postponed, global protests demanding climate action have come to an abrupt halt and the pandemic has reinforced the impulse of nationalist leaders to reject international cooperation. “It’s now vital that countries make use of this extra time and ensure their economic recovery plans are climate smart and do not prop up fossil fuel companies,” said Mohamed Adow of Power Shift Africa, an advocacy group based in Nairobi. “It would be shameful if rich countries recharge their economies on the backs of the climate vulnerable.” The virus-induced lockdowns around the world have resulted in a sharp drop in greenhouse gas emissions in recent months, but the decline was nowhere near enough to shake loose the thick blanket of gases that already wraps the planet. More important, greenhouse gas emissions are expected to go back up as countries reopen, especially if their recovery packages don’t pivot away from fossil fuels. “It will be a very, very challenging way forward in terms of international climate momentum,” said Li Shuo, a Beijing-based policy adviser for Greenpeace. “Covid-19 should be interpreted as a very negative factor for international climate cooperation.” A great deal of “horse trading,” Mr. Li added, is now taking place among Chinese officials. The country’s recovery package, estimated in the range of $800 billion, has been formally proposed but much remains unclear about how it will be spent. In addition to suspending growth targets for this year, the government in Beijing is giving its blessing to new coal plants, and signaled that environmental impact reviews could be relaxed. “A lot is still in the air,” Mr. Li said, though he noted that China’s leaders tend to prioritize economic and social stability in the near term. A lot remains in the air in the United States, too. The Trump Administration, which is pulling the United States out of the Paris accord, has used the coronavirus pandemic to relax an array of environmental rules. Embattled Republicans and their allies have been testing the argument that climate friendly policies would kill jobs and crush an already ailing economy, though there is no evidence to support those claims. And, while the early United States aid packages have resisted calls to boost renewable energy, and fossil fuel companies have dipped into the relief money, the next rounds of government stimulus are still in play. The biggest unknown is the presidential election: The presumptive Democratic candidate, Joseph R. Biden Jr., has pledged to rejoin the Paris Agreement, vowing that the United States would “take a back seat to no one when it comes to fighting climate change.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The European Union faces its own uncertainties. The bloc’s executive branch, which has already proposed to reduce emissions to net zero by 2050, still has to sell the package to 27 national leaders who don’t always agree on the speed of a green transition. The proposal, made public Wednesday, was praised by environmentalists for pushing for measures that would also create new jobs, like the plan to retrofit old buildings and encourage the production of no-carbon fuels, like hydrogen. Governments are under considerable pressure to aim for what is called a green recovery. A survey of central bankers and finance ministers found broad support around the idea that the most effective economic recovery measures would also reduce emissions, including clean energy infrastructure. “The recovery packages can either kill these two birds with one stone — setting the global economy on a pathway toward net-zero emissions — or lock us into a fossil system from which it will be nearly impossible to escape,” the authors wrote. In the United States, a group of corporate executives called on Congress in mid-May to bake in long-term climate solutions in future recovery packages. In a report published earlier this week, the consultancy firm McKinsey & Co. concluded that “a low-carbon recovery could not only initiate the significant emissions reductions needed to halt climate change but also create more jobs and economic growth than a high-carbon recovery would.” And hundreds of groups representing health professionals urged the leaders of the world’s 20 largest economies to turn away from fossil fuel subsidies. “A truly healthy recovery will not allow pollution to continue to cloud the air we breathe and the water we drink,” their letter read. “It will not permit unabated climate change and deforestation, potentially unleashing new health threats upon vulnerable populations.”Quarantine life has left us yearning for human connection, so it’s no surprise that exes have turned to texts as a means of reconnecting. Some in hopes of reconciliation, others to stave off boredom. In this week’s Modern Love essay, the writer Max McDonough finds himself baffled yet intrigued by the onslaught of text messages from former partners since the start of the pandemic. A few weeks ago we asked our readers who were isolating alone to tell us how they were coping while quarantined. Now, we want to hear from people who are isolating together. Whether you’re spending your time tackling home improvement projects together (like Adrienne Bailon-Houghton and her husband) or starting to notice your partner’s annoying food habits, we want to hear about how the relationship with the person or people you are living with has changed. [Like this newsletter? Sign up here to receive it in your inbox!] And, finally, when stay-at-home orders threatened to upend their plans of a hotel wedding in Austin, Texas, two brides, Lindsey Leaverton and Bri Houk, quickly shifted plans and organized a socially distanced celebration — in just 17 days — at the Doc’s Drive-In Theatre in Buda, Texas. Their friends and family, clad in pajamas at the request of the couple, watched on the big screens from the comfort of their cars. Who doesn’t love a happy ending? Stay safe and watch out for those exes. We want to deliver content that truly matters to you and your feedback is helpful. Email your thoughts to loveletter@nytimes.com. Also, here’s how to submit a Modern Love essay or how to be featured in an Unhitched column. Don’t feel like writing more than a tweet, an Instagram caption or a Facebook post? Consider submitting to Tiny Love Stories, which are no more than 100 words. Getting married? Here’s how to submit a wedding announcement.WASHINGTON — Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, said central bankers had seen the need to use their tools “to their fullest extent” as coronavirus lockdowns shuttered economies around the globe and caused United States unemployment to soar. “We felt called to do what we could,” Mr. Powell said Friday during a Princeton University webinar. “We crossed a lot of red lines, that had not been crossed before,” he said. He added that he was comfortable with what the Fed had done given “this is that situation in which you do that, and you figure it out afterward.” The Fed has taken a variety of actions to support the economy: cutting interest rates to near-zero, rolling out unlimited bond purchases to soothe markets and initiating emergency lending programs to keep credit flowing to businesses and state governments. Several of those efforts tiptoe into untested territory for the central bank, including programs that lend to medium-sized businesses, buy corporate bonds and purchase debt from states and large cities. “We work very hard to explain ourselves to the general public,” Mr. Powell said, explaining that the Fed is disclosing information on its lending efforts, and discussing them regularly with lawmakers. The programs come at a time of dire need. Economists are bracing for a deep plunge in economic output in the second quarter, which runs from April through June, and most predict only a gradual recovery over the remainder of the year. It could be months or years before output returns to its pre-crisis level, and the unemployment rate falls to the 50-year lows that prevailed before the coronavirus lockdowns precipitated a wave of layoffs. More than 40 million people, about one of every four American workers, have filed for unemployment benefits since mid-March, based on data released this week. A report next Friday is expected to show that the unemployment rate jumped to 19.5 percent in May, based on the median estimate in a Bloomberg survey of economists. Mr. Powell noted that the “burdens” of job loss are falling on those least able to bear them, in lower-paid service work, exacerbating economic inequalities. “Those are the people being laid off, who have the least financial resources,” Mr. Powell said. “It’s falling on women to an extraordinary degree,” and “there’s tremendous inequality” in how the pandemic is affecting the population. He also voiced concern that if a second round of virus infections hits America, it could lead to a more delayed economic rebound. “A second wave would really undermine public confidence, and might make for a significantly longer recovery, and weaker recovery,” he said, after explaining that “a full recovery of the economy will really depend on people being confident that it’s safe to go out.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. While Mr. Powell stressed the Fed’s willingness to act when it comes to emergency lending, he reiterated that the central bank is not looking to cut interest rates into negative territory, something central banks abroad have done in an effort to stimulate their economies. “Central bankers and economists have been working on the problem of, what can central bankers do when they hit zero,” Mr. Powell said. “The evidence on whether it actually helps is pretty ambiguous,” he said. “You’re crushing down on bank margins, and that makes them lend less.”  He said that Fed policies that worked during the financial crisis — holding rates near-zero and buy longer-term government-backed bonds to lower interest rates — are in the “toolbox” again.It was the end of March, and Josh Fiske, a urologist from Livingston, N.J., was in the hospital fighting an uphill battle against the coronavirus. Just a week earlier, he had easily jogged a five-mile route around his neighborhood. But his body was failing him now. His oxygen levels dipped dangerously low, and his fever rocketed to a worrying 104 degrees. Shifting his body in bed exhausted him. Walking a few steps felt like “hiking in thin air.” Opening a bottle of iced tea was “a huge task.” Fiske kept fighting, though, and eventually, with the help of his doctors, he turned a corner. Yet even as he did, even as he seemed assured of avoiding the worst outcomes of the virus, a different sort of anxiety consumed him. “I started to think, ‘Am I going to be able to run again? Am I going to be able to walk the golf course?’” said Fiske, 46, who does a marathon or half-marathon every year. “These are things I love to do.” The coronavirus has infected millions of people around the world. Athletes tend to view themselves as perhaps better equipped than the general population to avoid the worst consequences of the disease the virus causes, Covid-19. Yet interviews with athletes who have contracted the virus — from professionals to college athletes to weekend hobbyists — revealed their surprise at the potency of its symptoms, struggles to reestablish workout regimens, lingering battles with lung issues and muscle weakness, and unsettling bouts of anxiety about whether they would be able to match their physical peaks. And with sports leagues around the world scrambling to restart play, more athletes could soon be taking on a significant amount of risk. “It definitely shook me up a bit — it was very surreal, you know?” Von Miller, a linebacker for the Denver Broncos who contracted the virus, said in an interview. “My biggest takeaway from this experience is that no matter how great of shape you are in physically, no matter what your age is, that you’re not immune from things like this.” Miller, who has had asthma his whole life, said he was left shaken up by shortness of breath and coughing when he tried to sleep. He said he felt himself “fatiguing faster” when he first tried working out again in his home gym, but that now he was training “full-on” again. Experts warn that the virus does not discriminate. That was the lesson Andrew Boselli, an offensive lineman at Florida State, learned as members of his family — including his father, Tony, 47, a former N.F.L. lineman — began showing symptoms in March. “I knew I was young and healthy,” said Boselli, 22, who moved home to Jacksonville, Fla., after the university closed its doors. “I play Division 1 football, and I’ve been training my butt off all winter and spring. I thought I had no worries. I wasn’t going to get it.” That bullish attitude faded days later, when he awoke feeling sluggish and short of breath. That night, his body temperature climbed to 104. “It was the sickest I’ve ever felt,” said Boselli, who continued to feel shortness of breath and fatigue for about week and a half. In Italy, Paulo Dybala, an Argentine player with Juventus, described his own unnerving experience dealing with respiratory symptoms. “I would try to train and was short of breath after five or 10 minutes,” Dybala said in an interview with the Argentine Football Association, “and we realized something was not right.” Panagis Galiatsatos, a pulmonary physician and assistant professor at Johns Hopkins, said that, like much about the disease, the long-term consequences for athletes who contract it are not fully understood. Athletes, though, represent interesting case studies for doctors, given their generally good baseline health and nuanced awareness of their own bodies. “Patients who are athletes, I love them, because they will pick up subtle changes sometimes way before even the tests identify a disease,” Galiatsatos said. Galiatsatos singled out three complications from Covid-19 that could be of particular concern to athletes. First, coronavirus patients, like anyone with a serious respiratory infection, were at risk for long-term lung issues. He often saw patients “who three months ago had a bad virus and still can’t get their breathing back to normal.” “Sometimes a bad virus creates an airway disease similar to an asthma,” he said. “They can ravage the lungs, where the lungs were rebuilt, but not well, and patients are stuck with an asthmalike reactive airway disease situation.” Another complication that Galiatsatos considered particularly concerning to athletes, and one that experts were still trying to wrap their heads around, was the high incidence of blood clots that doctors were seeing in coronavirus patients. People diagnosed with blood clots, and prescribed blood thinners, are typically discouraged from participating in contact sports. Finally, Galiatsatos said people unfortunate enough to be placed in intensive care could deal with “I.C.U. acquired weakness.” Patients placed on ventilators and confined to a bed often lost between 2 and 10 percent of their muscle mass per day, he said. Ben O’Donnell, a triathlete who lives in Anoka County, Minn., lost 45 pounds during a four-week hospital stay during which he was placed on a ventilator and a short-term  life support machine. O’Donnell, 38, a former college football player who completed an Ironman race a couple of years ago and was planning on doing another this fall, said he was pulled back from the brink of death after struggling with dangerously low levels of oxygen and kidney and liver failure in the intensive care unit. In mid-February, in anticipation of ramping up his training, O’Donnell had completed a two-day, comprehensive physical exam and received a clean bill of health. Doctors believe he contracted the virus five days later. Back at home after his harrowing month in the hospital, O’Donnell has set his sights on competing in an Ironman race in Arizona this fall. He acknowledged it was a lofty goal. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “They’re not sure if I’ll ever get full lung capacity back,” he said. “I may or may not.” Had he not contracted the virus, O’Donnell, an executive at a chemical company, would be doing three runs, three swims and three bicycle workouts per week at this point in his training cycle. But the virus derailed his life plans. After returning home, he needed a walker just to go out to the mailbox at the end of the driveway. In his first attempt to exercise, two days after he left the hospital, he walked for seven minutes at a speed of 1.2 miles per hour using supplemental oxygen. He has been trying to add a minute of time, and a bit of speed, each day. O’Donnell said he was struggling with “a fair amount of doubt” about his ability to get back in shape for the race. But he has motivated himself with the secondary goal of raising money for coronavirus relief, and he has been repeating the same mantra ever since he was struggling in his hospital bed: “Don’t stop. Don’t quit. Keep moving forward.” This mentality has helped other athletes who have been hit with serious symptoms. The 29 days Tsang Yee-ting spent in the hospital were the most she had been away from a karate mat since being introduced to the sport at age 6. A member of the Hong Kong national team, Tsang, 27, contracted the coronavirus in March while preparing to qualify for the Summer Olympics. For the next month, she battled a range of symptoms, the worst a searing pain that engulfed the lower half of her body. Walking was a struggle. Lying down offered no relief. As she fought a virus that doctors were still learning about, “all sorts of thoughts” about her body and about her future spiraled through her mind, she said. “Of course I was worried,” Tsang said. “Karate is my life.” But even as the virus and isolation from her family levied an “emotional toll” on her, Tsang resolved to stay as active as possible to keep herself sane. She acquired elastic bands and, on days when her body felt strong enough, completed mini-workouts in the tight confines of her hospital room. “Battling the virus was like training for a competition,” said Tsang, who said she now felt normal again and has been training with her teammates over video. Fiske, the urologist, has been working, very slowly, to get back into shape after his weeklong I.C.U. stay in March. Fiske said he found himself relying on the same mental calisthenics he might have used to get through a punishing long-distance run — “when you’re having a tough time, and you decide to do another mile or two to see if you can break through it” — to stave off negative thoughts about his recovery. Since returning home, his focus has been on regaining lung strength. He could not walk up the stairs without becoming “totally gassed.” He could not hold a conversation. But it pained him to think that he might not be able to run, to golf or to exercise with his two teenage sons. So he has persisted with breathing exercises and laboring jogs through his neighborhood. Recently, he was able to finish his old five-mile route — albeit at a different pace. “They’re slow,” he said of the miles. “But they’re there.”Regístrate para recibir nuestro boletín con lo mejor de The New York Times. La llamaron la Crisis de 2020: una calamidad no especificada que “podría rivalizar con las pruebas más graves que nuestros antepasados conocieron” y serviría como “la próxima gran bisagra de la historia”. Podía ser una catástrofe ambiental, una amenaza nuclear o “alguna falla catastrófica en la economía mundial”. Eso fue en 1991. Los académicos responsables fueron William Strauss y Neil Howe, cuyo libro Generations presentó una provocadora teoría de que la historia estadounidense se desarrolla en ciclos de auge y caída de aproximadamente 80 años. Sus conclusiones sobre la forma en que cada generación desarrolla sus propias características y cualidades de liderazgo influyeron en una amplia gama de líderes políticos, desde liberales como Bill Clinton y Al Gore hasta conservadores pro-Trump como Newt Gingrich y Stephen K. Bannon. Parece que sabían algo. ¿Y ahora qué? Strauss murió en 2007, por lo que no puede observar cuán inquietantemente correcta fue “la crisis de 2020” ni ofrecer ninguna idea sobre cómo Estados Unidos saldrá después de atravesar la pandemia del coronavirus. Pero Howe, quien ahora presenta un pódcast y analiza tendencias demográficas para una firma de asesoría de inversiones, aún está en el negocio del conocimiento. Y lo que prevé —un realineamiento generacional en la política estadounidense acelerado por el fracaso de la generación de los baby boomers para sacar a la nación de su atolladero— no presagia nada bueno para el presidente Donald Trump o los republicanos. Durante la mayor parte de los últimos 75 años, la actitud republicana sobre el gobierno se basó en un profundo escepticismo respecto a la autoridad que dice, en esencia: para el éxito no se necesita de una aldea; se necesita de un individuo decidido cuyo gobierno no se interponga en el camino. Pero esa creencia, dijo Howe, “es excepcionalmente inadecuada para la crisis actual”. Hace casi 30 años, cuando predijo por primera vez un evento como el coronavirus, Howe dijo que el año 2020 no era un pronóstico como para marcar el día del fin del mundo en un calendario, sino un número redondo que se ajusta a la naturaleza cíclica de su teoría: es aproximadamente 80 años después de las grandes crisis de la Segunda Guerra Mundial y la Gran Depresión. Más perspicaz que la fecha en sí fue la afirmación de que los patrones históricos apuntaban a la llegada de una crisis generacional definitoria que obligaría a los milénials a enfrentar una situación complicada a inicios de su edad adulta. (Strauss y Howe fueron los primeros en aplicar ese término a los nacidos a principios de la década de 1980, porque alcanzarían la mayoría de edad alrededor del año 2000). Más que una novedad, su teoría ayuda a explicar por qué algunas de las voces más prominentes de izquierda, centro y derecha que piden una reforma política en Estados Unidos han sido jóvenes: la representante Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, de 30 años; Pete Buttigieg, de 38 años; Josh Hawley, senador de Missouri, de 40 años. Mientras los baby boomers envejecen y se retiran del servicio público, dice la teoría, arreglar los problemas creados por la pandemia le corresponderá a esta generación más joven y cívicamente orientada. Howe, quien a los 68 es miembro del grupo del cual es crítico, dijo en una entrevista que no fue una coincidencia que el presidente boomer y muchos de su generación —en especial los más conservadores— en general hayan tomado una actitud más laxa hacia el coronavirus que las personas más jóvenes. Las encuestas han encontrado que los estadounidenses más jóvenes favorecen abrumadoramente un enfoque cauteloso para volver a la normalidad, y están más preocupados sobre el virus. Esto incluye a muchos jóvenes republicanos, de entre 18 y 49 años, que son mucho más propensos que los republicanos de 50 años o más a opinar que lo peor del brote aún está por llegar, según una encuesta de abril del Pew Research Center. “Este es realmente el problema con la Generación X y los baby boomers”, dijo Howe. “Ellos han defendido este tipo de individualismo. Han defendido pensar menos en la comunidad”. Por otro lado, los conservadores podrían argumentar que son los mejor preparados para enfrentar un momento que a veces se siente como el apocalipsis a la vuelta de la esquina. Las noticias por cable, las conversaciones en la radio y los sitios web de derecha han estado hace mucho llenos de anuncios de productos destinados a sustentar a las personas durante una catástrofe: inversiones en metales preciosos, generadores domésticos y suministros para conservar su propia comida. Pero la tranquilidad que ofrecen estos productos se trata, en última instancia, de cuidarse a sí mismo, el tipo de conservadurismo de “yo primero” que se desarrolló a partir del auge de Estados Unidos después de la Segunda Guerra Mundial. La crítica de Howe a los conservadores de hoy es compartida por un número creciente de republicanos más jóvenes. Rachel Bovard, directora sénior de políticas del Conservative Partnership Institute, dijo que muchos de su generación quieren ver un gobierno intervencionista en áreas de la política como el comercio y las finanzas. “Creo que no se lo ha cuestionado por mucho tiempo y se ha convertido en una especie de teología nacional: la empresa privada es buena. Punto final”, dijo Bovard, de 36 años. “Valoro mi libertad, ya sea la libertad de un gobierno tiránico o de una corporación tiránica”. Después de Generations, Howe y Strauss siguieron con The Fourth Turning, que ahondó sobre la inminente calamidad. Pero más allá de la predicción de desastres, la base de su trabajo es que los estadounidenses tienden a desarrollar ciertos rasgos que son bastante consistentes en toda su generación. En el prefacio de Generations hace casi 30 años, hicieron un guiño a la desesperación que los boomers a veces sentían sobre el carácter de sus pares. “Puede que sientas algo de decepción”, dijeron, “sobre los Dan Quayle y Donald Trump que han estado entre los primeros de tus contemporáneos en escalar la pirámide de la vida”. Howe admite la decepción que siente respecto al sitio que ocupa Trump en la pirámide de la vida: “Creo que hasta ahora”, dijo, “es justo decir que Trump no ha crecido en su papel”. Una de las ventajas de las crisis que están en el centro de estas teorías es la innovación que tienden a producir: un programa económico y social como el New Deal, un descubrimiento para la salud pública como la vacuna contra la poliomielitis. Pero, hasta ahora, el gobierno de Trump ha sido incapaz o no ha querido pensar en grande sobre los problemas en cuestión, dicen los críticos. “La noticia verdaderamente mala es que estamos bajo el control de una administración que lo ve a todo como mercadotecnia, propaganda, marcas”, dijo David Kaiser, ex profesor del Naval War College e historiador que es fanático de las teorías de Strauss y Howe. “Y no creo que sea realmente capaz de pensar en un problema y actuar en consecuencia”. El escepticismo de que grandes y audaces soluciones vendrán del gobierno Trump es compartido incluso por Bannon, un fiel defensor del presidente desde que fue retirado de su papel como estratega jefe de la Casa Blanca en agosto de 2017. En una entrevista, Bannon dijo que el gobierno nunca se tomó en serio la posibilidad de que ocurriera una catástrofe como el coronavirus, lo que ha llevado a una falta de imaginación al lidiar con el problema. “Tuviste un llamado de atención al comienzo de esta administración, y nadie le prestó atención”, dijo. Bannon fue un promotor de la teoría de las crisis en The Fourth Turning cuando aún estaba en la Casa Blanca. “Tanta gente se burló de mí y me ridiculizó. Dijeron: ‘No puedes creer en estas cosas. Te hace ver como un loco de remate’”, dijo. Los que dudaban incluían al presidente, quien le dijo a Bannon que la teoría era demasiado sombría para él. “Él dijo: ‘Soy un optimista’. Yo dije: ‘Soy un realista. Y esta es la realidad’”, recordó Bannon. Bannon dijo que en lugar de idear nuevos programas para los millones de personas que tal vez nunca recuperen sus viejos empleos, la Casa Blanca y sus aliados conservadores estaban recurriendo al tipo de políticas de estímulo que se supone que detestan. ¿Dónde estaban todos los empresarios conservadores que insistieron en que el gobierno salga de su camino?, preguntó Bannon. “Los vi a todos, una vez más, ir corriendo al gobierno para pedir rescates”, dijo. Al escribir en 1997 The Fourth Turning, Howe y Strauss advirtieron que, después de la crisis de 2020, el partido que estuviera en el poder en esa fecha “podría encontrarse fuera del poder por una generación”, similar a lo que pasó con los demócratas de 1860 y los republicanos de 1929. No todos ven un final sombrío para Trump y los republicanos en esta crisis. Dick Morris, un ex asistente de Clinton que desde entonces se ha convertido en un crítico conservador de los demócratas, dijo que creía que la teoría de Strauss y Howe ayudó a explicar cómo Trump ganó en 2016, y cómo podría hacerlo nuevamente este año. Si la victoria de Trump fue una rebelión de los votantes de la clase trabajadora que sentían que los líderes del país les habían fallado, dijo Morris, su reelección “dependerá de quién va a reconstruir la economía una vez que todo esto haya terminado, lo cual es también la fuerza de Trump”. Morris, fanático de Strauss y Howe, recordó que cuando trabajó para Clinton durante la campaña presidencial de 1992, el ex presidente le dijo que leer Generaciones lo influyó para escoger a Al Gore como su compañero de fórmula, debido a su cercanía en edad y temperamento político. Tres de los cuatro últimos presidentes son boomers: Clinton, George W. Bush y Trump, todos nacidos en 1946. El probable nominado demócrata este año, Joe Biden, tiene 77 años y es parte de la más vieja “Generación Silenciosa”. Si la pandemia no acaba con el control de la generación boomer en el gobierno estadounidense, algunos esperan que termine con la marca de conservadurismo que ha prosperado durante su tiempo en el poder. “¿Dónde está mi copia de Atlas Shrugged?”, preguntó Bannon, refiriéndose a la novela de Ayn Rand que los conservadores a menudo citan por su heróica representación del individualismo y la autodeterminación. “Está en la trituradora”. Jeremy W. Peters cubre política nacional en el buró de Washington. En la década que tiene trabajando para The New York Times ha cubierto los mercados financieros, los medios, la política en Nueva York y dos campañas presidenciales. @jwpetersNYT • FacebookTOKYO — As the world tries to get a handle on the coronavirus and emerge from paralyzing lockdowns, public health officials have repeated a mantra: “test, test, test.” But Japan went its own way, limiting tests to only the most severe cases as other countries raced to screen as many people as possible. Medical experts worried that the approach would blind the country to the spread of infection, allowing cases to explode and swamping hospitals. It hasn’t happened. Japan — the grayest country in the world and a popular tourist destination with large, crowded cities — has one of the lowest mortality rates from Covid-19 among major nations. The medical system has not been overwhelmed. And the government never forced businesses to close, although many chose to. This week, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe declared Japan’s battle against the outbreak a resounding success, taking the country off an emergency footing — a sort of “lockdown lite” that lasted only a month and a half. “By doing things in a uniquely Japanese way, we were able to almost completely end this wave of infection,” Mr. Abe said, adding that what he called the “Japan model” offered a path out of the global pandemic. It’s still unclear, though, exactly what accounts for Japan’s achievement and whether other countries can take lessons from its approach. Critics say Japan has undercounted coronavirus deaths. And some warn that further waves of infection could undermine the government’s self-congratulatory pronouncements. Instead of testing widely to understand and limit the virus’s spread through the general population, Japan has focused on quickly containing small outbreaks through contact tracing. Instead of dictating strict constraints on daily life, it has focused on educating people about measures like social distancing and gently prodding them to follow along. Theories for the country’s relatively low mortality rate run the gamut from cultural attributes — widespread mask wearing, a practice of regular hand washing, a near absence of physical greetings like hugs and handshakes — to just plain luck. A combination of many other factors, including government measures and changes in behavior among a public that feels strong pressure to follow the rules, could also be at work. Individual actions “may seem small or mundane,” said Keiji Fukuda, an epidemiologist who directs the School of Public Health at the University of Hong Kong. But, he added, “the cumulative impact of all of those efforts across the entire country to really implement some kind of distancing” may have been substantial. Whatever the formula, Japan has so far succeeded in keeping deaths low. The country has recorded fewer than 900 deaths even as the United States and European countries have reported tens of thousands. Epidemiologists say widespread testing for the virus is important because it allows officials to isolate those who test positive, and to track trends in infection rates to help determine when it is safe to reopen schools, businesses and other places where people congregate. Researchers at Harvard have said the goal should be to test nearly everyone who has at least mild flulike symptoms, as well as an average of 10 contacts for each person who tests positive. Countries like South Korea and China that faced fast-growing outbreaks early in the pandemic quickly ramped up testing.  China performed more than three times as many tests in Wuhan in a single day than those Japan has conducted nationwide since Feb. 18 — about 455,000 tests on around 278,000 people. Japan initially told people who suspected they were infected with the virus not to seek help unless they had experienced a fever for four days, or two days if they were over 65. Even some people with seemingly severe symptoms were refused, provoking theories that the government was trying to hide the true extent of the problem. Medical experts said the guideline was intended to conserve hospital resources. A national law on infectious diseases mandated that anyone who tested positive, even those who were asymptomatic, had to be placed in one of the country’s few isolation wards, creating a strong disincentive for doctors to test patients with milder symptoms. The Japanese government also said early on that test kits must be rationed because they were in short supply. That argument has since faded, however, as Japan has never used even half of its testing capacity on any given day, and it has increased its testing capacity to just over 24,000 a day. Japan has since eased its rules to allow those who test positive but are asymptomatic to stay in hotels. It is preparing to begin limited testing for antibodies, hoping to get a better grasp of the number of people who have been infected. It also plans to introduce a smartphone app to help with contact tracing. Despite the constrained testing for the virus, the rate of positive results has dropped below 1 percent, a fact that the government’s expert panel on the virus says demonstrates that current testing levels are sufficient. But a group of prominent Japanese academics, businesspeople and other figures has called on the government to take a much bolder step: build a capacity of 10 million tests a day and offer testing to anyone who wants it. Consecutive negative results, the group argues, could allow people to fully resume social and economic activities. As the country has seemingly defied the odds, many public health experts, including some in the government, have warned against drawing any definite conclusions from Japan’s experience. They caution that Japan is not in the clear yet, and that a second or third wave of infections could strike at any time. As more data on deaths from this year becomes available — there are indications that Tokyo has undercounted dozens of coronavirus deaths — the picture may not look quite as good. Some say Japan may have a large hidden population of asymptomatic cases. Shigeru Omi, the deputy head of the government’s expert panel on the coronavirus, told lawmakers that the real number of infections could be as much as 10 or 20 times as high as currently believed. Japan has reported fewer than 17,000 cases, versus more than 1.7 million in the United States. Norio Sugaya, an infectious diseases expert at Keiyu Hospital in Yokohama, noted that Japan’s mortality rate, while vastly lower than those in hard-hit countries like Spain or Britain, is one of the worst in Asia. In February, an outbreak of the virus aboard the cruise ship Diamond Princess left officials scrambling. The response was widely seen as a disaster, but health experts turned it into a learning opportunity. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Epidemiologists and public health experts used the data from the ship to help develop a framework for stopping the virus’s spread in Japan. The approach emphasized reducing people’s exposure to the conditions that led the pathogen to spread on the ship. A public education campaign urged people to avoid the “Three C’s” — closed spaces with poor ventilation, crowded places and close contact. On TV talk shows, hosts took a “no question is too stupid” approach to talking about the virus, assuaging viewers’ anxiety and stressing the basic science of prevention: wash your hands, wear a mask, keep your distance from others. At the same time, community health centers raced to investigate clusters using a monitoring system that had been developed to trace cases of influenza and tuberculosis.  Another key factor may have been Mr. Abe’s decision to close schools in late February, well before almost any other country. The decision was hugely unpopular, but it appears to have provoked an almost instantaneous change in behavior, according to polling conducted by researchers at Hiroshima University. The day after the announcement, the percentage of people who were avoiding crowded places nearly doubled, rising to almost 60 percent. By mid-March, it was over 75, the study found. In April, as cases began to spike, Mr. Abe declared a state of emergency. Businesses were requested to close or reduce their hours. People were asked to make only necessary trips. There were no penalties, but many complied anyway. Makoto Sasho, 50, decided to close his grilled eel restaurant in the Meguro neighborhood of Tokyo and focus on delivery and carryout, despite assurances from the government that businesses like his could continue table service. “We conformed to society’s expectations of us,” he said, adding that “when I thought about the future, I knew we absolutely could not be responsible for a cluster.” As Japan now begins to reopen, some experts fear that people will begin to let down their guard. In a speech on Monday night, Mr. Abe emphasized that the end of the state of emergency did not mean a return to normal life. “What we need to aim for,” he said, “is establishing a new normal.” Mr. Sasho said that his customers were clamoring for him to reopen, but that he was not sure he was ready. “It’s a new way of life,” he said. “Maybe I’ll just stick with delivery and takeout.” Motoko Rich contributed reporting.The Sotheby’s auctioneer, Oliver Barker, will be live, by video, in London, looking at screens showing his associates live in New York, Hong Kong and elsewhere, who will be on the phone with live bidders all over the world. It’s a far cry from the buzzing salesroom in Manhattan, where hundreds of collectors, dealers, art advisers and spectators typically hobnob over champagne before sitting side by side to raise their paddles in nail-biting battles for great works of art. But this digitally streamed live auction next month will allow Sotheby’s to proceed with its big-ticket biannual art sale that was supposed to take place in May but was delayed by the coronavirus outbreak. On Friday in a conference call, Sotheby’s executives announced that the first sale, of contemporary art, would be June 29 beginning at 6:30 p.m., immediately followed by its Impressionist and modern art evening sale. The auctions will be livestreamed in high-definition, each lot accompanied by an onscreen image. Bidders can participate by phone or online. Mr. Barker will take bids from Sotheby’s specialists on the phone banks in New York, London and Hong Kong with the results broadcast to screens in a control center studio setup. “It’s definitely a first,” said Mr. Barker in the conference call. “This will be the first time that I have taken to the rostrum in London in order to conduct a New York sale.” Works can be viewed virtually online and by appointment beginning June 8 at Sotheby’s Manhattan galleries. Their Hong Kong sales, which were postponed from April, will take place as usual July 5-11, with the auctioneers live and bidders expected in the salesroom, given that restrictions have been lifted. While protests have resumed there, Patti Wong, the chairwoman of Sotheby’s Asia, said this “hasn’t deterred clients from bidding.” At the top of the New York lineup on June 29 is Francis Bacon’s 1981 three-part oil painting, “Triptych Inspired by the Oresteia of Aeschylus,” which is estimated to sell for at least $60 million. The work has been guaranteed by Sotheby’s, meaning the auction house has already secured a bid. Still, given the demand for Bacon, there is likely to be competition for the painting, which would lift the price over the estimate. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Whether the excitement typically generated by such a bidding war can be replicated remotely remains to be seen. Mr. Barker bullishly predicted it will “be a dynamic, truly global experience that will usher in an exciting new era of marquee auctions at Sotheby’s in which the best of the established live auction format is with married with the latest technology." In doing so, Sotheby’s is following the announcement by its rival, Christie’s, which said on May 15 that it would be offering a hybrid of online bidding, streaming and in-room bidding for its sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art. The auctions will take place in consecutive sessions from across four Christie’s salesrooms — Hong Kong, Paris, London and New York — on July 10. Phillips, the third major auction house, is set to announce its live auctions (with bidders in the room where permitted), with contemporary sales on July 2. Their auctions have been streamed live online for about five years, according to a Phillips spokesperson. Welcome to the weekend. It’s been a hard week. The United States reached a grim milestone, and as we move into the weekend, the streets are on fire in Minneapolis as people protest the death of George Floyd. Here are some great articles you may have missed if you had to tune out a bit this week for your own well-being. So take a walk or get some coffee and settle in for some amazing journalism. As the U.S. reached a grim milestone in the outbreak, The New York Times gathered names of the dead and memories of their lives from obituaries across the country. [Also read: “What Should You Say When Someone You Know Is Grieving?”] Seventy-five years after integration, the military’s upper echelons remain the domain of white men. Interviews with more than three dozen white, black and Hispanic service members and officers depict an entrenched and clubby system with near cement ceilings for minority groups. Above, Lila Holley, a former Army chief warrant officer; Gen. Michael X. Garrett; and Lt. Col. Walter Smiley. [Also read: “A 96-Year-Old Veteran Was Near Death. Then He Met His Social Worker.”] ____ Faced with the spread of the coronavirus, the government is promoting using serving utensils, but resistance is strong. Sharing food with personal chopsticks is one way Chinese people express intimacy. ____ Camming and canning and canvassing from her idyllic compound on Vancouver Island. ____ Christian Cooper is already back birding at Central Park. “I’m not excusing the racism,” he said. “But I don’t know if her life needed to be torn apart.” [Also read: “Why Amy Cooper’s Use of ‘African-American’ Stung” and “The Birds Are Not on Lockdown, and More People Are Watching Them.”] ____ These tiny, beautifully crafted objects have helped one writer understand and accept her fear of life’s painful departures. ____ We’re making food from our favorite restaurants at home. Above, bananas Foster, adapted from Brennan’s restaurant in New Orleans. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. ____ He sought to shock the country into dealing with AIDS as a public-health emergency and foresaw that it could kill millions regardless of sexual orientation. Above, Mr. Kramer at home in 1989, a year after he learned he was H.I.V. positive. [Also read: “‘We Loved Each Other’: Fauci Recalls Larry Kramer, Friend and Nemesis,” and “Larry Kramer, Prophet and Pussycat.”] ____ transcript Locked inside my apartment under stay-at-home orders, the pandemic begins to look oddly routine. Bingeing some reality TV show, I can begin to forget why I’m stuck here — until the commercial break. “We’re all living a new normal —” “Especially now.” “Even in times as uncertain as these.” It’s jarring how quickly the realities of the coronavirus have been processed into the optimistic language of advertising. Every crisis inspires its own corporate PSAs, but these ones are strangely ubiquitous. The hallmarks of coronavirus ads are so consistent they could be generated by bots. “People.” “People.” “People.” “People.” “People.” “And family.” They’re all collected in this YouTube montage called, “Every Covid-19 Commercial Is Exactly the Same.” “Especially now.” The ads begin with eerie drone footage of empty streets, a shot of a child staring plaintively out the window, some desperate-looking individual, and then — upbeat musical key change. A medical worker peeling off their mask, a guy jamming on his home piano, a deeply pregnant woman rubbing her stomach as if summoning a genie from a bottle. And finally: “We care about keeping you safe.” “We’re here to help.” “We’re still here for you.” “Our spirit is what unites us.” What’s weird is, I’m not sure what I’m supposed to buy. These ads are often strangely devoid of product placement. Instead, they lean on pat metaphors that stuff the crisis into the various receptacles affiliated with the products. There are no Cokes in this Malaysian Coke ad, just the note, “Thank you for filling the glass with kindness and hope.” Dunkin’ talks about raising a cup. And Hefty’s message compares the human spirit to a bag of trash. “Thank you.” Uber even ran an anti-Uber commercial that tells its customers, “Thank you for not riding with Uber.” In the place of images of products, these ads are selling a vision of the workers who made them. They show Fareway employees striding in slo-mo through stockrooms, and masked warehouse workers monitoring Amazon conveyor belts. “To our over one million heroes —” “To all of our Amazon retail heroes, we want to thank you.” “I say thank you.” They’re capitalizing on the trend of anointing all essential workers as heroes. It’s a well-meaning impulse to thank those people who are stocking shelves and bagging groceries, but employers have seized on it as a tactic to soften the uncomfortable truth that their workers are at risk, and ease our own tensions as consumers about benefiting from their work. “So how does it feel when you see an ad that valorizes a grocery store worker as a hero?” “The word, hero, has always implied having some sort of agency. Somebody running into a burning house and saving a baby, they are making a conscious decision. But we weren’t trained for this kind of thing. This wasn’t in our job descriptions. We’re not these altruistic angels that are just so happy to be there, and to serve you. And that’s kind of what they’re trying to show in these ads. It’s wonderful to be acknowledged. It’s when it becomes a catchphrase, it’s when it becomes ingenuine. It’s like memos from corporate like, ‘You guys are heroes,’ you know? It doesn’t mean anything anymore.” These ads have reimagined their ideal consumers too. Medical workers have swiftly been elevated into unwitting corporate spokesmodels, creating a fantasy where all consumption is reframed as a public service performed by heroes for heroes. In the coronavirus ad world, heroes are broadly defined. They’re not just the nurses and grocery stockers. Now every couch surfer can feel like they’re doing their part. Basically anything a person does during the pandemic can be reframed in a commercial as an act of heroism. It’s telling that so many of these ads are constructed from found images of social media, or at least they’re made to appear that way. They locate hope in amateur video of a woman cutting her own bangs and a baby riding a Roomba. It’s as if by some kind of transitive property, drinking the same brand of coffee that I saw a nurse drink means that I’m contributing to the cause. [sirens] I may not be packing meat or intubating patients, but at least I am bravely maintaining my consumption habits. They make me feel like I’m doing my part by staying on my couch. ____ Peter Piot, 71, one of the giants of Ebola and AIDS research, is still battling a coronavirus infection that hit him “like a bus” in March. Above, Dr. Piot, with his wife, Dr. Heidi Larson, at home in London. ____ James Poniewozik, our chief TV critic, writes about why lip-sync impressions like Sarah Cooper’s turned out to be the best way to satirize this president. [Also read: “Review: ‘Central Park’ Is the Show We Need Right Now.”] For more great reads, follow me, @kalyTsoto, on Twitter.WASHINGTON — There is widespread agreement that the United States economy will soon begin to recover from coronavirus lockdowns. The big debate is whether that rebound will resemble a V, a W, an L or a Nike Swoosh. Increasingly, economists and analysts are penciling in another glyph: a question mark. Forecasters often label their expectations for a post-recession rebound with letters — a “V” suggests a rapid recovery, a “W” a double-dip, and so on — but that’s hard to do this time around. As all 50 states begin to open up and consumers trickle out of their homes, the path ahead is wildly uncertain, making prognostication dicey. Second-wave virus outbreaks, changes in consumer behavior or a wave of unexpected business closures could reshape the future. That has left economists unsure how quick or smooth a rebound the U.S. economy will undergo, prompting many to offer a range of scenarios instead of declarative forecasts. It isn’t just Wall Street forecasters eschewing the alphabet in favor of a range of what-if’s. From the Federal Reserve to the White House, analysts have suggested that posing confident prognostications is probably more misleading than helpful. John C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said during an appearance last week that it is important for policymakers to prepare for every eventuality, rather than focus on one type of recovery. “We’ve had discussions all my career about V-shaped recoveries, L-shaped, U-shaped,” Mr. Williams said “One thing I’ve learned is, don’t get into that letter game.” Larry Kudlow, director of the White House National Economic Council, said at an event sponsored by The Washington Post that he shares President Trump’s expectation for a rapid bounceback, but suggested that there are wide ranges around those estimates. “It’s really hard to model a virus, or a pandemic, the likes of which we haven’t seen in 100 years,” Mr. Kudlow said. “You can have your own Vs; there’s Vs, there are lesser Vs,” Mr. Kudlow said. “There are combos of Us and Vs.” Cognizant of that uncertainty, the White House confirmed it will not even issue an update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition. Here are the possible shapes that economists are discussing and the caveats that have forecasters writing their predictions in pencil. Since economists know that economic activity slowed sharply during the first half of 2020, the best possible outcome is a swift recovery, making for a “V” shape in which the economy is back to its 2019 output level within a few quarters. Unfortunately, economists say that projection is probably a pipe dream. In a note entitled “V Is for Very Unlikely,” Michael Feroli, J.P. Morgan’s chief U.S. economist, described the trajectory as one in which the economy “is turned off and then on, like a light switch.” Because economic variables like unemployment and output often face a lingering drag after a one-time shock, that sort of outcome is pretty dubious, he said. Lower business capital spending and state and local budget cuts are likely to weigh on growth for some time, alongside other factors, making it hard for the economy to get right back on track. It is also worth noting that a sharp rebound in growth rate is distinct from a return to the previous level of economic output. For example, the economy is broadly expected to show a fast rate of growth in the third quarter, given the record contraction in the second quarter. But overall output will remain lower than it was pre-coronavirus for some time, most economists think. “The initial bounce may feel pretty robust,” said Michelle Meyer, head of U.S. economics at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Her team recently revised up its third quarter growth forecast; they see a 7 percent output gain following a 40 percent plunge in the second quarter. While stimulus checks may help spending, that is not going to make up for corporate insolvency and lost jobs. Full recovery could take until the end of 2022, she said. “There’s quite a lot of residual damage,” she said. Just as only strident optimists expect a perfect “V,” only outright pessimists are projecting an L, in which growth remains at or near the very-low levels it almost certainly hit during the second quarter. The economy is already showing a partial rebound, suggesting that such a formation is unlikely. Mortgage applications have stabilized after sharp declines, consumer confidence is recovering slightly and while initial jobless claims remain elevated, they are slowing. The car industry is hopeful that auto sales are in for a rebound in June. 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 3 2 RECESSION 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 6 million 40.8 million 5 Claims were filed in the last 10 weeks 4 3 RECESSION 2 Initial jobless claims, per week Seasonally adjusted 1 ’06 ’08 ’09 ’12 ’16 ’20 Source: Department of Labor By The New York Times Real-time trackers show a muted bounce, with a daily J.P. Morgan credit card series showing a slow but fairly steady uptick starting from mid-April. Google mobility data suggest that people are moving around more and visiting parks, TD Securities said in a research note. The pickup in areas that drive growth — retail, restaurants, and move theaters — has been more restrained. “None of the states show a sudden snapback,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief U.S. macro strategist at TD Securities, noting that some places are further along the path to official reopening. While the nascent recovery seems to preclude an “L,” he said, the limited data so far jibe with the idea that the recovery will be more gradual than the collapse. That brings us to a scenario that is still on the table: a W-shaped recovery. It could be that the economy will partly bounce back before plunging again amid a second wave of infections as states reopen and people face renewed exposure to the coronavirus, or if the disease stages a comeback this autumn. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. While economists generally say that a “W” remains entirely possible, they aren’t willing to make it their most-likely forecast because it hinges on two total unknowns: whether there is another spike in infections, and whether states will shut down again if that happens. Analysts who venture a guess increasingly favor a nonletter shape as their base-case: the checkmark. The Congressional Budget Office’s baseline expectation suggests that growth will contract slightly in the first quarter and sharply in the second quarter before making a gradual rebound starting in the quarter that stretches from the start of July to the end of September. The budget office doesn’t label the shape, because the climb back will be slower than the drop. The trajectory looks like a checkmark on a graph. There are big uncertainties around that forecast. Additional waves of infection, variations in consumer behavior, and the timeline for a vaccine are all wild cards that could change the path ahead. A host of risks could lead to worse outcomes while a vaccine breakthrough or unexpected government support for the economy could improve the trajectory. If a quicker recovery takes hold, the rebound could look more like a “swoosh” as growth improves slowly before accelerating. But if more infections occur and a vaccine remains elusive, the economy could also face a “wave” recovery of repeating peaks and troughs as states continually reopen and then pull back. “We’re all prefacing what we say with: We’re not epidemiologists,” said Mr. O’Sullivan, explaining that the range of possible economic outcomes is unusually wide because it turns so much on what happens with public health. Because it’s a new coronavirus, and a totally unusual shock to the economy, nobody’s guess for what comes next is especially reliable. Even the Fed’s economists, never shy to to set out a forecast, have sounded uncertain. Minutes from the central bank’s late-April meeting show that staff offered a baseline forecast in which shutdowns gradually ease and growth resumes into the second half of the year, but warned that “a more pessimistic projection was no less plausible than the baseline forecast.” Fed policymakers, for their part, “discussed several alternative scenarios with regard to the behavior of economic activity in the medium term that all seemed about equally likely,” according to the minutes. Among them were predictions that the country experienced additional outbreaks and shutdowns (a “W” or a wave), and more optimistic situations in which social distancing measures were successfully relaxed (a check or a swoosh). Richard Clarida, the Fed’s vice chairman, said last week that it could take until early autumn to get more clarity on where the economy is headed. To put it bluntly, as Ian Shepherdson at Pantheon Macroeconomics did in a recent research note, “the timing of a full recovery is unknowable.” Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.This obituary is part of a series about people who have died in the coronavirus pandemic. Read about others here. Gladys Cortes, who had always been there for others, was all by herself when she died on April 9 in a Long Island hospital at 48. “To me, that was the most heartbreaking part of it,” her sister Miriam Cortes said. Yet she remains in the minds of her family and friends, of her co-workers and customers. Some remember her as a struggling single mother of a 13-year-old daughter, Adryanna, or the caretaker for her 85-year-old mother, Narcisa. Others remember her for readying prepared food behind the counter in her job at a supermarket in Islip, N.Y., or ministering to relatives, close colleagues and even mere acquaintances when they were bedbound with illness. “She was always there,” Miriam Cortes said. “Anyone needed help, she was always there.” Gladys Cortes was born on March 12, 1972, in Mayagüez, P.R., to Ceferino and Narcisa Cortes. She came to New York with her parents as a toddler. The family moved to Long Island, and she graduated from North Babylon High School with a Regents diploma and attended the State University of New York at Farmingdale, dreaming of becoming an artist. She was discouraged by less than rave reviews of her work in college and by slim job prospects. To help support her family, she took a factory job while making displays for stores and other clients; at least they had an artistic element to them, her sister said. The supermarket hired her about a year ago. Ms. Cortes, who lived in Brentwood, N.Y., began feeling ill on March 28. She was admitted to Southside Hospital in Bay Shore, also on Long Island, on April 2 and died a week later of complications of Covid-19. In addition to her sister, she is survived by her mother and daughter and five other siblings. Her partner left when their daughter was born. Gladys Cortes had been born prematurely, barely one pound, 10 ounces. “A miracle baby,” Miriam Cortes said. “And, I think knowing that,” her sister said, “she felt that every time somebody needed a friend to listen to, or a family member needed someone to co-sign a loan on their house, or someone else was sick in the hospital, she was there.”MOSCOW — This should be the moment for Aleksei A. Navalny, Russia’s most visible opposition leader. Many Russians are enraged with the Kremlin over its botched handling of the coronavirus pandemic. President Vladimir V. Putin’s approval rating, at 59 percent, is at its lowest ebb since 1999, when he was a lowly prime minister. At the same time, Mr. Navalny’s audience for his YouTube livestreaming channel tripled as the virus took hold. But whether Mr. Navalny can capitalize on the opportunity remains to be seen. As Russia fights the coronavirus, the country’s beleaguered opposition, too, finds itself on the back foot. Its proven approach to effecting change — mass street protest — will not be viable for the foreseeable future. Mr. Navalny and his colleagues are left working from home, pumping out video clips, petitions and social media posts to try to channel the anger of Russians wondering why Mr. Putin has not done more to help them during the biggest domestic crisis of his tenure. “This is the most important thing happening in people’s lives,” Mr. Navalny said, referring to the authorities’ virus-related measures. “In every Moscow apartment, in every Russian apartment, even if they never talked about politics before, they’re talking about this.” The discontent may be hidden behind apartment walls, but it is increasingly palpable. Anastasia Nikolskaya, a psychologist at Kosygin State University in Moscow, worked with a team to conduct 235 telephone interviews with a cross-section of Russians in May. She said she encountered far more, and far more intense, invective toward the Kremlin than in focus groups she had conducted in years past. “We are entering a rather acute phase of public discontent,” said Mikhail Dmitriev, an economist and public-opinion expert who reviewed Ms. Nikolskaya’s findings. “If the level of aggressiveness in society remains this high, it will influence people’s political behavior after the quarantine measures are removed.” Mr. Navalny, a 43-year-old lawyer and anti-corruption activist, has needled Mr. Putin as corrupt and incompetent for more than a decade, dubbing him the head of “a party of crooks and thieves.” He maintains a nationwide network of branch offices and has honed a punchy, populist and sometimes nationalist rhetoric that reaches millions of social-media followers well beyond the urban middle class. Along the way he has spent stints in jail and under house arrest, and the authorities have raided his offices and frozen his bank accounts. But the Kremlin has continued to let him operate, perhaps fearing that tougher action would only raise his popularity and standing. Mr. Dmitriev says the coronavirus crisis is a singular moment in Russia’s political history, because the lockdown gave people lots of free time to stew over their sudden economic dislocation. As bars, malls and parks closed, Mr. Navalny — forced to broadcast from a makeshift studio in his living room — saw his online audience spike. His “Navalny Live” YouTube channel reached 10.6 million unique viewers in April, double the total in January and triple the total in April 2019, according to Google data that his team provided to The New York Times. Eighty-two percent of the April 2020 viewers were inside Russia. “You get the feeling that Putin always got lucky, and now he’s unlucky, and things aren’t going according to the Kremlin’s plan,” said Ivan Zhdanov, who heads Mr. Navalny’s Anti-Corruption Foundation. “There is a window of opportunity opening up.” Mr. Navalny says the Kremlin is losing the support of Russians who had backed Mr. Putin as their guarantor of order and stability. In confrontations over Ukraine and Syria, Mr. Putin cut the figure of a tough, determined leader. But when a major crisis hit at home — the country’s total of 387,623 coronavirus infections is the third-highest in the world — Mr. Putin appeared to waffle. He issued confusing edicts, delegated key decisions to regional governors and struggled for weeks to get local officials to pay out bonuses he promised to medical workers. “Just like that, the emperor turned out to have no clothes,” Mr. Navalny said. “Those who sought and hoped for some kind of order saw totally colossal chaos, a lack of help and utter craziness.” More than 4,000 Russians have already died of the coronavirus — a number widely seen as an undercount — and even state-run media have carried images of lines of ambulances and full hospitals in Moscow and elsewhere. But Mr. Navalny says his most powerful message is an economic one: the idea that for all of Russia’s natural-resource wealth, Mr. Putin is continuing to pad the pockets of those close to him while failing to support the millions of self-employed Russians and service workers who have seen their incomes dry up. “The officials’ real approach is: ‘Sure, people don’t have any money, but no one has died of hunger,’” Mr. Navalny told the viewers of his live broadcast on Thursday. He went on, sarcastically: “Of course no one has died! Spring is here, it’s berry season, and before this there was birch sap. You need to drink a substantial amount of birch sap to be satiated, but still.” Russians who work for the government or major companies have been somewhat insulated from the crisis, since they have continued to receive their salaries during the lockdown. But for others, the Kremlin has provided only a meager safety net. There have been no blanket payments like the $1,200 stimulus checks in the United States, only targeted ones like $140 for families with children aged 3 to 15. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Elena Lerman, a 34-year-old makeup artist in the Urals city of Yekaterinburg, said she and her friends in the beauty industry watched each of Mr. Putin’s addresses to the nation in March and April, hoping in vain to hear about relief measures that might compensate them for their shuttered studios and salons. “It was utter disillusionment,” Ms. Lerman said in a telephone interview. “It confirmed that regular people can only depend on themselves and on those close to them.” Ms. Lerman tried to make ends meet by offering makeup lessons online. Eventually, she joined her colleagues in quietly returning to work, despite the lockdown. “It was either die of the coronavirus or die of hunger,” she said. Ms. Lerman said she now followed politics more closely than she used to and could imagine taking part in protests in the future. But she said she was skeptical of Mr. Navalny, explaining, “I no longer understand who tells the truth.” Shedding light on Mr. Navalny’s far-from-universal appeal, the YouTube statistics provided by his team show that 76 percent of his April viewers were men, and more than half were between the ages of 25 and 44. Harnessing the anger of people like Ms. Lerman will be the biggest task for Mr. Navalny and other activists in the months to come. The most high-profile focus: Mr. Putin is widely expected to reschedule a referendum on constitutional amendments allowing him to serve as president until 2036 — a vote postponed from April because of the virus — for sometime this summer. And regional elections will take place across the country on Sept. 13. But the pandemic gives the Kremlin new tools to stifle dissent. Mail-in and online voting, cast as a measure to prevent the spread of the virus, will make it harder for activists to monitor elections. In Moscow this week, the police cited the capital’s continuing coronavirus lockdown to detain journalists staging one-person protests, which are typically allowed. “Of course the Kremlin is incredibly happy that it’s impossible to hold large-scale opposition protests,” said Lyubov Sobol, a Navalny associate who helped spark rallies in Moscow last summer when she was barred from running in local elections. “We are adjusting to this reality — we can’t change it and invent this vaccine — and we have to use the tools that we have.”Longer-term analyses of the coronavirus pandemic emphasize that there is a good chance that it will fade within a year or two, especially if a vaccine or effective treatment appears. I hope that’s true. But even if it is, I’m worried that the economy may not return to normal within that time frame. Big events like a pandemic have the potential to leave behind a trail of disruption. They can create social discord, reduce people’s willingness to spend and take risks, destroy business momentum and shake confidence in the value of investments. But episodes as far-reaching as this one are scarce, widely spaced in time, and so different in circumstances that statisticians cannot easily compare them systematically. The best we can do is examine some case studies. The so-called Spanish flu, the influenza epidemic that started in 1918, which ultimately cost 675,000 American lives and millions around the world, is a reasonable place to start. While we know a great deal about that era, we don’t know enough to shed much light on current circumstances. There was a recession in the United States from August 1918 to March 1919, according to the National Bureau of Economic Research, but not a deep one. Searching the newspapers of the time, one finds surprisingly little concern about the possible ill effects of the influenza on the economy, perhaps because the more-dominant narrative concerned the impact of World War I, which ended on November 11, 1918. Yet a recent study by Robert Barro of Harvard University and his associates suggests that the epidemic along with the decline in production associated with the war led to a protracted decline in G.D.P. growth in affected countries from 1918 through 1920. In short, that period provides little comfort. Perhaps more relevant to the current crisis is the Great Depression of 1929 to 1940, the biggest economic slowdown of modern history. From 1931 to 1940, the annual unemployment rate in the United States never fell below 12 percent. (In April this year, unemployment shot up to 14.7 percent.) The conventional story is that the 1929 crash was the result of a stock market bubble in the 1920s. The Cyclically Adjusted Price Earnings Ratio, a stock valuation measure that I helped develop, reached 32.6 in 1929 (compared with 31.0 in January 2020). The Depression started in 1929 after a 23 percent crash in the Dow Jones industrial average over two days, Oct. 28 and 29. It created global social unrest around the world and the downturn only ended with World War II. In 1929 many people expected the stock market to bounce right back and that decline was short-lived, in one sense: The market rose almost half the way back to its 1929 peak by April 1930. But it fell sharply again, and the crash set in motion a train of powerful narratives that resemble some of the popular notions that are circulating today. Much as President Trump dismissed the seriousness of the Covid-19 pandemic in its early days, President Herbert Hoover made optimistic forecasts that proved to be wrong. Much as people fret these days about extreme polarization between Democrats and Republicans, so too were people of that era concerned about extreme political divisiveness. After losing the 1932 election to Franklin Delano Roosevelt, for example, President Hoover, by then a lame duck, called F.D.R.’s plans a “march to Moscow.” Much as people today have experienced long lines and empty shelves at supermarkets, in the Great Depression people fretted about long lines and empty cash registers at banks. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. There are other troubling parallels: Fear of long-term unemployment and a never-ending depression was rampant back then, leading people to restrain spending, thus prolonging the downturn. This may not happen now, but it is a danger. Much as now, in the Great Depression people were very focused on maintaining a “fair wage” in the face of economic distress. But this led to nationwide resistance to nominal wage cuts for anyone, even when retail prices were falling rapidly. This appears to have had the unintended result of inducing employers, who could not afford to keep everyone working at their former wages, to lay off many people. The economists Harold L. Cole of the University of Pennsylvania and Lee E. Ohanian, of U.C.L.A., have shown that this may explain some of the extreme duration of Great Depression unemployment. Another development back then may have resonance today. Faced with widespread poverty, even people with money voluntarily embraced austerity, saying they no longer needed to “keep up with the Joneses.” Their reduction in consumption helps to explain the severity and duration of the Depression. If contemporary culture shifts in a similar way, it could limit the economy’s ability to bounce back. A series of concerns like these — some with echoes of the Great Depression, some newly forming and associated directly with worries about disease and infection — will be on millions of people’s minds long after the economy reopens. Such social narratives will affect their thinking on how to spend and invest, whether to go out to eat or attend sporting events, on whom to vote for, and whether to travel: multitudes of decisions, big and small, that determine the course of the economy. It is too early to tell which narratives will prevail and what path the economy will take after this pandemic subsides. Limited case studies will take us only so far. But we shouldn’t be surprised if we see post-pandemic economic weakness over the next decade. Robert J. Shiller is Sterling Professor of Economics at Yale.More than 100 scientists and clinicians have questioned the authenticity of a massive hospital database that was the basis for an influential study published last week that concluded that treating people who have Covid-19 with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine did not help and might have increased the risk of abnormal heart rhythms and death. In an open letter to The Lancet’s editor, Richard Horton, and the paper’s authors, the scientists asked the journal to provide details about the provenance of the data and called for the study to be independently validated by the World Health Organization or another institution. A spokeswoman for Dr. Mandeep R. Mehra, the Harvard professor who was the paper’s lead author, said on Friday that the study’s authors had asked for an independent academic review and audit of their work. Use of the malaria drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine to prevent and treat Covid-19 has been a focus of intense public attention. President Trump has promoted the promise of hydroxychloroquine, despite the absence of gold-standard evidence from randomized clinical trials to prove its effectiveness, and recently said he was taking it himself in hopes of preventing coronavirus infection. The scientists’ challenges to The Lancet paper come at a time of increasing debate about the risks of the rush to publish new medical findings about Covid-19. The paper, published May 22, included data on tens of thousands of patients hospitalized through April 14, meaning that the authors analyzed the trove of data, wrote the paper and went through the journal’s peer review of its findings in just over five weeks, much faster than usual. The experts who wrote The Lancet also criticized the study’s methodology and the authors’ refusal to identify any of the hospitals that contributed patient data, or to name the countries where they were located. The company that owns the database is Surgisphere, based in Chicago. “Data from Africa indicate that nearly 25 percent of all Covid-19 cases and 40 percent of all deaths in the continent occurred in Surgisphere-associated hospitals which had sophisticated electronic patient data recording,” the scientists wrote. “Both the numbers of cases and deaths, and the detailed data collection, seem unlikely.” Another of the critics’ concerns was that the data about Covid-19 cases in Australia was incompatible with government reports and included “more in-hospital deaths than had occurred in the entire country during the study period.” A spokeswoman for The Lancet, Emily Head, said in an email that the journal had received numerous inquiries about the paper and had referred the questions to the authors. “We will provide further updates as necessary,” she said. “The Lancet encourages scientific debate and will publish responses to the study, along with a response from the authors, in the journal in due course.” On Saturday, the journal made two corrections to the study but said, “There have been no changes to the findings of the paper.” Dr. Sapan S. Desai, the owner and founder of Surgisphere and one of the paper’s authors, vigorously defended the findings and the authenticity and validity of the company’s database. He said official counts of coronavirus cases and deaths often lagged behind actual cases, which might explain some discrepancies. The paper’s authors said they had analyzed data gathered from 671 hospitals on six continents that shared granular medical information about nearly 15,000 patients who had received the drugs and 81,000 who had not, while shielding their identities. “What the world has to understand is that this is registry-based data,” Dr. Desai said. “We have no control over the source of the information. All we can do is report the data that is given to us.” Another group of researchers from the Barcelona Institute for Global Health also raised questions about the Surgisphere database, both with the authors and editors of The Lancet. Scientists who wrote and signed the letter criticizing the study included clinicians, researchers, statisticians and ethicists from academic medical centers, including Harvard’s T.H. Chan School of Public Health, the University of Pennsylvania, Vanderbilt University and Duke University. [Like the Science Times page on Facebook. | Sign up for the Science Times newsletter.] One of the signatories, Dr. Adrian Hernandez, who heads the Duke Clinical Research Institute, said the paper contained many troubling anomalies, “but the biggest thing that raised a red flag was that here was such a large database across more than 600 hospitals, and no one had really known about its existence. That was quite remarkable.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Like several other signatories of the letter, Dr. Hernandez is involved in a clinical trial of hydroxychloroquine to see if it can protect health care workers from infection. Allen Cheng, a professor of infectious diseases at Monash University in Melbourne, Australia, who also signed the letter, said in an email that the individual hospitals included in the database should be identified. “Ideally, the database should be made public, but if that isn’t possible, it should at least be independently reviewed and an audit performed,” he said. Surgisphere’s data was also the basis of a study of coronavirus patients published in The New England Journal of Medicine this month by some of the same authors, including Dr. Desai and Harvard’s Dr. Mehra, as well as for two versions of an article on the use of an antimicrobial drug to treat Covid-19 that were not published in an established medical journal. Jennifer Zeis, a spokeswoman for The New England Journal of Medicine, said by email that the journal was aware of the questions that had been raised and was looking into them. Dr. Mehra issued a statement Friday, saying that the paper’s authors “leveraged the data available through Surgisphere to provide observational guidance to inform the care of hospitalized Covid-19 patients” because the results of randomized clinical trials would not be available for some time. Other observational studies had previously reported possible harms associated with the malaria drugs, and the Food and Drug Administration had issued a safety warning about their use. After the Lancet paper was published, the World Health Organization and other organizations suspended clinical trials of the drugs.Regístrate para recibir nuestro boletín con lo mejor de The New York Times. Tal vez tu hermana mayor acaba de tener un bebé y quieres llevarle un platillo casero. O te encantaría intercambiar un poco de masa fermentada por el famoso estofado de carne de tu vecino. O quizá horneaste un pastel de cumpleaños para tu vecino inmunocomprometido. Cocinar, hornear y compartir lo que preparaste es una de las pocas maneras en que podemos conectarnos de manera tangible en este momento. ¿Pero de verdad es seguro? “La respuesta en general es ‘sí’”, dijo Elizabeth A. Bihn, profesora del Departamento de Ciencia Alimentaria en la Universidad Cornell. El riesgo de transmitir o contraer el coronavirus por el acto de compartir comida o por el mismo empaque de los alimentos es muy bajo, pero aun así debes tomar precauciones. Y el virus no debería ser tu única preocupación. “Lo último que queremos en esta era de la COVID-19”, comentó, “es contraer una enfermedad transmitida por alimentos y tener que ir a la sala de emergencias, lo cual nos puede poner en mayor riesgo de contraer el virus”. A continuación, te presentamos algunos consejos para preparar, entregar y recibir alimentos que reducirán el riesgo de transmitir o contraer el virus o una enfermedad a través de los alimentos. Sigue las cuatro prácticas principales de la Asociación para la Educación en Seguridad Alimentaria: limpiar, separar, cocinar, enfriar. Las conoces y, en general, sueles seguirlas, pero ahora debes acatarlas al pie de la letra. Asegúrate de lavar tus manos y las superficies que uses con cuidado y de tener presente la contaminación cruzada. Cocina los alimentos a las temperaturas adecuadas y refrigéralos de inmediato. No tiene nada de malo (de hecho, es un detalle lindísimo) llevarle comida a una mujer embarazada o a una madre lactante o a un individuo inmunocomprometido. Solo sigue los lineamientos mencionados con más cuidado. No tienes que usar una mascarilla mientras preparas los alimentos, pero si esto evita que te toques la cara o te tranquiliza, adelante. Lo mismo aplica para los guantes Desde el principio pregunta si la persona tiene alergias. Este no es un buen momento para tener una reacción alérgica. Asimismo, y esto debería quedar implícito, no lleves (ni prepares) alimentos que ciertos grupos de personas no deban comer. Por ejemplo, nada de quesos de leche cruda para las mujeres embarazadas y nada de miel para los niños menores de 1 año. Si dudas sobre usar algo, pregunta antes de entregarlo. No uses jabón (ni lejía) para limpiar los vegetales y las frutas. El jabón y la lejía pueden ser muy dañinos para la salud. Más bien, enjuágalos con bastante agua fría de la llave. Según los Centros para el Control y la Prevención de Enfermedades, se piensa que el coronavirus se propaga principalmente a través de las gotículas que se producen cuando una persona enferma tose o estornuda. Así que el mayor riesgo ocurre cuando se hace una entrega en persona. Cuando entregues el platillo, ponte una mascarilla y coloca la comida en un lugar neutral, a unos dos metros o más de distancia, después deja que tu amigo o ser querido lo recoja. Envuelve el alimento en plástico o aluminio, o guárdalo en un recipiente reusable que se pueda lavar. Esto evita que la comida se contamine en el trayecto. Si te preocupa recibir alimentos de parte de alguien más, piensa en cómo lo vas a abrir y manejar. Lo que Bihn sugiere es lo siguiente: trae la comida al interior de tu casa y haz espacio en la encimera de tu cocina para poner los recipientes. (Si están en una bolsa, coloca la bolsa en el suelo y saca los contenedores). Ábrelos en el espacio designado y pasa los alimentos a un tazón, un plato o uno de tus propios recipientes. Tira la bolsa a la basura y lava los contenedores con agua caliente y jabonosa si son reusables. (Si no lo son, deséchalos). Limpia la encimera. Lávate las manos. Come. Bihn admite que no todos tomaremos estas medidas cada vez que recibamos algo, pero si te preocupa, este proceso podría tranquilizarte. Respira hondo y recuerda que las probabilidades de contraer o transmitir el virus por alimentos o sus empaques son muy pocas. Así que hornea esa tanda de galletas o hierve esa olla de sopa y llévasela a alguien que quieres. A ambos les hará bien. Solo no olvides lavarte las manos cuando llegues a casa.At 7 a.m. on April 30, Pietro Demita and Silvana Persano, the owners of Diamond Couture, which specializes in wedding gowns, were already busy in their atelier in Veglie, Italy. The business partners had chosen nine gowns from their latest collection, hung them on a rack and dragged them in front of their warehouse. Scissors in hand, Mr. Demita and Ms. Persano, each wearing face masks, cut through corsages of white lace and skirts of tulle, thrusting the shreds into a large yellow and blue bin. Mr. Demita set the pile on fire with a lighter. The burning was filmed by a friend and used to address “people in power,” he said, about the plight of the country’s wedding industry. According to the Italian National Institute of Statistics, 190,000 to 195,000 weddings are registered every year in Italy. When these are celebrated with a party, they sustain an industry worth an estimated 40 billion euros ($44 billion) employing 83,000 companies. Additionally, 540 million euros ($593 million) are generated by about 10,000 wedding celebrations organized by foreigners in Italy, who often purchase their wedding dresses in the country. “If my dreams have to be turned into ashes, I prefer doing it myself,” Mr. Demita said. Diamond Couture presented its latest collection in April 2019 at Sì Sposaitalia Collezioni, an international trade show in Milan for bridal and formal wear. The event showed 220 bridal collections in 2019. Orders for gowns were taken during the buying appointments at the fair and delivered between September and October. The company always agreed to start crafting the ordered dresses without a deposit. The payments would be sent in March of the following year. Mr. Demita’s and Ms. Persano’s annual production grew from 49 gowns to more than 1,000 within 13 years. But on March 9, the Italian government announced stringent quarantine measures. Eighty percent of the weddings for which Diamond Couture had orders for gowns were postponed with the rest being canceled. Mr. Demita and Ms. Persano faced empty cash registers. [Sign up for Love Letter and always get the latest in Modern Love, weddings, and relationships in the news by email.] Italy was the first Western country to impose a national lockdown, on March 4, which suspended all businesses. With 33,072 Covid-19-related deaths as of May 27, Italy has the third-highest figure, only ranking behind the United Kingdom (37,460) and the United States (101,392). Restrictions in Italy were lifted May 18, but social-distance measures are still being enforced throughout the summer, pushing most weddings planned during the sought-after period from April through September to the fall or next year. “It is a climate that certainly does not invite to celebrate,” Michela Gombacci, a business consultant, said about her postponed May wedding on the Italian island of Capri with her American fiancé, Stefano Minoli. “We thought it would have been almost out of place.” The practice of delayed payments is common among small businesses in Italy, and it is especially widespread in the wedding industry as it allows retailers to collect the payments for the gown in installments. Larger companies and small outfits operating in the higher-end segment try to steer clear of it. Nicole Spose by Nicole Cavallo has asked brides to pay off dresses by the date on which the wedding was originally planned, not the newly scheduled date in the future. “The majority understands the situation and has agreed,” Ms. Cavallo said in a phone interview. But, she noted, “some aren’t that happy about it.” The payments are necessary, Ms. Cavallo said, to cover the cost of keeping gowns in her atelier for longer than originally planned. Still, shops are without their usual orders and deposit money. To make up for the canceled fashion show in April, Ms. Cavallo offered future brides online consultations to jump-start new orders and deposits. A similar service will be rolled out by Antonio Riva in Milan at the beginning of June. Mr. Riva, who starts producing only upon receipt of a deposit and delivers only when gowns are paid in full, hopes to be able to deliver his gowns by October, as usual. “We are in a lucky position because everything is made in Italy and our business partners understand our needs,” he said. Larger losses were suffered by companies like Carlo Pignatelli in Turin, Italy, which specializes in formal attire for men. “While brides start looking for a gown nine to six months before the event, men start only three to two months before,” said Francesco Pignatelli, the creative director of the house. His company received all payments for its 2019 bridal dress collection in the fall of the same year. However, since 80 percent of the company’s total sales is generated by men’s suits, which typically sell between February and April, Mr. Pignatelli expects a 50 percent drop in the companies’ annual revenue. To date, no company in Italy has received the government’s monetary aid to provide for furloughs. Businesses have had, instead, to advance salaries for about two months, putting their finances under further strain.  Wedding gown makers remain hopeful that they will recover in 2021; they expect to set a record in the production of gowns after social restrictions are lifted. Yet, it seems inevitable that smaller businesses will suffer. “The year 2020 is compromised,” said Serena Ranieri, the president of Feder Matrimoni ed Eventi Privati,  a group that represents businesses involved in weddings and private events. “It is a collapse that the sector is unable to absorb and which will cause closures and bankruptcies, with consequent job losses and a devastating impact also for the companies in the supply chain which miss most of the customers.” Mr. Demita said he and Ms. Persano are using their savings to get by, “but sooner or later, the water in the well runs out.” In the meantime, in Milan, Emanuele Guido, the director of Sì Sposaitalia Collezioni, is working on the next edition of the fair, which has been postponed from April until September. “It is an experiment,” Mr. Guido said of how many exhibitors will actually show up in the month when they usually deliver gowns. Will Diamond Couture attend? Mr. Demita sighed. “Frankly, I do not know.” Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion and Weddings) and Instagram.Families are already wondering what college campuses will look like, post pandemic. They may also be reconsidering the price of a college education, after seeing the toll the virus-induced stock market turmoil took on their 529 college savings plans. The impact of recent market gyrations on the accounts depended on the age of the student and the type of investment, according to a new report from the research firm Morningstar. Many families put their tax-favored 529 savings in preset investment portfolios that change as their child gets closer to college age, starting with investments heavily weighted in stocks to take advantage of potentially greater returns. The money shifts over time into less volatile holdings, like bonds and cash, as college approaches. In the first three months of this year, those age-based and target-date portfolios tumbled along with the broader market, Morningstar found. Quarterly losses averaged as much as 19 percent for portfolios focused on children age 4 and under, while those for students 17 and 18, who will probably be heading to college this year and next, fell less than 5 percent, on average. (Morningstar compared the losses to a global stock index, the MSCI ACWI Index, which lost 21.4 percent in the first quarter.) The report, which covered most state plans, didn’t break down returns or cite specific plan fees, although it did find that fees overall had fallen. While losses can be daunting, the relatively muted declines for students nearing college suggested that age-based 529 portfolios held up reasonably well, said Madeline Hume, an analyst with Morningstar. Overall, the plans “worked as expected,” she said. For a family with a balance in their 529 account of $50,000 — the average cost of one year of tuition, fees, room and board at a private, four-year college, according to the College Board — the average loss for older teenagers was as much as $2,100, although some individual portfolios saw larger losses. Still, despite their “highly diversified” holdings, age-based portfolios proved “more susceptible to declines” than anticipated, the report noted. Just one portfolio type — representing students who are already in college — had losses in line with what would be expected, based on the level of stocks in the portfolio. The report attributed the outsize losses to “disappointing” results in the underlying funds making up the portfolio; fees, which eat away at returns; and investments in “riskier” types of bonds, which offset holdings in higher-quality bonds. “Reality,” Ms. Hume said, “is always just a little bit messier than the studies say it will be.” While families with young children have years to recoup the losses before they must start paying college tuition, older teenagers are running out of time. On average, the report calculated, 18-year-olds need a 3.5 percent return to recoup their first-quarter losses. Based on returns in age-based plans over the past nine years, that’s “not an unrealistic goal” to achieve in less than a year, Morningstar said. Because of a market rebound in April, the average 18-year-old has already recouped 2.8 percent. “The high-level message,” Ms. Hume said, “ is that the first quarter was far from a disaster for college savers.” Of course, continued economic uncertainty because of the virus make strong returns uncertain. What, then, is a family to do? It’s difficult for families to accumulate enough money for college and avoid the need for student loans, without investing. Families have turned to 529 accounts as the price of a four-year college has ballooned while wage growth stagnated. Money deposited in the accounts grows tax free, and is tax free when withdrawn and spent on eligible expenses, including tuition, housing, meal plans, books and equipment. Recent legislation also allows the money to pay for private schools for children in kindergarten through 12th grade, as well as for formal apprenticeships and to repay student loans, within limits. There’s no federal tax deduction for contributions, but some states offer tax breaks. At the end of last year, there were more than 14 million accounts with an average balance of about $26,000, according to the College Savings Plans Network, a group that promotes the plans. Advisers suggest families carefully consider their risk tolerance and opt for a less aggressive approach if market gyrations are too hard to stomach. Be sure to understand your plan’s stock allocation, especially as college nears, said Christopher Parr, a financial planner in Columbia, Md. “Most people don’t know what’s going on under the hood,” he said. If you expect to be paying tuition in the near future, he said, “That money doesn’t belong in the stock market.” Most plans offer low-risk options for cautious savers, or those who have just a short time left before college. California’s ScholarShare 529 program, for instance, offers a “principal plus interest” option that guarantees a return of at least 1 percent and no more than 3 percent. Others offer a money-market option. It’s also important, advisers say, to understand the details of how your 529 portfolio shifts holdings from stocks to bonds over time. Some plans may move money relatively abruptly, often around a child’s birthday, which can hurt returns if the move comes when the stock market is down. It’s preferable, and common, for plans to make the shift more gradually to reduce the risk of locking in losses. Despite roiling financial markets and economic woes, there hasn’t been an apparent rush to withdraw money from 529 accounts, plan representatives say.  But it’s also because families still see a need to save for college, despite near-term uncertainty about a move to online classes because of the coronavirus. That’s partly because if people spend the money for a noneducational use, they face income taxes and a 10 percent penalty on the earnings portion of the withdrawal. “Nothing, in my mind, has changed significantly to make me want to adjust our strategy,” said one investor, Steve Blackmarr, a senior manager with Amazon Business Professional Services. He considers college savings a long-term investment, he said, and intends to keep saving for his children, ages 9 and 11. Peg Creonte, head of government savings at Ascensus, which administers 529 plans in 26 states and the District of Columbia, said that while one-time contributions had fallen compared with last year, scheduled contributions mostly weren’t affected. “We did not see any sort of panicked reaction,” she said. Utah’s my529 plan saw new accounts increase in early May, to 29 per day this year from about 16 per day last year, said Bryn Ramjoue, the plan’s marketing director. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Alaska 529 has seen a “moderate” increase in people moving funds into less risky investments, said Lael Oldmixon, the program’s executive director. (Tax rules allow 529 participants to change their current investment options twice each year.) But she said people are not making major changes. “Families don’t want to touch that money.” Here are some questions and answers about 529 accounts: Cash is tight. Should I stop contributing to my 529 fund? That depends on your circumstances. Andy Mardock, a financial planner in Bend, Ore., said clients typically placed a high value on college savings. But if someone has a loss of income, he said, and is faced with tapping emergency funds or using a credit card to cover basic bills, “the clear answer is to cut 529 contributions.” If possible, advisers say, temporarily reduce contributions rather than stopping. By saving regularly, you will buy more stocks when prices are low and fewer when prices are high. Andrew Rumbach, an assistant professor of urban and regional planning at the University of Colorado Denver, said he and his wife considered education paramount, but have temporarily reduced the size of their contributions to their child’s 529 plan during the pandemic. They consider themselves privileged to remain employed, he said, but the slowdown has eroded the extra income they make from consulting. They aim to increase contributions again, he said, when things pick up. When is the best time to open a 529 account? It’s generally wise to open an account when a child is young, advisers say, to allow as much time as possible to save and for investments to ride out market declines. You can even open an account before a child is born to gain the advantage of additional time. Just name yourself as the beneficiary initially, then later change it to the child’s name. Are there any incentives for opening a 529 account? Many 529 plans are offering promotions this month, from small matching contributions to the chance for bigger jackpots, to encourage families to open accounts. Alabama’s CollegeCounts program is giving away contributions of $529 to families with an account who have a baby born during the 12 months ending on May 29. Georgia’s Path2College program will award $1,529 to the first babies born at two hospitals on May 29. And Missouri’s MOST 529 program is giving away up to $5,029, in a series of drawings. The offerings are pegged to “529 Day,” which the plans observe on May 29, but some run into June.The stock market has been erratic, real estate is hurting, bond yields are painfully low and dividends are shrinking. In the coronavirus recession, most financial assets have been disturbingly volatile. But one widely held financial asset, perhaps the most important one for the vast majority of Americans, has performed splendidly: their stake in Social Security. It hasn’t merely been a solid support for millions of people in a difficult time. While the income-producing power of so many other assets has been sapped by economic weakness and low interest rates, Social Security payments have held steady. And thanks to those rock-bottom interest rates, the market value of the Social Security income stream has soared in a measurable way. You may not think of Social Security as a personal asset, like a bank account, a portfolio of stocks and bonds or a house. But Social Security retirement benefits are a kind of annuity, as I’ll explain, and annuities have a definite market value. Considered this way, Social Security’s value has been rising. Even if you aren’t receiving payments now, you have a stake in the asset, and it is in your interest to protect it. “The most important financial asset for most Americans by far is Social Security,” said William J. Bernstein, a financial adviser and author on financial subjects. “We are in a retirement crisis, and the only foreseeable answer is Social Security.” Perhaps if more people understood the impressive, countercyclical performance of their share in Social Security, there would be more clamor to protect it. But critical as the benefits are proving to be in this crisis, as in so many others, the entire Social Security system faces a cash shortfall down the road, and it needs help from Congress. The pandemic has complicated these long-term issues, which can be resolved only in Washington. First, consider the good news. In the coronavirus crisis, Social Security has succeeded in doing just what it was designed to do: keeping old people, disabled people and their dependents out of dire poverty, and providing a retirement cushion for nearly everyone else. About 178 million working people of all ages are covered by Social Security, government statistics show. Even if those people are not eligible for benefits now, they will be entitled to them later. Plenty of people are already getting them, however: About 65 million Americans will receive more than $1 trillion this year. That includes nine out of 10 of those 65 and older, as well as millions of disabled people, dependents and survivors. With more than 100,000 Covid-19 deaths in America and millions of people financially desperate, a program that supplies regular income to so many can surely be said to be more valuable than ever. But I concede that is a subjective judgment. The program has also risen in value in a measurable way that may not be intuitively obvious. This is a little wonky, so bear with me. Financial markets put a price on almost everything, and they can provide an approximate cash value for Social Security, too. Your benefits, now or in the future, accrue gradually, over years of work and paying taxes into the Social Security system. But as I pointed out recently, low interest rates have reduced bond yields and made commercial annuities extremely expensive. With the help of Dale Kintzel, a former Social Security economist who studied its pricing in a 2017 paper, I’ve checked the market values of annuities and compared them with Social Security. Those federal retirement benefits are essentially annuities: bonds wrapped in insurance. So-called single-premium immediate annuities — in which an insurance company will provide you with income,  in exchange for a sum of cash — can’t do everything Social Security does, but they come close. Mr. Kintzel has used annuities to approximate the cash value of Social Security benefits. Those values are startlingly high. Mr. Kintzel found that for the average 65-year-old man, who last year received a retirement benefit of $1,375 a month, an annuity supplying that lifetime cash flow would cost at least $459,866 — 13 percent more than a comparable annuity in 2014. For a 65-year-old woman, the average monthly benefit was $1,102 last year. A comparable commercial annuity, Mr. Kintzel said, would cost $368,562. These figures are based on data from immediateannuities.com, which tracks annuity prices. These are just average amounts and would be much bigger — perhaps as much as $1 million — for high-income people who delay claiming benefits until they are 70, my own calculations suggest. Note that all of these estimates understate the value of Social Security, which provides disability benefits and supplemental income in addition to basic retirement benefits. And these estimates don’t take into account the effects of the further decline in interest rates since the beginning of this year, which have reduced income streams from many assets, but not for Social Security. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Perhaps the best thing about Social Security is that unlike a stock portfolio, it can be counted on, Mr. Kintzel said. “It is backed by the government, and so it’s virtually risk-free, or it should be. I’ve always thought that Social Security is one thing that everybody can agree on. It’s a good thing.” Yet Social Security continues to have an odd problem. Although its stability has been among its greatest virtues, it remains underfunded. I pointed out a year ago that Social Security benefit payouts were greater than the system’s revenues. That is still true. To receive all of the benefits you have been promised, a reluctant Congress will need to fix Social Security, which is likely to dip into the principal of its trust funds for the first time this year. Interest payments from the trust funds have made up the gap, allowing full benefits until now. Without help from Congress, these trust funds, are likely to be exhausted within 15 years — and perhaps sooner. If that were to happen, benefits would be cut, perhaps to 79 percent of the promised levels, Social Security estimates. In an online conference in late April, Stephen C. Goss, Social Security’s chief actuary, said that the current recession would almost certainly reduce the system’s payroll tax receipts and could lead to trust fund depletion by 2033 or even sooner. Precise estimates are impossible now, with the economy shrinking so rapidly, he said. “All bets are off, and we will just have to see what happens, because we really don’t know whether we’ll be back to normal,” Mr. Goss said. As a matter of basic math, Social Security needs more revenue or lower expenses. But I think this recession suggests that increasing revenue is the way to go, because Social Security benefits have been so crucial. If they were to be cut, even bigger rescue programs would be needed from other sources. Far better to maintain and improve Social Security, which works automatically and well. Last year, I said that the most important thing you could probably do to improve your personal finances was to make sure that Congress took action to bolster the program’s funding. That’s even truer today, when its benefits are more valuable, and more badly needed.The Champions League final, one of sport’s most-watched annual events, will not be held at its planned site, Istanbul, amid the ongoing crisis brought on by the coronavirus pandemic, according to a person with knowledge of the matter. European soccer’s governing body UEFA, the event’s organizer, is now considering a number of alternative venues as it plans to complete the competition, which was part way through its round of 16 stage when — like most other sporting events — it paused indefinitely. Now with national leagues starting to emerge to complete their seasons, UEFA is concluding talks on how to finish the Champions League and its secondary Europa League in August. The Europa League final had been set to be held in Gdansk, Poland. A decision will be made after a meeting of the executive committee on June 17, said the person, who declined to speak publicly because talks on the alternative sites are ongoing. UEFA will hold further talks with Turkish officials next week, to finalize an agreement to move the event. Istanbul could be picked to host the final at a later date. Leagues that have restarted, or are planning to restart, are adopting severe hygiene protocols to ensure games can be played again safely while the virus continues to be a danger. UEFA is certain to adopt similar strategies, meaning that the games are being planned to take place in empty stadiums and that the players involved will face regular tests. With European travel limited, and ongoing quarantine laws in some countries, it is also likely that most of the remaining games will take place in the place picked to host the final. The Spanish news media reported that UEFA was planning to host this year’s Champions League final, an event that draws more viewers globally than the Super Bowl, in Lisbon. There are a small number of other candidates, according to the person with knowledge of the matter. “A working group has been set up with the participation of representatives from the leagues and clubs to examine calendar solutions and format options that would allow for the completion of the current season,” said a UEFA spokesman. “A variety of options is being looked at and no decisions have been made at this stage.” Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. What’s certain is the competition is unlikely to look like anything that has gone before, with calendar constraints necessitating it be completed in as short a time possible to allow players to rest before starting next season in September. The original date for the final at Atatürk Olympic Stadium in Istanbul was May 30. “A working group has been set up with the participation of representatives from the leagues and clubs to examine calendar solutions and format options that would allow for the completion of the current season,” said a UEFA spokesman. “A variety of options is being looked at and no decisions have been made at this stage.” UEFA’s television contract for the Champions League is one of the richest in sports, with most of that income being paid out in prize money to teams participating in its tournaments. Last season it paid nearly 2 billion euros to participating teams. Should it not be able to complete the tournament, UEFA faces paying a ruinous rebate worth hundreds of millions of dollars.OAKLAND, Calif. — Google, facing an advertising slump caused by the pandemic, has rescinded offers to several thousand people who had agreed to work at the company as temporary and contract workers. “We’re slowing our pace of hiring and investment, and are not bringing on as many new starters as we had planned at the beginning of the year,” Google said in an email to contracting agencies last week that was seen by The New York Times. The company told the firms that it “will not be moving forward to onboard” the people that the agencies had recruited to work at Google. The move affected more than 2,000 people globally who had signed offers with the agencies to be a contract or temp worker, according to three people familiar with the decision, who spoke on the condition of anonymity because they were not allowed to speak publicly on the matter. Google employs more than 130,000 contractors and temp workers, a shadow work force that outnumbers its 123,000 full-time employees. Google’s full-time staff are rewarded with high salaries and generous perks, but temps and contractors often receive less pay, fewer benefits and do not have the same protections, even though they work alongside full timers. The coronavirus crisis has underscored that disparity. Google announced in April that it was extending its employee paid leave policy to 14 weeks from eight weeks for caretakers, including parents looking after children whose schools are closed. For employees working from home, Sundar Pichai, chief executive of Google’s parent company Alphabet, said on Tuesday that they could spend $1,000 for equipment and furniture like standing desks and ergonomic chairs. Many of the contract and temp candidates who had agreed to work at Google before the pandemic took hold in the United States were let go without any severance or financial compensation. This came after weeks of uncertainty as Google repeatedly postponed their start dates during which time they were not paid by Google or the staffing agencies. Some of the would-be contractors left stable, full-time jobs once they received an employment offer at Google and are now searching for work in a difficult labor market. Some, who are Americans, said the rescinded offers have complicated and, in some cases, delayed their ability to receive unemployment benefits because they left their last jobs voluntarily, according to several of the workers facing this quandary. In mid-April, Mr. Pichai told employees in a memo that the company planned to “significantly” slow the pace of hiring this year, with the exception of several strategic areas. A company spokeswoman said at the time that Google intended to bring on the people who it had already hired but who had not started. But this did not seem to apply to contractors or temp workers for Google and Alphabet, which has a market capitalization of near $1 trillion dollars. It made $6.8 billion in profit in the first three months of 2020, despite what it called “a significant and sudden slowdown” in advertising. “If these people were promised jobs at Alphabet, which is worth a trillion dollars, it seems like the company has a responsibility to take them on,” said Ben Gwin, who works as a data analyst in a Google office for HCL America, a contracting agency. “It’s not like Google can’t afford it.” Mr. Gwin led a unionization effort for contract technical workers at Google’s offices in Pittsburgh last year. “As we’ve publicly indicated, we’re slowing our pace of hiring and investment, and as a result are not bringing on as many new people — full time and temporary — as we’d planned at the beginning of the year,” said Alex Krasov, a Google spokeswoman. Ruth Porat, chief financial officer for Alphabet, told analysts last month that the company was cutting expenses by not hiring as many new employees as initially projected. She did not address contract or temp workers. Google has taken some steps to help its temp and contract workers. In March, the company said it would extend the assignments of temp workers whose jobs were scheduled to end from March 20 to May 15 by 60 days. The company also said it would continue to pay contract workers affected by office closures such as people who serve food in the company’s cafeterias. And it established a fund to allow contingent workers to take paid sick leave if they exhibit coronavirus symptoms or can’t come to work because they’re quarantined. Like many technology companies, Google depends on a large number of temps, vendors and contractors to perform a wide variety of jobs, including cafeteria workers, maintenance workers, recruiters, content moderators and software testers. For the company, these workers cost less than full-time employees, and Google has no long-term obligation to them, making it easy to hire them or eliminate their positions. Last year, 10 Democratic senators called on Google to convert its temporary and contract workers to full-time employees, saying the company should stop its “anti-worker practices” and treat all of its workers equally. Google pays staffing companies to find the workers and provide them with salaries and benefits as their employer. But Google interviews prospective candidates and signs off on hiring, deciding where they work, what they do and when to fire them. When Google pulled the offers to prospective workers, the company told the staffing companies, which included firms like Accenture, Cognizant and Adecco, that “we’ll look to you to have the conversations with the individuals who won’t be onboarded.” Google said it was “hopeful” that the “agencies will be able to find other assignments” for the candidates. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. It was not immediately clear which countries were most affected in the decision, but some of the workers are in the United States, India and the Philippines. This was the second wave of rescinded job offers for temps and contract workers. Google had pulled offers for several dozen temp workers in April. Joli Holland was one of the candidates whose job offers was rescinded in mid-April. She was working as a lead teller at Wells Fargo when Adecco contacted her about a recruiter position working at Google in Mountain View, Calif. After a few rounds of interviews, she was offered the position with a start date of March 23. She was hopeful that she would get her foot in the door with a temporary job and land a full-time position at Google. Before she gave her two-week notice to Wells Fargo, she checked with Adecco about whether the job at Google was safe given the growing concerns about the coronavirus. Ms. Holland said she was assured that everything “should be fine.” Another candidate whose offer was rescinded expressed similar concerns to another recruiter at Adecco. This person, who asked not to be identified because they still wanted to work at Google and were worried about being blacklisted for speaking out, said the recruiter said “Google always does the right thing, so I wouldn’t worry about it.” Mary Beth Waddill, a spokeswoman for Adecco, said the company did not intend to mislead anyone about their career prospects, “especially given the uncertainty of the Covid-19 pandemic. Our standard practice is to advise in writing that placement on assignment is not guaranteed.” A few days before Ms. Holland was set to start, she was told that her start date at Google would be pushed back to April 6. Then it was postponed to April 13 and again to April 20, a Monday. On the Friday before she was set to begin her job, Ms. Holland said she was told that the company was rescinding all temp worker offers. She didn’t receive any money while she waited to start at Google, nor did she get any severance. “I’m disappointed, because not a lot of people are hiring right now,” she said. She hadn’t filed for unemployment because she left her last job voluntarily. Still, Ms. Holland said she still hoped to work for Google because it would still be a great opportunity. “I am disappointed, but it hasn’t completely soured me on the company,” she said. “I’d still like to work there.”Welcome to Poll Watch, our weekly look at polling data and survey research on the candidates, voters and issues that will shape the 2020 election. The coronavirus has completely overtaken American life and politics, but in polls, most people don’t name it as their top voting issue. Political observers agree that what happens with the virus over the next few months is likely to determine the outcome of the November presidential election, but what they really mean is this: President Trump’s response to the virus — and how it’s perceived — will probably swing the election. Tied closely to that is how much the economy bounces back. “The two top interrelated issues right now are the state of the pandemic and the state of the economy, and it’s hard to separate the two,” Whit Ayres, a Republican pollster, said in an interview. “The real question is what it looks like come October.” In a Kaiser Family Foundation poll released this week, voters were markedly more likely to name traditional issues like health care, the economy and foreign policy as the ones they’ll be voting on. Still, 50 percent said the virus would be very important to their vote for president, and 72 percent said the pandemic would factor into their vote at least somewhat. When asked in an open-ended question what exactly they meant by that, the most common response was some variation of this: How Mr. Trump responds. From early April to late May, the virus’s death toll skyrocketed. Just over 50,000 people had been killed by the pandemic worldwide at the start of last month, but today the death toll in the United States alone is more than 100,000. In that time, governors have called on Mr. Trump to address testing deficiencies — usually to no avail — and he has often struck a defiant tone when asked why he isn’t doing more. Even among Republicans, approval of Mr. Trump’s handling of the virus now runs a few percentage points behind their rating of his overall performance as president. Voters in the political middle, including a small share of Democrats who initially gave Mr. Trump the benefit of the doubt, have particularly lost faith in his handling of the crisis. In a Fox News poll published last week, just 29 percent of independent voters gave him positive marks on dealing with the pandemic. His numbers have also flagged in polling matchups with Joseph R. Biden Jr., the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee; rare is the poll these days that finds Mr. Trump escaping the low 40s in a head-to-head scenario. In back-to-back Fox polls, Mr. Trump’s approval among registered voters on handling the pandemic fell by eight points from April to May; it now sits at 43 percent, roughly even with his 44 percent approval rating over all, according to Fox. Basically, if you were for Mr. Trump before, you are probably still with him now. If you started out this year generally against him but willing to see how he led during the crisis, you have probably given up on that by now. Still, it matters that Mr. Trump has proved to have a remarkably high floor. With the Republican establishment and the conservative news media firmly behind him, the president is unlikely to fall far below 40 percent approval. To finish strongly in November, he would need to win back between five and 10 points nationally, relying heavily on persuadable voters. “A lot of it has to do with where people will be economically going into the election, and who they will credit or blame for that,” Thomas Sutton, a professor of political science at Baldwin Wallace University in Ohio who runs the university’s statewide poll, said in an interview. “At this point in October, the unemployment rate will be less, Trump will claim credit for that, and Biden’s got to run a really strong campaign with a countermessage to stop him from getting that credit and taking it to victory in Ohio.” Mr. Trump has historically enjoyed positive ratings on his handling of the economy. Of the five issues that Fox asked about in its latest poll, the economy was the only one on which voters did not generally say they would prefer to have Mr. Biden overseeing it. The president has made it clear that he prioritizes restarting the economy soon, even if that means disregarding the warnings of his own health experts. With most states now moving forward with a partial reopening of public accommodations and businesses, Mr. Trump is eager to point to signs of economic life. While unemployment has climbed to 14.7 percent — and it is probably much higher than that, in reality — the stock market has largely bounced back, and public confidence in a recovery is rising. Only 50 percent of Americans now say the worst days of the pandemic are ahead, down from three-fourths in early April. And the Consumer Confidence Index, a polling measure of the national economic mood, finally stabilized this week after taking a historically steep plunge in the weeks before. “You’re not going to get a massive amount of economic growth in this time, but a psychological effect is the biggest thing,” said Chuck Coughlin, a Republican-aligned consultant in Arizona whose firm recently published a poll in that swing state. “People just beginning to feel positive about going out, beginning to socialize, seeing some restaurants open again: I think that’s incredibly important for the general electoral prospects of Republicans.” While Mr. Trump has received increasingly middling reviews for his handling of the virus, many governors’ approval ratings have leapt. In poll after poll, Americans have been far more likely to give their state governments high marks on confronting the virus, even as they don’t rate the federal government’s work so well. Many states heavily affected by the virus also happen to be swing states run by Democratic governors whose ratings have surged: Wisconsin, Michigan, Pennsylvania and North Carolina all fit that description. In two key states, Georgia and Florida, the inverse has occurred: The approval ratings of the Republican governors, both reluctant to enforce social-distancing measures, fell. Very few of these governors in pivotal states are up for re-election in 2020, but their popularity — or unpopularity — could play a role in helping to drive enthusiasm and turnout within their parties. “There are a number of governors who, if they could run for re-election in November, would be untouchable,” Mr. Ayres said. “They have job approvals in the 70s and 80s.”MILAN — After months of living under a strict lockdown in Italy, a closely gathered group of teenagers welcomed a warm evening this week at a verdant park in Milan, gazing at phone screens, embracing and forming a small circle around a playful dog. No one wore a mask. Pinuccia Ciancalloni, 59, who was taking her daily walk through the park on Tuesday, pointed at the group with dread. To her, the expressions of young love and healthy sociability amounted to a profound threat. She complained that the dozen teenagers lacked civic sense and could potentially drive up the curve of coronavirus infections just as things had started to improve in the region of northern Italy that is the heart of Italy’s epidemic. “The problem is with young people,” she said. Italy, the country in Europe with the highest median age among its residents, has long agonized over its relative shortage of youths and the energy they bring. (Around 23 percent of the population is above 65, and about 16 percent is between 15 and 30.) But the coronavirus pandemic has led many Italians to center their anxieties — unfairly, some experts say — on the public gatherings of the country’s teenagers and young adults, fearing they could bring the virus to the older population, causing a second wave of infections and a new round of restrictions. To some, the young are being scapegoated. They say that the vast majority have respected the social-distancing rules. “Young people are not today’s plague spreaders,” Nicola Zingaretti, the leader of the governing Democratic Party, wrote on Facebook. Italy’s older population has suffered a devastating toll during the pandemic, with 80 being the average age of those who have died of Covid-19, according to Italy’s National Health Institute. But virologists said that while young people could become vehicles to spread the infection to their more vulnerable relatives, it was too early to assess the scope of the danger represented by those enjoying a night out. Italy has no limit on crowd sizes — except that people must keep a safe distance of one meter apart — now that the lockdown, once the strictest in Europe, has been all but lifted. So long as they observe the distance rule, people may move and meet freely within one region. But newspapers and television footage have shown a constant stream of images of what one newspaper called “young people’s crazy nights out.” Local officials have called Italy’s young people “irresponsible.” Doctors have accused them of being “assassins.” Even the country’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, has reprimanded the youth. “It is not yet the time for parties, movidas and gatherings of all sorts,” Mr. Conte said in an address to Parliament on May 21, using a Spanish word for nightlife favored by older Italians. He added that everyone needed to take it easy — “especially the young.” In Brescia, one of the hardest-hit cities in the outbreak, crowds of young people standing inches apart, with their masks under their chins, have infuriated officials who said the young Italians had failed their first exam and would be subject to a weekend curfew. When others crowded into squares in Turin and Verona, the mayor introduced a rule insisting that public drinking could take place only inside bars, with fines of up to 3,000 euros (about $3,300). On Monday, the national government announced a call for 60,000 volunteers to visit gathering places to remind people to respect the social-distancing rules. Many said it reminded them of a move by a police state and described it as the introduction of Orwellian “cocktail voyeurs,” or an “antivirus army.” The government later explained it had no intention of creating a nightlife police force. But most attention has centered on a stretch of bars in Milan, along the canals in Navigli, a neighborhood favored by young professionals and students. This month, large crowds pushed Milan’s mayor, Giuseppe Sala, to threaten to close down the area. On Tuesday, he banned the sale of takeout alcoholic drinks after 7 p.m. Giorgia Gangi, 22, who was drinking an aperitif on Tuesday with her friends at a bar in the area called Ugo, said that while a minority of young people might have behaved irresponsibly after the lockdown, the great majority respected the rules still in place. “Now it looks like we are the culprits,” she said. “It’s a mountain out of a molehill.” There are those, however, who acknowledge some irresponsible behavior by young people, but say it has largely been a result of inconsistent messages from officials and of the government’s largely abandoning the younger generation during the emergency, leaving schools and colleges closed while opening bars. Raffaele Alberto Ventura, a writer and the author of “Theory of the Disadvantaged Class,” said that the fact that young people came under scrutiny only when discussing inessential leisure activities such as drinking and socializing highlighted that many were unemployed or unemployable and reliant on their parents’ income. “This crisis puts under the spotlight a deeper problem: the existence of a whole age group that is forced to be inessential,” he wrote in an email on Monday. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Giulia Renna, 20, who was drinking an aperitif with her boyfriend in the Navigli area on Tuesday, agreed. She said that they had both lost their on-call jobs during the emergency and that she did not understand how, in a country that “does not consider young people,” they were suddenly being blamed. “It’s unfair,” she declared. Gemma Calamandrei, who leads the behavioral science and mental health department at Italy’s National Health Institute, said that young people became an easy target for a general population that has lost a sense of control. She said the “criminalization” of youth was one way to cope with the fear. “Finding an external visible enemy helps,” she explained. Andrea Crisanti, a professor of microbiology who served as Veneto’s top consultant for the coronavirus emergency, also criticized the “condemnation of the youth,” saying that officials had never clearly explained social-distancing measures, the actual danger represented by young people and the use of masks. Back at the Milan park, the teenagers still seemed confused about the Lombardy region’s rule that masks must be worn outside. “I can see my friends outside, but wearing a mask,” Nina Bellafiore, 17, said, while wearing her mask around her arm. One of her friends disagreed, saying that outdoors, masks were not compulsory. While others blithely argued that only the old got sick and died from the virus, Ms. Bellafiore said she was not scared of infecting her parents because she did not hug her friends, she showered every time she returned home and she talked to her grandmother only from the street below her balcony. “I never felt guilty,” she said.Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device:Via Apple Podcasts | Via Spotify | Via Stitcher Barbara Krupke won the lottery. Fred Walter Gray enjoyed his bacon and hash browns crispy. Orlando Moncada crawled through a hole in a fence to reach the United States. John Prine chronicled the human condition. Cornelia Ann Hunt left the world with gratitude. Over 100,000 people have died from the coronavirus in the United States. Today, we remember 100 of them. As the U.S. reached a grim milestone in the outbreak, The New York Times gathered names of the dead and memories of their lives from obituaries across the country. In order of appearance in the episode: Willie Levi, 73. Cleon and Leon Boyd, both 64. Valentina Blackhorse, 28. Madeline Kripke, 76. Special thanks to Daniel Krieger at Narratively. Orlando Moncada, 56. John Prine, 73. Special thanks to Eddie Huffman, author of “In Spite of Himself.” Britta Lou Miller, 97. Ann Sullivan, 91. Ralph McGehee, 92. Wallace Roney, 59. Wilson Jerman, 91. Arlene Saunders, 89. Rafael Leonardo Black, 71. Margaret Powe, 80, and Charles “Ed” Powe Jr., 88. Arthur Winthrop Barstow, 93. Sal Capozucca, 65. Jerry Spring, 85. Alison Schwartz, 29. Ellis Marsalis, 85. Joel Reed, 86. Joyce Posson Winston, 93. Vinton Mason, 86. Donald Horsfall, 72. Milena Jelinek, 84. Georgianna Glose, 73. Bill Mantell, 68. Durlene Shuffler, 85. Alan Potanka, 68. John Schoffstall, 41. Carmen Lydia Rodriguez, 76. Helen Antonette Molina, 85. Fred Walter Gray, 75. Angelo Piro, 74. Leo Sreebny, 98. Norman Leslie Jenkins, 91. Jeanne Madden Cibroski, 79. Peggy Rakestraw, 72. Mattie Adams, 89. Lillian Press, 95. Myles Coker, 69. Celia Yap-Banago, 69. Steve Dalkowski, 80. Carlos Ernesto Escobar Mejia, 57. John Nakawatase, 62. Richard Rutledge, 87. Juanita “Nita” Pippins, 93. John Sebastian Laird-Hammond, 59. Mary Desole, 93. Gertrude Clemmer Baber, 91. Motoko Fujishiro Huthwaite, 92. John von Sternberg Jr., 79. Anna Elizabeth Pearson Lugg, 90. Barbara Krupke, 83. Kenneth Godwin, 94. Stanley Grossman, 83. Philip Scardilli, 91. Harold Reisner, 85. Clara Louise Bennett, 91. Loretta Mendoza Dionisio, 68. Loretta Dionisio was 4 feet 10 inches tall and outrageously friendly, the kind of person liable to invite the sales clerk at T-Mobile to join the family for dinner. She is photographed with her husband, Roddy, in a photo from 2005 provided by her children. Miguel Ulluari, 51. Special thanks to Annie Correal for her reporting. Vera Jackson, 65. Marilyn Williams, 54. Merrick Dowson, 67. Tomas Puebla, 47. Lloyd Porter, 49. Sally Rowley, 88. Sherrell Stokes, 54. Frank Gabrin, 60. Tommie, 82, and Doris Brown, 79. Israel Sauz, 22. Harold Upjohn, 91. Philip Kahn, 100. Bernice Silver, 106. Lorena Borjas, 59. Laneeka Barksdale, 47. Dez-Ann Romain, 36. David Edwards, 48. George Freeman Winfield, 72. Steve Hann, 67. Islam Uddin Khan, 65. Eddie Gancayco, 62. Mary Roman, 84. Hailey Herrera, 25. Ronald Lewis, 68. Conrad Ifill, 81. Francis Kennedy, 95. Dr. Julie Butler, 62. Jana Prince, 43. Kimarlee Nguyen, 33. Raymond Copeland, 46. Wanda Bailey, 63. Cornelia Ann Hunt, 87. The coronavirus pandemic has taken an incalculable death toll. This series is designed to put names and faces to the numbers. 
          The coronavirus pandemic has taken an incalculable death toll. This series is designed to put names and faces to the numbers.
         Tune in, and tell us what you think. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. Follow Michael Barbaro on Twitter: @mikiebarb. And if you’re interested in advertising with “The Daily,” write to us at thedaily-ads@nytimes.com. “The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Stella Tan, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, M.J. Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette, Hans Buetow, Robert Jimison, Mike Benoist, Bianca Giaever and Asthaa Chaturvedi. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Lauren Jackson, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani and Nora Keller.Administration officials will only testify before Congress if committee leaders agree to conduct the hearings in person, the White House informed Congress on Friday. The decision amounted to a direct challenge to new House rules that allow committees and lawmakers to conduct their work remotely during the coronavirus pandemic, but it was also symbolic of a growing partisan divide about how to conduct political business in an era of concerns about public health. The new condition, outlined in a notice obtained by The New York Times, is in addition to a policy the administration instituted this spring barring administration and agency officials from testifying without the express permission of Mark Meadows, the White House chief of staff. “The Administration is willing to make accommodations, but only when Congress is similarly willing to make accommodations, including agreeing to appear in person,” the White House said, according to a notice sent to congressional staff members. The notice acknowledged exceptions could be made in instances in which a witness needed to quarantine. The policy comes as the House of Representatives plans to pull back from its usual activities. Democratic leaders announced on Friday that they expect to call the chamber into session for votes for only three weeks over the next three months — a substantially scaled-back summer schedule. President Trump, in contrast, is ramping up his campaigning in the coming weeks. While he still has no mass rallies scheduled, he will resume in-person fund-raisers next month under new restrictions, according to Republican Party officials. Mr. Trump will headline a June 11 fund-raiser at a private home in Dallas, and a June 13 fund-raising event at his golf club in Bedminster, N.J. The Dallas event will cost $580,600 per couple to attend, a party official said, and the Bedminster event will be held outdoors and cost $250,000 per person. Only about 25 attendees are expected at each of the events, a nod to social distancing recommendations. But each attendee will have to submit to a virus test, complete a wellness questionnaire, and pass a temperature screening. Vice President Mike Pence is also expected to resume attending fund-raisers in June, but the future of the Republican convention scheduled for August in Charlotte, N.C., remained in limbo as Republicans planning the event traded demands with North Carolina’s Democratic governor. In a joint letter to Gov. Roy Cooper on Thursday, the Republican National Committee chairwoman, Ronna McDaniel, and the president of the convention committee, Marcia Lee Kelly, laid out a deadline of June 3 to approve safety measures to prevent the spread of the virus during the event. On Friday, Mr. Cooper’s administration responded with a letter of its own, asking Ms. McDaniel and Ms. Kelly to detail the R.N.C.’s plans to protect participants, and to specify whether the president was still set on holding a large-scale nominating event where crowds would not wear face masks. A detailed county map shows the extent of the coronavirus outbreak, with tables of the number of cases by county. The first mention of the coronavirus pandemic was a joke. A master of ceremonies was explaining to a crowd of more than 100 people why the keynote speakers — home-state Senators Lindsey Graham and Tim Scott — were running a bit late. “You have to understand, they haven’t got to do any politicking for a while,” said the M.C., Robert Rabon of the Horry County Republican Party. “They’re like a kid in a candy store — they’re going wild!” And with that passing mention, South Carolina Republicans returned to the normal rhythm of the campaign trail, coronavirus all the same. The outdoor gathering here on Thursday was a send-off event for Cleo Steele, a longtime Republican Party operative in Horry County, who is retiring to Ohio. Speakers shared the same microphone. Local and state political candidates greeted voters with handshakes and squeezed tight for pictures. Of all the people gathered outside the county Republican office — many of them senior citizens — fewer than a dozen wore masks. “Social distancing guidelines are recommended,” the invitation had said. “Hand sanitizer and face masks will be available.” In reality, according to interviews with more than a dozen attendees, the event was an active rejection of behavior that the hyper-conservative crowd has come to associate with liberal enemies in recent months — wearing masks and gloves, staying six feet away from other people, avoiding physical touch. To treat the coronavirus as something to be feared, they said, was a political act incongruous with their values. Dwayne “Duke” Buckner, who is challenging Mr. Graham in the Republican Senate primary next month and came to the event to meet voters, said he had recently stopped adhering to public health guidelines, which he described as overly burdensome. “You can quote me on this,” Mr. Buckner said. “When the good Lord calls you home, a mask ain’t going to stop it.” Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo of New York said on Friday that he expected the city to meet several benchmarks that would permit millions of virus-weary residents to enjoy the first signs of a normal life as early as June 8. Retail stores could open for curbside or in-store pickup, and nonessential construction and manufacturing could resume, part of an initial phase that could send as many as 400,000 people back to work. As other parts of the nation, including less populated sections of New York State, have already reopened, New York City, which lost more than 20,000 lives to the virus, has taken much longer to recover. Deaths in New York have dropped to only dozens a day, rather than the 700 or 800 a day that were taking place in April. That progress largely came because many New Yorkers followed the rules, and have been wearing masks and maintaining social distance as requested. The rewards of vigilance have been manifest not only in decreasing fatalities, but also in the declining number of people testing positive for the virus and those requiring hospital stays because of it. “I am proud of the way New York is figuring it out,” Mr. Cuomo said. But even with the strides the city has made, the road to normalcy will no doubt be steep and rocky. Since February, nearly 900,000 local jobs have vanished and thousands of businesses have closed their doors — some forever. Revenues from sales taxes are expected to drop by $1 billion, part of a frightening $9 billion estimated budget shortfall that could push officials into risky borrowing and force drastic cuts to essential city services. Major cities like Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles were set to continue easing restrictions, with Washington reopening outdoor seating at restaurants. The number of diners in a party will be limited to six people and tables will have to be spaced at least six feet apart. Hair salons and barbershops were also permitted to open for appointment-only haircuts with stations six feet apart. The city’s parks are open, but not its playgrounds. The northern suburbs of Virginia also began limited reopenings on Friday, while suburban counties in Maryland remain shut. Earlier this week, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House virus response coordinator, singled out the Washington region as among a handful of metropolitan areas where positive test rates remained high. In California, officials in hard-hit Los Angeles announced plans to lift some restrictions. Restaurants and hair salons will be able to reopen as soon as this weekend if they meet Los Angeles County’s guidelines and safety protocols. As of Friday, 48 out of 58 California counties had met the readiness criteria for reopening. Each county is required to file documentation showing that it qualifies for variance from the stay-at-home order. Illinois is expected to enter its third phase of reopening in the coming days, bringing barbershops, salons, retail stores and other businesses back with some limitations. Gatherings of more than 10 people remain banned. New cases in the state continue to mount, with an average of more than 1,800 new cases a day over the past week. In the next few days, Ohio will allow child care centers, day camps and some catering and banquet businesses to reopen. Most businesses there have reopened over the last month. The governor of Connecticut announced Friday that his state would begin to allow gatherings of up to 10 people indoors and 25 people outdoors. Houses of worship would be allowed to hold indoor gatherings at 25 percent capacity or up to 100 people, whichever is fewer; outdoor services could include up to 150 people as long as social distancing was observed. Casinos on land held by sovereign nations could also reopen, a move the governor, Ned Lamont, had opposed. In New Jersey, Gov. Phil Murphy said that over the next several weeks the state would permit child care services to fully open and some summer programs for children to begin operating. “As more and more workers prepare to get back out to their jobs, we must ensure a continuum of care for their children,” he said. In many places across the U.S., cases and deaths appear to have peaked or are starting to flatten. But there is a lot of regional variation. transcript China has total control over the World Health Organization despite only paying $40 million per year compared to what the United States has been paying, which is approximately $450 million a year. Chinese officials ignored their reporting obligations to the World Health Organization and pressured the World Health Organization to mislead the world when the virus was first discovered by Chinese authorities. Countless lives have been taken and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe. We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization, and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs. The world needs answers from China on the virus. We must have transparency. After spending weeks accusing the World Health Organization of helping the Chinese government cover up the early days of the coronavirus epidemic in China, President Trump said on Friday that the United States would terminate its relationship with the agency. “The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government,” Mr. Trump said in a speech in the Rose Garden. “Countless lives have been taken, and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe.” In his 10-minute address, Mr. Trump took no responsibility for the deaths of 100,000 Americans from the virus, instead saying China had “instigated a global pandemic.” There is no evidence that the W.H.O. or the government in Beijing hid the extent of the epidemic in China, and public health experts generally view Mr. Trump’s charges as a way to deflect attention from his administration’s own bungled attempts to respond to the virus’s spread in the United States. A spokeswoman for the W.H.O. in Geneva, where word of Mr. Trump’s announcement arrived around 9 p.m., said the agency would not have a response until Saturday. Public health experts in the United States reacted to Mr. Trump’s announcement with alarm. “We helped create the W.H.O.,” said Dr. Thomas Frieden, the former director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, which has worked with the organization since its creation in 1948. “We’re part of it — it is part of the world,” Dr. Frieden said. “Turning our back on the W.H.O. makes us and the world less safe.” When experts recommend wearing masks, staying at least six feet away from others, washing your hands frequently and avoiding crowded spaces, what they’re really saying is: Try to minimize the amount of virus you encounter. A few viral particles cannot make you sick — the immune system would vanquish the intruders before they could. But how much virus is needed for an infection to take root? What is the minimum effective dose? A precise answer is impossible, because it’s difficult to capture the moment of infection. Scientists are studying ferrets, hamsters and mice for clues but, of course, it wouldn’t be ethical for scientists to expose people to different doses of the virus, as they do with milder cold viruses. “The truth is, we really just don’t know,” said Angela Rasmussen, a virologist at Columbia University in New York. “I don’t think we can make anything better than an educated guess.” So-called super-spreaders seem to be particularly gifted in transmitting the virus, although it’s unclear whether that’s because of their biology or their behavior. On the receiving end, the shape of a person’s nostrils and the amount of nose hair and mucus present — as well as the distribution of certain cellular receptors in the airway that the virus needs to latch on to — can all influence how much virus it takes to become infected. The crucial dose may also vary depending on whether it’s ingested or inhaled. But the virus’s uncertainties will weigh on American employers as they contemplate sweeping new recommendations from the C.D.C. on the safest ways to reopen their offices. The recommendations include temperature and symptom checks for arriving employees; keeping desks six feet apart; and the wearing of face coverings at all times. If followed, the guidelines would lead to a far-reaching remaking of the corporate work experience. They even upend years of advice on commuting, urging people to drive to work by themselves, instead of taking mass transportation or car-pooling, to avoid potential exposure to the virus. transcript Locked inside my apartment under stay-at-home orders, the pandemic begins to look oddly routine. Bingeing some reality TV show, I can begin to forget why I’m stuck here — until the commercial break. “We’re all living a new normal —” “Especially now.” “Even in times as uncertain as these.” It’s jarring how quickly the realities of the coronavirus have been processed into the optimistic language of advertising. Every crisis inspires its own corporate PSAs, but these ones are strangely ubiquitous. The hallmarks of coronavirus ads are so consistent they could be generated by bots. “People.” “People.” “People.” “People.” “People.” “And family.” They’re all collected in this YouTube montage called, “Every Covid-19 Commercial Is Exactly the Same.” “Especially now.” The ads begin with eerie drone footage of empty streets, a shot of a child staring plaintively out the window, some desperate-looking individual, and then — upbeat musical key change. A medical worker peeling off their mask, a guy jamming on his home piano, a deeply pregnant woman rubbing her stomach as if summoning a genie from a bottle. And finally: “We care about keeping you safe.” “We’re here to help.” “We’re still here for you.” “Our spirit is what unites us.” What’s weird is, I’m not sure what I’m supposed to buy. These ads are often strangely devoid of product placement. Instead, they lean on pat metaphors that stuff the crisis into the various receptacles affiliated with the products. There are no Cokes in this Malaysian Coke ad, just the note, “Thank you for filling the glass with kindness and hope.” Dunkin’ talks about raising a cup. And Hefty’s message compares the human spirit to a bag of trash. “Thank you.” Uber even ran an anti-Uber commercial that tells its customers, “Thank you for not riding with Uber.” In the place of images of products, these ads are selling a vision of the workers who made them. They show Fareway employees striding in slo-mo through stockrooms, and masked warehouse workers monitoring Amazon conveyor belts. “To our over one million heroes —” “To all of our Amazon retail heroes, we want to thank you.” “I say thank you.” They’re capitalizing on the trend of anointing all essential workers as heroes. It’s a well-meaning impulse to thank those people who are stocking shelves and bagging groceries, but employers have seized on it as a tactic to soften the uncomfortable truth that their workers are at risk, and ease our own tensions as consumers about benefiting from their work. “So how does it feel when you see an ad that valorizes a grocery store worker as a hero?” “The word, hero, has always implied having some sort of agency. Somebody running into a burning house and saving a baby, they are making a conscious decision. But we weren’t trained for this kind of thing. This wasn’t in our job descriptions. We’re not these altruistic angels that are just so happy to be there, and to serve you. And that’s kind of what they’re trying to show in these ads. It’s wonderful to be acknowledged. It’s when it becomes a catchphrase, it’s when it becomes ingenuine. It’s like memos from corporate like, ‘You guys are heroes,’ you know? It doesn’t mean anything anymore.” These ads have reimagined their ideal consumers too. Medical workers have swiftly been elevated into unwitting corporate spokesmodels, creating a fantasy where all consumption is reframed as a public service performed by heroes for heroes. In the coronavirus ad world, heroes are broadly defined. They’re not just the nurses and grocery stockers. Now every couch surfer can feel like they’re doing their part. Basically anything a person does during the pandemic can be reframed in a commercial as an act of heroism. It’s telling that so many of these ads are constructed from found images of social media, or at least they’re made to appear that way. They locate hope in amateur video of a woman cutting her own bangs and a baby riding a Roomba. It’s as if by some kind of transitive property, drinking the same brand of coffee that I saw a nurse drink means that I’m contributing to the cause. [sirens] I may not be packing meat or intubating patients, but at least I am bravely maintaining my consumption habits. They make me feel like I’m doing my part by staying on my couch. For the TV networks, 2020 was supposed to be a big year. The presidential election and Tokyo Olympics would keep people watching, and companies were expected to spend more than usual on commercial time. But with the Summer Games postponed and campaign rallies on lockdown, television advertising revenue is likely to drop 12 percent this year, according to a projection by the research firm MoffettNathanson. Networks will lose out on $25.5 billion in spending, according to a report released on Thursday by the WARC research group. Viewership is not the problem; now that millions of homebound people have limited entertainment options, many people are watching more TV. But the economic fallout of the pandemic has caused companies to slash their advertising budgets by more than 40 percent, according to the research firm Kantar. To hedge against that drop in revenue, networks have offered commercial time at double-digit discounts, and some companies have turned to bare-bones advertisements instead of more elaborately produced commercials. Before the pandemic, 30 percent of ad spending in the United States went toward TV commercials, while 56 percent went to purely digital platforms. By the end of the year, “this gap is really going to blow out,” with TV “falling more dramatically,” said Michael Nathanson, a founding partner of the MoffettNathanson research firm. Senator Bob Casey, Democrat of Pennsylvania, disclosed Friday that he had tested positive for coronavirus antibodies, and said that he planned to donate his plasma to help fight the virus. Mr. Casey was the second senator in two days to announce a recent positive antibody test, after Tim Kaine of Virginia said Thursday he had the antibodies, and the third now known to have contracted Covid-19. Senator Rand Paul, Republican of Kentucky, tested positive for the virus earlier this spring, and continued to come into close contact with colleagues in the Capitol in the days before receiving his results. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. It was unclear from his statement whether Mr. Casey could have been carrying the virus when Congress was in session, at a time when it was known to be infecting others on Capitol Hill. Mr. Casey said he had experienced “mild” Covid-19 symptoms including “for a number of days” this spring, without providing a precise timetable. He said he had been able to work remotely, in isolation, through the symptoms and that by mid-April he was feeling better. Because the case was mild, Mr. Casey said his doctor at the time recommended against getting a coronavirus test. More recently, Congress’s attending physician advised Mr. Casey to take an antibody test. “The results revealed substantial levels of Covid-19 antibody in my blood, significantly more than the amount required to qualify me as a plasma donor,” he said on Friday. “In an effort to help others fighting this virus, I will be making my first donation today.” There is widespread agreement that the United States economy will soon begin to recover from coronavirus lockdowns. The big debate is whether that rebound will resemble a V, a W, an L or a Nike Swoosh. Increasingly, economists and analysts are penciling in another glyph: a question mark. Forecasters often label their expectations for a post-recession rebound with letters — a “V” suggests a rapid recovery, a “W” a double-dip, and so on — but that’s hard to do this time around. As all 50 states begin to open up, consumers trickle out of their homes and businesses make adjustments — crafting everything from restaurant protocols to remote auctions — the path ahead is wildly uncertain, making prognostication dicey. It isn’t just Wall Street forecasters eschewing declarative forecasts and the alphabet in favor of a range of what-ifs. From the Federal Reserve to the White House, analysts have suggested that posing confident prognostications is probably more misleading than helpful. Larry Kudlow, director of the White House National Economic Council, said at an event sponsored by The Washington Post that he shares President Trump’s expectation for a rapid bounce-back, but suggested that there are wide ranges around those estimates. “It’s really hard to model a virus, or a pandemic, the likes of which we haven’t seen in 100 years,” Mr. Kudlow said. “You can have your own Vs; there’s Vs, there are lesser Vs,” Mr. Kudlow said. “There are combos of Us and Vs.” Cognizant of that uncertainty, the White House confirmed it will not even issue an update to its economic forecasts this summer, breaking decades of tradition. Athletes tend to view themselves as perhaps better equipped than the general population to avoid the worst consequences of the disease. Yet interviews with athletes who have contracted it — from professionals to college athletes to weekend hobbyists — revealed their surprise at the potency of its symptoms, struggles to reestablish workout regimens, lingering battles with lung issues and muscle weakness, and unsettling bouts of anxiety about whether they would be able to match their physical peaks. “It definitely shook me up a bit — it was very surreal, you know?” Von Miller, a linebacker for the Denver Broncos who contracted the virus, said in an interview.  Panagis Galiatsatos, a pulmonary physician and assistant professor at Johns Hopkins, singled out three complications from Covid-19 that could be of particular concern to athletes. First, coronavirus patients, like anyone with a serious respiratory infection, were at risk for long-term lung issues. He also considered the high incidence of blood clots seen as potentially troubling for athletes because people diagnosed with blood clots, and prescribed blood thinners, are typically discouraged from participating in contact sports. Finally, Dr. Galiatsatos said patients placed on ventilators and confined to a bed often lost between 2 and 10 percent of their muscle mass per day. transcript Protester: “Hands up, don’t shoot. Hands up, don’t shoot. Hands up —” [explosion] The Third Precinct of the Minneapolis Police Department. On fire. Nearby businesses, ablaze. This is how the night of May 28 unfolded. George Floyd’s arrest and death in police custody on Monday set off protests in the Twin Cities. The protesters are demanding that criminal charges be brought against the officers involved. Protester: “Put that fist up — we’re all him. All lives matter.” When that didn’t happen on Thursday, some demonstrators escalated their tactics … … while others tried to keep the peace. [shouting] Police scanner audio, and footage from outside the precinct, provide insight into what happened. The police shoot tear gas from grenade launchers. “You want more of your people to die? You [expletive] coward. You want more of the people you’re supposed to protect to [expletive] die? You [expletive] coward — [expletive] you!” This back and forth with protesters continues for about an hour. Around 10 p.m., the officers begin evacuating the precinct. Crowd: “No justice, no peace.” Protester: “Everybody get garbage — let’s fill the cops’ place with garbage.” Protester: “Burn it!” On Friday, one former officer was charged with murder and manslaughter in connection with George Floyd’s death. As restrictions eased across the country, new measures were issued and under consideration in some cities and states where protests were growing over the killing of George Floyd, a black man who died in Minneapolis after a white police officer held his knee on Mr. Floyd’s neck for about nine minutes. The Minnesota authorities said Friday afternoon that the officer, Derek Chauvin, who was fired after the episode, had been arrested and charged with third-degree murder. Earlier, large crowds of demonstrators had gathered against the backdrop of a pandemic that had kept many residents from engaging with one another directly for months. Last week, Dr. Deborah L. Birx, the White House virus response coordinator, said that Minneapolis was considered a hot spot for virus cases. In New York, where the city is still under restrictions to stem the spread of the virus, hundreds of people joined the protests on Thursday, and more than 40 were arrested. More than 100 scientists and clinicians have questioned the authenticity of a huge hospital database that was the basis for an influential study published last week that concluded that treating people who have Covid-19 with chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine did not help and might have increased the risk of abnormal heart rhythms and death. In an open letter to the editor of The Lancet, which published the study’s findings, and the paper’s authors, the scientists asked the journal to provide details about the provenance of the data and called for the study to be independently validated by the World Health Organization or another institution. A spokeswoman for Dr. Mandeep R. Mehra, the Harvard professor who was the paper’s lead author, said on Friday that the study’s authors had asked for an independent academic review and audit of their work. Use of the malaria drugs chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine to prevent and treat Covid-19 has been a focus of intense public attention. President Trump has promoted the promise of hydroxychloroquine, despite the absence of gold-standard evidence from randomized clinical trials to prove its effectiveness, and recently said he was taking it himself in hopes of preventing coronavirus infection. Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, said central bankers had seen the need to use their tools “to their fullest extent” as coronavirus restrictions shuttered economies around the globe and caused United States unemployment to soar. “We crossed a lot of red lines, that had not been crossed before,” Mr. Powell said in a webinar on Friday. He added that he was comfortable with what the Fed had done, because “this is that situation in which you do that, and you figure it out afterward.” The Fed cut interest rates to near-zero and rolled out unlimited bond purchases to soothe markets, while setting up emergency lending programs to keep credit flowing to businesses and state governments. Several of those tiptoe into uncharted territory for the central bank, including programs to buy corporate bonds and purchase debt from states and large cities. But even with that extraordinary support, the Fed chair made it clear that there is uncertainty about what will happen next, acknowledging that “a full recovery of the economy will really depend on people being confident that it’s safe to go out.” Economists say that the path ahead for the economy is wildly uncertain, as massive questions loom over whether additional virus outbreaks will shutter the economy again, and over whether and when consumers will come back to stores. While a quick “V”-shaped recovery seems unlikely — and an “L” in which growth fails to rebound also seems off the table — what path the rebound will follow is a question mark. “We’re all prefacing what we say with: We’re not epidemiologists,” said Jim O’Sullivan, chief U.S. macro strategist at TD Securities. There have been nearly 700,000 new known cases reported in the past week as the virus spreads in Latin America. But many countries are sputtering into reopenings at what experts fear may be the worst time. Airplane travel is inching back, but staying safe remains a concern and safety protocols are changing. We have tips for approaching your next flight. Reporting was contributed by Mike Baker, Karen Barrow, Alan Blinder, Julie Bosman, Ben Casselman, Emily Cochrane, Andrew Das, Nicholas Fandos, Dana Goldstein, Jenny Gross, Maggie Haberman, Astead W. Herndon, Andrew Jacobs, Zolan Kanno-Youngs, Annie Karni, Andrew Keh, Apoorva Mandavilli, Donald G. McNeil, Jr., Andy Newman, Sona Patel, Roni Caryn Rabin, Matt Richtel, Katie Rogers, Dagny Salas, Marc Santora and Eileen Sullivan. [Want to get New York Today by email? Here’s the sign-up.] It’s Friday.  Weather:  Patchy fog and possible thunderstorms, with a high around 80. It starts to clear up Saturday afternoon, and Sunday should be sunny but cooler.  Alternate-side parking: Suspended through June 7.  With the weather getting warmer and New Yorkers getting antsier, the New York City Council wants to force Mayor Bill de Blasio’s hand on outdoor dining. The Council, backed by the restaurant industry, introduced legislation Thursday requiring the mayor to find a way to open streets, sidewalks and public plazas to outdoor dining. Corey Johnson, the Council speaker, and Councilman Antonio Reynoso of Brooklyn are spearheading the effort. “The restaurant and the food industry has been struggling just as much as any other businesses in our city,” Mr. Reynoso said at the Council’s hearing on Thursday, adding that the process would be “something that can be done very quickly and in a timely fashion.” Andrew Rigie, executive director of the New York City Hospitality Alliance, a business group, said the idea was to require the mayor to establish a framework to identify appropriate places for restaurants to sell food and beverages outside and create a mechanism by which businesses and community boards could submit suggestions. The bill would also require the city to set health and safety requirements for such operations. “Our hope is there may be areas where entire streets could be shut down for restaurant service,” Mr. Rigie said. “Other places you may be able to extend the sidewalk, while keeping a lane of cars and bike lanes. Other places, you may be able to use pedestrian plazas.” [Get the latest news and updates on the coronavirus in the New York region.] Governor Andrew M. Cuomo said on Thursday that he would issue an executive order authorizing any business in New York State to deny entry to people who were not wearing face coverings. “We’re giving the store owners the right to say, if you’re not wearing a mask, you can’t come in,” Mr. Cuomo said. “That store owner has a right to protect themselves. That store owner has a right to protect the other patrons in that store.” Mr. Cuomo is not the first local leader to enact such a measure. In New York City, for instance, Mr. de Blasio announced a mask requirement on April 30. Mr. Cuomo also delivered the state’s daily fatality report: 74 more people died of the coronavirus. The governor delivered his briefing at a Boys and Girls Club in Flatbush, Brooklyn, and was joined by the comedian Chris Rock and the actress Rosie Perez, both of whom grew up in the borough. They amplified the governor’s message on the importance of face coverings. Mr. Rock said he had seen many young people in Brooklyn with faces uncovered. “It’s sad that our health has become sort of a political issue,” Mr. Rock said. “It’s a status symbol, almost, to not wear a mask.” [What’s open in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.] After weeks of outcry from distressed New Yorkers demanding that housing payments be halted during the pandemic, the State Legislature passed a bill on Thursday to provide emergency rent relief to tenants. The legislation would provide up to $100 million in rental assistance vouchers to landlords on behalf of tenants who are struggling to pay rent after losing their jobs during the health crisis. The funds would cover rent due from April 1 to July 31. As of late Thursday, the bill had yet to be formally delivered to Mr. Cuomo, but it would take effect immediately if and when he were to sign it. The program would be funded with New York’s share of the $2 trillion CARES Act, the federal relief package passed several weeks ago. Virus Forces N.Y.C. to Consider Tactic That Nearly Led to Ruin in ’75 10 Weeks Into New York Area’s Lockdown, Who Is Still Getting Sick? Lights. Camera. Makeup. And a Carefully Placed 1,246-Page Book. Review: ‘Central Park’ Is the Show We Need Right Now Want more news? Check out our full coverage. The Mini Crossword: Here is today’s puzzle. The City Council voted to replace mentions of “alien” in city documents, regulations and laws with “noncitizen.” [New York Post] Dozens of people were arrested in Union Square at a protest over George Floyd’s death. [NBC 4 New York] What we’re watching: On “The New York Times Close Up With Sam Roberts,” Christina Goldbaum, a reporter who covers the subway for The Times, discusses how the pandemic has affected the system. Also, the reporter Brian Rosenthal talks about the actions taken after his New York taxi medallion investigation. The show airs Friday at 8 p.m., Saturday at 1:30 p.m. and Sunday at 12:30 p.m. [CUNY TV] Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The Times’s Melissa Guerrero writes: Although most performance spaces, museums and community centers are closed, people are finding creative ways to connect through virtual events and programs. Here are suggestions for maintaining a New York social life this weekend while keeping a safe distance from other people. From 6 to 8 p.m. Friday and 1 to 3 p.m. Saturday, visit the Renegade Craft Virtual Fair, a marketplace of makers and designers. Each vendor will host a portal that “transports you into their universe,” and attendees will be able to interact with some of the artists through a livestream. The fair’s website has a roster of vendors and links to the portals. On Saturday from 2 to 4 p.m., gather family members for this festival put on by the Brooklyn Museum and Cool Culture, an organization that provides historically marginalized families free access to a network of cultural institutions. The virtual event will include animal-inspired yoga, a dance party and interactive storytelling. Register on the event page. The Free Black Women’s Library, a pop-up library that features books by black women, will host a conversation with the professors Ayana Jamieson and Moya Bailey, founders of the Octavia E. Butler Legacy Network. At noon on Sunday, they will discuss the book and Ms. Butler’s legacy, and why those feel relevant in this moment. Register and access the Zoom link on the event page. It’s Friday — make the most of it. Dear Diary: It was the wrap party for a not-so-successful television show I had just spent 60-plus-hour weeks working on for the better part of a year. The party was at our sound stage in Queens with about 200 crew members who now had to look for new jobs. The open bar was utilized liberally. Somewhere between the buffet dinner and the sloppy dance party, two costume assistants I hadn’t interacted with much approached a group of us. I knew their names, but I wasn’t quite sure which one was which. “You guys should come to our after-party!” one of them, either Nadia or Nathalie, said. “Meet me outside Bergdorf Goodman at midnight,” the other one instructed enigmatically before dissolving into the dance-floor crowd. It sounded less like a party invitation than the kind of code used by criminals to pass messages about clandestine meetings to incarcerated mob bosses. Honestly, either option sounded pretty thrilling, and it didn’t much matter to me which one I was in for. After all, I had nowhere I needed to be for the foreseeable future. — Libby M. Gardner New York Today is published weekdays around 6 a.m. Sign up here to get it by email. You can also find it at nytoday.com. We’re experimenting with the format of New York Today. What would you like to see more (or less) of? Post a comment or email us: nytoday@nytimes.com.This briefing is no longer updating. Live updates can be found here.  Stocks staged a late-day rebound on Friday, climbing after President Trump gave a long-awaited news conference on China without laying out any new tariffs or sanctions against the country.  Investors had spent most of Friday bracing for Mr. Trump to unveil new measures aimed at punishing China, after Beijing moved to strengthen its authority over Hong Kong, a semiautonomous Chinese city that enjoys special trade and financial relations with the United States.  Mr. Trump said that he would ask his administration to revoke special privileges afforded to Hong Kong, including on trade and law enforcement, and that it would impose sanctions on certain Chinese officials. Both those measures have been discussed by other administration officials and lawmakers in recent days. “My announcement today will affect the full range of agreements we have with Hong Kong,” he said, including “action to revoke Hong Kong’s preferential treatment as a separate customs and travel territory from the rest of China.” The S&P 500 posted a small gain for the day, the last trading session in May, leaving the benchmark stock index up more than 4.5 percent for the month. Technology companies, which are particularly sensitive to tension with China because the country serves as an important manufacturing hub and market, rallied.  Combined with a 12.7 percent gain in April, it was the best two-month jump for the markets in 11 years, a rise that reflects investors focus on the return of economic activity in regions were locked down in an attempt to fight the coronavirus, as well trillions of dollars’ worth of monetary and fiscal stimulus that has surged into financial markets and consumer bank accounts in recent weeks.  “The market has sort of intuitively decided that the worst of the Covid risk is behind us,” said Steve Sosnick, chief strategist at Interactive Brokers in Greenwich, Conn. That may prove incorrect. There’s no guarantee that current efforts to reopen will go smoothly. Experts say infections could begin to rise again as people begin to return to their normal activities. A second wave of infections in the fall remains a possibility.   transcript I would worry almost more that a second outbreak would undermine confidence. I mean, a full return to — a full recovery of the economy will really depend on people being confident that it’s safe to go out and save to engage in a broad range of economic activities. That’s how the economy will recover. And you see people testing the limits now, probably every day, all of us are doing things we might not have done two months ago. We know that — I guess everyone is affected by the pandemic in a negative way to one degree or another. But the burdens are falling very strongly on those who can least afford to bear them. The unemployed come very largely, so far, come very largely from parts of the service economy, which involve dealing with large groups of people in — that are tightly together. Secondly, falling on women to an extraordinary degree, this is falling on women to some extent, or in those jobs. And so this is, this — there’s tremendous inequality in the way the pandemic is affecting our population. Now you ask, does that does that affect our policy? Look, it does affect our policy. You know, although essentially part of our mandate is maximum employment. It’s maximum employment and stable prices are monetary policy mandates. So we’re very focused on the full range of employment, and doing whatever we can to really, as I mentioned earlier, to try to get those people back to work or in new jobs. Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, said that central bankers saw the need to use their tools “to their fullest extent” as coronavirus lockdowns shuttered economies around the world and caused U.S. unemployment to soar. “We felt called to do what we could,” Mr. Powell said on Friday, during a Princeton University webinar. “We crossed a lot of red lines that had not been crossed before, and I’m very comfortable with — this is that situation in which you do that, and you figure it out afterward.” The Fed has taken a variety of actions to support the economy, including cutting interest rates to near-zero, rolling out unlimited bond purchases and introducing a variety of emergency lending measures to keep credit flowing to businesses and state governments. The central bank’s efforts have come at a time of dire economic need. Economists are bracing for a deep plunge in output in the second quarter, which runs from April through June, and most predict only a gradual recovery over the remainder of the year. It could be months or years before output climbs back to its precrisis level and the unemployment rate falls to the 50-year lows that prevailed before the coronavirus came to the United States. More than 40 million people, the equivalent of one out of every four American workers, have filed for unemployment benefits since mid-March, based on data released this week. A report next Friday is expected to show that the unemployment rate jumped to 19.5 percent in May, based on the median estimate in a Bloomberg survey of economists. Government infusions to Americans’ bank accounts led to a surge in personal income in April, the Commerce Department reported Friday, but the coronavirus-related economic shutdown still caused a steep decline in consumer spending. Personal income rose overall by $1.97 trillion, a gain of 10.5 percent in March and 11.7 percent from the previous April. The drop-off in wages was offset by nearly $3 trillion in government transfer payments. Of that, $360 billion was unemployment benefits and $2.6 trillion was “other” — reflecting the checks of up to $1,200 a person that the federal government sent to most households. That extra cash did not translate, at least immediately, into spending on consumer goods, which was down 13.6 percent from March. The decline was spread across all major categories — durable goods, nondurable goods and services. “It’s not every year you get these kinds of crazy swings,” said Greg Daco, chief U.S. economist at Oxford Economics. “It requires a bit of coolheadedness to understand what is transitory and what is permanent.” Government payments, which pumped up personal income “are a one-time shot,” he said, adding, “If you take these benefits out, then you are left with a massive loss of income.” On the other hand, lingering fear is likely to restrain spending on social activities and discretionary for a while. There are signs that spending had begun to rebound slightly in May, Mr. Daco added, but there’s a long way to go before activity returns to precrisis levels. “You might see strong growth numbers on spending but we’re coming out of a deep hole,” he said. There is widespread agreement that the United States economy will soon begin to recover from coronavirus lockdowns. The big debate is whether that rebound will resemble a V, a W, an L or a Nike Swoosh. Increasingly, economists and analysts are penciling in another glyph: a question mark, writes Jeanna Smialek. Forecasters often label their expectations for a post-recession rebound with letters — a “V” suggests a rapid recovery, a “W” a double-dip, and so on — but that’s hard to do this time around. As all 50 states begin to open up and consumers trickle out of their homes, the path ahead is wildly uncertain, making prognostication dicey. It isn’t just Wall Street forecasters eschewing the alphabet in favor of a range of what-if’s. From the Federal Reserve to the White House, analysts have suggested that posing confident prognostications is probably more misleading than helpful. John C. Williams, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, said during an appearance last week that it was important for policymakers to prepare for every eventuality, rather than focus on one type of recovery. Google has rescinded offers to more than 2,000 people who had agreed to work at the company as temporary and contract workers. Google employs more than 130,000 contractors and temp workers, a shadow work force that outnumbers its 123,000 full-time employees. Google’s full-time staff are rewarded with high salaries and generous perks, but temps and contractors often receive less pay, fewer benefits and do not have the same protections, even though they work alongside full-timers. Many of the contract and temp candidates who had agreed to work at Google before the pandemic took hold in the United States were let go without any severance or financial compensation. This came after weeks of uncertainty as Google repeatedly postponed their start dates during which time they were not paid by Google or the staffing agencies through which they were recruited. Some of the would-be contractors left stable, full-time jobs once they received an employment offer at Google and are now searching for work in a difficult labor market. Some, who are Americans, said the rescinded offers had complicated and, in some cases, delayed their ability to receive unemployment benefits because they left their last jobs voluntarily, according to several of the workers facing this quandary. In mid-April, a company spokeswoman said that Google intended to bring on the people who it had already hired but who had not started. But this did not seem to apply to contractors or temp workers for Google and Alphabet, which has a market capitalization of near $1 trillion. It made $6.8 billion in profit in the first three months of 2020, despite what it called “a significant and sudden slowdown” in advertising. “If these people were promised jobs at Alphabet, which is worth a trillion dollars, it seems like the company has a responsibility to take them on,” said Ben Gwin, who works as a data analyst in a Google office for HCL America, a contracting agency. “It’s not like Google can’t afford it.” The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced sweeping new recommendations on the safest way for American employers to reopen their offices to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Among the guidelines: Employees should get a temperature and symptom check on arriving at work. Desks should be six feet apart. If that isn’t possible, employers should consider erecting plastic shields around desks. Seating should be barred in common areas. Face coverings should be worn at all times. If followed, the guidelines would lead to a far-reaching overhaul of the corporate work experience. They even upend years of advice on commuting, urging people to drive to work by themselves, instead of taking mass transportation or car-pooling, to avoid potential exposure to the virus. The recommendations run from technical advice on ventilation systems (more open windows are most desirable) to suggested abolition of communal perks like latte makers and snack bins. The country’s largest dollar-store chains reported their latest quarterly results on Thursday, blowing away expectations for sales and profits. These discounters generally thrive during periods of high unemployment and weak economic growth, and the coronavirus crisis is no exception. “We do very good in good times and we do fabulous in bad times,” said Todd J. Vasos, the chief  executive of Dollar General. His company reported a 28 percent rise in sales in its latest quarter. Dollar Tree reported an 8 percent rise in revenue over the same period. “In 2008, folks lost jobs, too, and they needed us and they found us,” said Gary M. Philbin, the chain’s chief executive. For the year, both companies’ stock prices are up nearly 20 percent, easily outperforming the S&P 500 and nearly doubling the rises recorded by Walmart and Target. Dollar General said it had hired more than 50,000 people since mid-March, and Dollar Tree hired more than 25,000 over a similar stretch. Both are paying special bonuses for workers during the pandemic; Dollar General said these totaled $60 million in its latest quarter. Still, working conditions at these stores have faced criticism, before and since the coronavirus outbreak. The French carmaker Renault said on Friday that it would cut nearly 15,000 jobs worldwide and drastically reduce production as it tries to deal with “the major crisis facing the automotive industry.” About a third of the job cuts would be in France, Renault said. The company, which is partly owned by the French government, indicated it is likely to close several factories while it cuts the number of cars it produces annually to 3.3 million, from four million. Renault will also pull out of China, where it has failed to get much traction. Renault has been hit hard by the pandemic. Renault sales in the European Union, its most important market, fell almost 80 percent in April, when dealerships were closed and most buyers were not leaving their homes. The U.S. dollar has gained about 7 percent this year against a basket of major currencies. But with interest rates at rock-bottom levels, the Fed’s printing presses revving up and the government borrowing enormous sums for stimulus spending, today’s DealBook newsletter asks: Can it retain its haven status? A recent research note by Gregory Daco at Oxford Economics found that since 1973, the dollar has appreciated an average of 6 percent in the past six recessions, in line with its performance during the current downturn. Mr. Daco expects the dollar to remain strong this year, but not for the usual reasons. Unlike in past recessions, when investors flocked to the safety of Treasury bonds, foreign investors dumped U.S. government debt at a record rate in March, which would normally push the dollar down. But since the Fed flooded the markets with stimulus, the U.S. stock market has, unusually, become a “safe refuge,” Mr. Daco writes, propelled by tech stocks whose businesses are benefiting from stay-at-home orders. Ascena Retail Group, the owner of Ann Taylor, Loft and Lane Bryant, said on Thursday that “the uncertainty created by Covid-19 requires us to evaluate all options available to protect the business and its stakeholders,” sending its shares down on Friday. The company, which also owns Justice, said that its revenue plummeted 45 percent in the quarter that ended May 2 and it had reopened only 450 of its 2,800 stores as of May 27. Nordstrom, the top-performing department store in the United States, said on Thursday that its net sales fell 40 percent to $2 billion in the first quarter, and that it posted a net loss of $521 million. Digital sales accounted for more than half of its total net sales during the quarter.  The retailer closed stores on March 17 and started reopening in early May. It said it now has about 40 percent of its locations open.  Costco Wholesale said on Thursday that its net sales rose 7.3 percent to $36.5 billion in its quarter ending May 10 and that it posted a net profit of $838 million, as the pandemic prompted customers to stock up on goods. The warehouse chain, which has more than 500 U.S. locations, said its income took a hit from a $283 million pretax charge “from incremental wage and sanitation costs related to Covid-19.” Reporting was contributed by Nelson D. Schwartz, Ben Casselman, Niraj Chokshi, Daisuke Wakabayashi, Jason Karaian, Jeanna Smialek, Matt Richtel, Kate Conger, Jack Ewing, Mike Isaac, Maggie Haberman, Kevin McKenna, Mohammed Hadi and Carlos Tejada.On a normal day at the Smithsonian’s National Air and Space Museum, giddy children line up to get a chance to be enclosed in a compact capsule capable of blasting off into space or to feel the stomach-turning lurch of operating a fighter jet. Nowadays, just the idea of their children in such touchy-feely spaces is enough to evoke a good deal of cringing by parents: the joysticks, the VR goggles, the seatbelts — all shared by dozens of tourists who have passed through. So in the second week of March, one day before the museum itself closed because of coronavirus, its leaders shut down one of the institution’s most popular — and germ-covered — attractions: flight simulators and virtual-reality machines that mimic the sensation of being a fighter pilot or astronaut. “I’m personally very reluctant to touch things in public right now,” said Ellen Stofan, the director of the Air and Space Museum. “And if we can’t find a way to do it safely, we’re not going to do it at all.” Such is the dilemma these days for many museums across the country, particularly science and children’s museums, for whom the ethos for decades has been to encourage visitors not only to look, but to touch. All sorts of exhibits were installed and designed to provide people the opportunity to manipulate touch screens or press buttons to help them learn. Research has shown that hands-on activities, guided by a parent or museum staffer, are very effective teaching tools for children. Now, as many of these institutions anticipate reopening, they must face the question of what to do with what had been integral parts of their museum experience. The solutions range from blocking off some hands-on exhibits to creating hygienic ways to touch without risk. So visitors, for example, won’t be able to test their risk tolerance at one exhibit at the International Spy Museum in Washington, by inserting their hand into an opaque box without knowing what’s inside. (Spoiler alert: It may feel as though something is crawling on you.) “Clearly we’re not going to open an exhibit where you stick your hand in something,” said Jackie Eyl, the museum’s youth education director. But visitors will be able activate touch screens and press buttons elsewhere, the museum said. It has bought disposable styluses that visitors can use in place of their hands, a low-cost solution that has caught on among museums of all kinds. Other institutions are looking into antiviral coatings that can be applied to the screens or thinking up other outside-the-box solutions to avoid the need for touching. “If we can’t be hands-on, can we be feet-on?” Ms. Eyl asked. The unfortunate news at the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County is that, for the near term anyway, it will have to close a very popular part of its permanent “Paleo Play Zone” exhibit, which opened in 2019. In normal times, children use miniature paleontological tools to find reproduced fossils in the sand of a “dig pit.” But it is impractical to clean the tools and the sand between visitors at the fake excavation site. The New-York Historical Society invested heavily in touch-screen stations during an $80 million renovation to its building that was completed in 2011, and they spent even more on that technology in 2015. Now, the museum will need to buy styluses for its visitors, and is exploring the possibility of replacing touch navigation with voice activation. Accessibility advocates are concerned that decades of progress in introducing multi-sensory features will be rolled back if museums turn into “no touch” environments, said Janice Majewski of the Institute for Human Centered Design, which consults for museums. Museums are looking into voice- or gesture-based tools, too, so that visitors can have interactive experiences without touching anything. But it’s a difficult time to be spending on new technology amid the slumping revenues and layoffs that have come with the pandemic. “All of the things we have to do to keep visitors healthy and safe are going to cost money,” said Louise Mirrer, the chief executive of the historical society. “But we won’t be able to operate otherwise.” A couple years ago, after touch screens had become popular at museums, research into the amount of bacteria that resides on these screens became a topic of conversation among museum officials, said Christy Coleman, executive director of the Jamestown-Yorktown Foundation, which runs two living history museums. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. There was a realization that museums needed to figure out an effective plan for keeping the screens clean. Before the pandemic, that meant wiping them down once a day. Now, museums will have to either shut these screens down or clean them much more frequently, install hand sanitizer nearby and trust their visitors to use it. At children’s museums, the problem is complicated by the fact that many exhibits are filled with toys, props and soft, pillowy material that is difficult to clean. Many, for example, feature “grocery stores,” where young visitors push miniature shopping carts, grab plastic “food” from shelves and check out at a register. At the Strong National Museum of Play in Rochester, N.Y., staff members are in discussion with Wegmans to enact the same kinds of safeguards as in use at the actual stores: plexiglass around the cashiers and frequent cleaning of the register belts. (Unlike a real Wegmans, they’ll have to disinfect each item before it goes back on the shelves.) At Brooklyn Children’s Museum, they’re considering giving each family that comes in a bag of mock “groceries” for their own personal use — rubber apples and bananas that only one family will be allowed to touch. The road ahead may seem particularly daunting for the Please Touch Museum in Philadelphia. Founded by a Montessori educator as a response to the familiar refrain at some art museums — “don’t touch!” — the museum is facing a financial shortfall because of the pandemic and has laid off or furloughed 75 percent of its staff. But Trish Wellenbach, the museum’s chief executive, said she is confident in the museum’s ability to keep things clean when it reopens. Unlike most institutions, children’s museums have long been seen as petri dishes for viruses, and the Please Touch Museum has had a deep-cleaning procedure in place for decades, she said. The procedure involves cleaning throughout the day, even when visitors are present and watching (a strategy that a broader set of museums are now adopting as a way to instill confidence in the institutions’ cleaning practices). When the American Museum of Natural History opens again, visitors will no longer be able to put their hands on dinosaur bones (“You can’t Clorox those off,” the museum’s president, Ellen Futter, said). The natural history museum is looking into more investment in gesture-based technology, Ms. Futter said, in addition to mobile apps that allow visitors to navigate museums with their smartphones. It experimented with gesture-based technology in a temporary pterosaur exhibit that opened in 2014: visitors were able to flap their arms as if they were wings and see the pterosaur onscreen respond in kind. At the Museum of Science in Boston, the latest endeavor demonstrates the needs of the current moment. In March, after the museum closed indefinitely, its staff started working on a new exhibit about Covid-19. It will feature a full-sized virtual projection of a scientist that uses an artificial intelligence algorithm to answer questions about the disease. When the museum reopens, possibly in July, visitors will be able to pose questions to the expert. And if someone asks, “How does coronavirus spread,” the virtual scientist, all voice-activated, will be in a position to respond: Not from this exhibit.In early March, when Ethan Rasiel read that Italy was going into a nationwide lockdown because of the coronavirus, he had one overriding response: envy. When, in-mid March, Mr. Rasiel, the owner of a public relations firm in Maplewood, N.J., learned that the Bay Area had issued a similar directive, California started looking very good to him. A week or so later, when New Jersey residents were instructed to quarantine, Mr. Rasiel, 47, went inside the four-bedroom house he shares with his wife and three young children, and has emerged only occasionally. Two months on, he couldn’t be happier. “If I’m honest I don’t like leaving home anyway. I don’t like crowds. I don’t like going to the beach. That’s always been my personality,” said Mr. Rasiel. “I’m Zooming with people and that’s good enough for me.” While most people desperately yearn for the moment it’s deemed safe for them to resume their former lives and all that goes with it — even traffic jams and endless meetings are bathed in the rosy glow of nostalgia — there are outliers who would like things to go on like this for a good long time. Not for them the mix of ennui and dread that characterizes sheltering in place. They love sheltering in place. They are, to a person, horrified by what the pandemic has wrought, and are humbled by the sacrifices made by those on the front line. They do not, for a minute, minimize what it is going on. But they have, sometimes to their surprise, found contentment and peace in the situation that has been thrust upon them. Some delight in how much more productive and energized they feel. Some are savoring their time in a house they worked long and hard to pay for, but only rarely had time to enjoy. Others are thrilled that they no longer need come up with a convincing excuse for why they won’t be attending this or that networking event/ birthday party/baby shower — though some of those activities have relocated to Zoom, thus presenting a challenge to even the most wily liars. “Many people have been living lives that if they could have half of what they’ve got going on, it would be great,” said Gail Saltz, a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at the NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital, Weill-Cornell Medical College. “It’s fine work, but it’s too much work. It’s fine socializing, but it’s too much, and the pandemic has been a forced respite. It’s a guilt-free release from the pressures of some work and social and family obligations.” Of course, this couldn’t be a better situation for introverts who have long found the world to be too much with them. “Obviously, we all have various strengths and weaknesses and it’s great if you can choose a life that plays to your strengths and minimizes the struggles you have,” said Dr. Saltz. “For some people, sheltering in place may play to their strengths,” she added. “They may be more introverted but their work life requires extroversion which means they’ve had to suck it up until now.” But thanks to a mandatory quarantine, even the more outgoing are discovering a fondness for their own company. They’re the ones who in the normal course of events are governed by a fear of missing out. “I’m an extrovert, like in the biggest way possible,” said Michael Volpatt, 48, the owner of the restaurant Big Bottom Market in Guerneville, Calif. When the stay-at-home orders that were issued in March made it clear to Mr. Volpatt that he wouldn’t be seeing people for quite some time, he was initially filled with anxiety. He responded by making his mother’s marinara sauce and has since done some 50 live cooking shows on his restaurant’s Facebook page. “Being forced to spend time with myself has taught me to like spending time with myself,” said Mr. Volpatt, who lives in a gated townhouse community near the Russian River. “I’ve gotten acquainted with my couch and I started going to the river with a glass of wine at the end of the day. I’ve lived here since 2009 and I had never done that.” He said that a friend recently asked if he missed going out to bars. “I don’t,” said Mr. Volpatt, who recently completed a book, “Cooking in Place,” which he is self-publishing in June. “Sheltering in place has spawned my creativity in ways I never thought could happen.” Others can identify. With few of the distractions that are part and parcel of a day at the office, they’re far better focused, they say, and able to get more done. Pre-pandemic, Chris Messina-Boyer’s commute to her consulting job at a public relations and marketing agency took 90 minutes out of her day. Now, Ms. Messina-Boyer commutes to the dining room of her home in Alexandria, Va.; it has recently been outfitted with a high top cocktail table, a $50 purchase on Amazon, that she uses as a standing desk. “Here in my home with all the things I love around me, I’m much calmer and I think it makes me work better and makes me more effective with my clients,” said Ms. Messina-Boyer. “We’ve been extremely busy at work,” she added. “But there are things that happen in an office that take you away from your concentration. At home, it easier to get things done.” And for Ms. Messina-Boyer, easier to lose weight. She’s shed 17 pounds so far. It’s far more simple to fit exercise into the day, and to do portion control now that she and her husband, David, are eating every meal at home. “There’s a certain tension and stress in the office that makes me look for a piece of chocolate or a salty snack,” Ms. Messina-Boyer said. “I don’t need that at home at all.” But some have found that the benefits of sheltering in place are as much psychological as physical. Lori Buckley, an administrative coordinator at the Center for Gender, Race and Area Studies at Clark University, likes her job just fine. She likes the staff, she likes the students. “But I find being with people at work very draining. I feel I have to be constantly on. I know how to do it and I’m fairly good at it, but it’s exhausting,” said Ms. Buckley, 51, who for the last two months has been quarantining with her husband, James, at their Cape Cod-style home in Leicester, Mass. “Because of the pandemic, a lot of people are depressed and suffering a lot of anxiety and I’m thriving,” she continued. “I know I’m a freak, but to not have to have physical interaction and worry about colleagues’ emotional state and how I have to play off it is such a relief.” While some people have struggled to adjust to Zoom meetings, Ms. Buckley said, “I can tolerate Zoom because people don’t linger on it. In the office, people linger.” Granted, it’s a lot easier to love sheltering in place if you love the place you’re sheltering in. Gisela Girard and her husband, co-owners of a marketing communications firm, live in a Spanish style house of their own design on eight acres in San Antonio. “You go to work and come home and go to work and you don’t get to enjoy it,” said Ms. Girard, 65, who is now getting to enjoy it to the hilt — the meticulously furnished library, the darkroom (she’s an avid amateur photographer), the patio where she and her husband have dinner every night and admire the view of rolling hills.  It’s also a lot easier to be enthusiastic about sheltering in place if you’re enthused about the people you’re sheltering with. Paul Ronto, the chief marketing officer for a footwear review site, has long worked remotely from his home in Fort Collins, Colo. But when his community went into lockdown, Mr. Ronto, 36, gained a co-worker: his wife. “It’s made my life so much better,” he said. Together, they’ve painted the interior of the four-bedroom house they bought three years ago, and are now tackling the kitchen cabinets. Pre-pandemic, the couple was lukewarm about the property. Now, said Mr. Ronto, “it feels more like our house than the house of the people who lived here before.” Jenelle Hamilton, the owner of a public relations firm, is the sort, she said, who has typically needed to be at this big-deal party or that hot restaurant. But now, as far as she’s concerned, the pandemic could last another year; she’s happily at home in a two-bedroom apartment in Beverly Hills, with her 11-year old daughter, Lily. “I would have never had this much time in my day to be with her,” said Ms. Hamilton, who is divorced and has a joint-custody arrangement with her former husband. “I want to leave her with good memories of what went on during the pandemic. We’re playing board games, we’re coloring. We’re baking. I don’t bake but we’re baking.” “Even though bad things are happening in the world it’s a magical time for us,” she added. People who are happy sheltering in place are aware that they are in the minority. “I feel so cheery and people on internal office calls say to me ‘WHY are you so cheery?” said Deborah Kostroun, the director of a boutique financial services public relations firm, and a single parent, who, while sheltering in place has found the successful work/life balance that previously eluded her. Ms. Hamilton generally opts for silence. “I have friends who are having meltdowns so I either don’t disclose how well I’m doing or downplay it because I know they can’t relate.” The futurist Faith Popcorn thinks that people who are happily working from home during the pandemic may well have the chance to do so when stay-at-home directives are lifted. “I think that once we have a vaccine, a lot of companies will realize they’re getting a good product from employees who are working from home. They’re working more hours,” Ms. Popcorn said. “And if they want to retain good people, they’ve going to have to allow them to continue to work remotely.” Ms. Messina-Boyer is hopeful. “In the past our clients have liked having us in the room with them and maybe now some will see that it works fine on Zoom,” she said. Ms. Kostroun, who says she has been as productive at home as she was in the office, will be considering post-pandemic work-from-home options for her employees. Every time that Ms. Girard hears a sentence that begins “when we get back to normal,” she really doesn’t want to stay around to hear the end of the sentence. “I keep thinking ‘No, I don’t want to be in the office five days a week,” she said. “That was frenetic for me. I want to continue this. I don’t want to go back to normal.” For weekly email updates on residential real estate news, sign up here. Follow us on Twitter: @nytrealestate.WASHINGTON — The Trump administration is accelerating efforts to seize private property for President Trump’s border wall, taking advantage of the coronavirus pandemic to survey land while its owners are confined indoors, residents along the Rio Grande say. “Is that essential business?” asked Nayda Alvarez, 49, who recently found construction markers on the land in Starr County, Texas, that has been in her family for five generations. “That didn’t stop a single minute during the shelter in place or stay at home.” The federal government brought a flurry of lawsuits against landowners in South Texas to survey, seize and potentially begin construction on private property in the first five months of the year as the administration rushed to deliver on Mr. Trump’s promise to build 450 miles of wall by the end of the year, which he downgraded on Thursday to 400. While Mr. Trump has built less than 200 of those miles, his administration has brought 78 lawsuits against landowners on the border, 30 of them this year. Negotiations and lawsuits are proving to be arduous. The administration has acquired just 10 of the 213 miles of private property that the border wall is projected to pass through in the Laredo and Rio Grande Valley sectors, according to Customs and Border Protection data from May 19 obtained by The Times, an increase of seven miles since December. In recent months, the president’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, has stepped in to oversee the effort. The increased litigation against the landowners, despite the pandemic, is evidence of the administration’s sense of urgency to deliver on a symbol of Mr. Trump’s crackdown on immigration. The president has said the pandemic is proof of the wall’s necessity, though there is no real evidence it will have any effect on public health. “Mexico is having a very, very hard time, as you know, with Covid, especially along the border,” Mr. Trump told reporters on Thursday, though Mexico’s 8,600 deaths and 78,000 infections are a fraction of the toll in the United States. “Fortunately,” he added, “we have a brand-new wall along there, and the wall is saving us.” The government filed 13 lawsuits in March alone to access and acquire land, the highest single-month total since Mr. Trump took office, according to the Texas Civil Rights Project. Some of the landowners sued have kept the properties in their families for generations. But the Texans say the government’s timing has left them further disadvantaged in a process in which the administration already has the law on its side. Landowners adhering to coronavirus guidelines have been unable to meet with their relatives to discuss the government’s offers, to confer with lawyers on how to fight the government or to consult appraisers on the accurate value of their land. Some have questioned why the push to access their properties is coming as the coronavirus spreads, and they try to avoid social contact. “They want to do it all obviously prior to November” and the election, said Steven Kobernat, a 61-year-old landowner in Starr County who said he felt hounded by the Department of Justice. “But here we are in a pandemic. We can’t meet, we can’t meet with our families. And then D.O.J. says it’s time-sensitive in a time of pandemic. It’s just absurd.” The Justice Department said in a statement, “We are following all local, state and federal Covid protocols for all phases of land acquisition and court work.” Raini Brunson, a spokeswoman for the Army Corps of Engineers, which is leading construction, said the agency was committed to the safety of employees, contractors and “the people in communities in which we work.” The agency “continues to execute its border barrier infrastructure mission in order to safeguard national security capabilities,” she added. Ms. Alvarez had just come back to Starr County in March when she noticed something strange on her property: construction markers jammed into the earth to measure elevation. Crews had come to her land while she was in Washington to testify to Congress against the border wall. Months before, Ms. Alvarez had encountered government contractors on her property who claimed they had received permission from a relative to survey the land. She refused them access, but her family has continued to see construction crews driving around their land. Mr. Kobernat feels similar pressure. When the Army Corps of Engineers pressed him to accept an offer for seven acres of his family’s farm, he pleaded for time to allow the pandemic to ebb. “There is a sudden mad rush to obtain our property by pushing us to sign and sell immediately. But due to the extraordinary current pandemic crisis, we simply need more time,” Mr. Kobernat wrote in an April 27 email to Army Corps and Border Patrol officials. “Our family is presently unable to safely confer with each other or our attorney as we need to — due to my mayor, my governor and your boss’s shelter-in-place rules.” Shortly after that, he began getting calls from the Justice Department telling him to cooperate with the Army Corps or risk a lawsuit. Lawyers and government officials agree that landowners already had few options. They can choose to voluntarily allow the government to access and survey their land and, if the administration wants it, accept compensation that is supposed to be based on fair market value. But if they refuse, they are likely to be taken to court, where the government can use eminent domain powers to argue that the wall is an emergency and eventually take possession of their land. The government can then begin construction, even while continuing to argue with the landowners over compensation. Ricky Garza, a staff lawyer for the Texas Civil Rights Project, said the timing of the government’s push for private property had made what was already an uphill battle for the landowners even more challenging. “They’ve taken advantage of people sheltering in place. People have not been able to seek out attorneys,” Mr. Garza said. “We haven’t seen any signs of it slowing down. The landowner is really at the mercy of what the government is trying to do.” Many of the property owners are still enlisting lawyers to negotiate. Some hope they can delay the process beyond the election, when the construction of the wall may not be as much of a priority. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. But Mr. Trump is pressing forward as fast as possible. As the coronavirus spread in March, he tweeted, “We need the Wall more than ever,” despite a top health official saying he had not seen evidence that physical barriers would prevent the spread of the virus. The president’s border agency recently started a website showcasing videos of the wall’s construction, months after Mr. Kushner and his allies pushed the Department of Homeland Security to livestream the building of the project. The administration has also waived federal contracting laws to speed construction of the wall; 194 miles have been completed as of this week, up from 93 in December. All but three of the miles are in areas where dilapidated barriers existed or vehicle barriers once stood. The federal government also recently gave a nearly $1.3 billion contract to a North Dakota company backed by Stephen K. Bannon to construct 42 miles of the wall, despite the Office of Inspector General for the Department of Defense examining an earlier $400 million contract given to the company. With recent funding transfers from the Department of Defense, the administration now has $15 billion to build 731 miles of border wall. John B. Mennell, a Customs and Border Protection spokesman, pointed to data that suggested the agency could build about 500 miles of wall on federal border land, without private acquisitions. The agency has apparently tried to lower expectations in recent months, removing language from weekly border wall bulletins that said the administration expected to have 450 miles completed by the end of the year. By the Trump administration’s own logic, private land in South Texas is where the wall is most needed. The border agency recorded more than 34,000 illegal crossings in the Rio Grande Valley in fiscal year 2019, the most of any border sector. “It is the shortest land route from the Guatemala-Mexico border to the U.S. It is an environment that is very difficult to enforce,” said Gil Kerlikowske, the Customs and Border Protection commissioner under President Barack Obama. “It should be the focal point.” Melissa Cigarroa, 53, said she had rarely thought of the border in Zapata County, Texas, as dangerous. The land brings to mind skeet shooting or watching aoudads — or Barbary sheep — make their way through her family’s 150-acre ranch. So far, she has refused to sign documents allowing the government to enter her property. “Why are we going to be the guinea pigs?” Ms. Cigarroa said. “We’re such a little town on the border. It is ridiculous.” Mr. Kobernat said he incorrectly thought that when he sold one acre to the federal government a year ago to build a watchtower for Border Patrol, he and his siblings might be spared from the border wall, which could turn a portion of their farmland into a “no man’s land” between the wall and the Rio Grande. He said he would not give the federal government an answer until he could meet with his siblings, who share ownership of the property. All of them are vulnerable to the coronavirus.After more than a decade of getting around New York City almost exclusively by subway and bus, Nicole Avallone decided to buy a car in April after watching the rapid spread of the coronavirus. But with dealerships closed in the New York area, Ms. Avallone did something few car buyers are able or willing to do: buy a car online. Over the course of several phone calls, text messages and Zoom meetings with a sales representative at Paragon Honda in Queens, she found a low-mileage, dark-purple Honda HRV that the dealership delivered to her door in Brooklyn. “We did a lot of the paper work online, and we didn’t have to spend hours in the dealership,” said Ms. Avallone, a psychotherapist. “I had a million questions, but it was a lot easier than I thought.” E-commerce has been embraced for all manner of goods and services — books, travel, groceries, electronics — but auto sales have resisted the trend. While consumers typically use the internet to browse and arm themselves with information, they have gone to dealers for most transactions. With the coronavirus and stay-at-home orders, that is changing. “Dealers are discovering they can sell cars online,” said Alan Haig, president of Haig Partners, an automotive retail consultant. “They are learning how to interact with customers outside the showroom.” In reporting its first-quarter earnings, General Motors said 750 of its dealers had signed up for its “Shop Click Drive” e-commerce system since the outbreak began. More than 85 percent of its dealers in the United States now use it, said G.M.’s chief executive, Mary T. Barra. AutoNation, a chain of more than 325 dealerships, also reported a jump in online-only sales in March and April. The company’s chief executive, Mike Jackson, said he believed online sales would continue increasing even as stay-at-home restrictions were eased. “This is what the industry has needed to do for a long time,” he said. “This is an inflection point, a strategic shift, and it’s not going back.” Paragon Honda sold about 70 vehicles a month online before infections started to surge in March, a small fraction of its typical monthly total of about 1,300. But when officials in New York ordered people to stay home, the dealership had a dozen or so of its sales representatives switch to online sales. In April, the dealership sold 378 cars online, and the total for May is expected to exceed 500, said Brian Benstock, Paragon’s general manager. “We didn’t think we’d see this much business, but in April we had no choice,” he said. Paragon had a head start because it had been picking up and delivering cars for oil changes and other services for the last two years, using a system that allowed customers to schedule, approve, and pay for repairs by text. As a result, it had a staff of experienced delivery drivers ready to go. Paragon’s drivers wear masks and gloves, cover seats with protective plastic and disinfect the steering wheel and other places that might have been touched during the delivery. Until recently, customers had few options for buying cars online, among them Tesla, the electric car company, and Carvana, a nationwide seller of used cars. Tesla customers can choose and customize cars, secure financing and pay for their cars on the company’s website. Carvana has a similar system allowing customers to peruse its nationwide inventory. Buyers can have cars shipped to them, sometimes at no additional cost. “This is what consumers want and expect now,” said Ernest Garcia III, Carvana’s chief executive. “The product comes to you. You don’t go to the product.” Conventional auto dealers face issues that online-only sellers do not, particularly in setting prices. Automakers use discounts and incentive programs to change prices as often as every month. Manufacturers give sales representatives leeway to cut prices to close deals, and customers know that the sticker price may not be the last word. Dealers resort to such discounts in part because other dealers in the area are competing to sell the same cars. Some manufacturers prevent dealers from advertising the prices they would be willing to accept. For example, Honda typically requires dealers to advertise the list prices of cars on their websites, without taking into account discounts and incentives, Mr. Benstock said. For some models, that means Paragon is displaying a price that may be up to $7,000 more than what customers end up paying. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “It’s hard to sell a car online if you can’t tell the customer up front what the actual price is,” he said. Honda said it discouraged dealers from advertising deals at less than list prices to protect the company’s brand image. An online-sales system that Honda offers its dealers allows them to display actual sales prices of a dealer’s choosing, but only after a customer has started provided some personal information and inquired about a particular vehicle on the lot. Paragon’s website complies with Honda’s rules. When it identifies a repeat or returning customer, it displays the actual price the dealership is willing to settle for. Ray Frias, a New York City police officer, said he was pleasantly surprised by the process of buying a car remotely. He chatted with a Paragon representative online before deciding on a 2020 Accord Sport, which the dealership recently delivered to him. “I still had to talk to a lot of different people, but it was easier doing it online,” he said. “I could do it from my living room or while I was out for a walk. I didn’t have to spend hours in the dealership.” But some customers said they would not make a car purchase entirely online if they didn’t have to. Ms. Avallone said she found it “a little scary” to make such a big purchase sight unseen. If she buys another car, she said, she will want to test drive it first. “I’d still prefer to see the car and sit in the car and smell the car before I buy it,” she said.Money is a stressful subject at the best of times, and only more so now in these worst of times. With unemployment at levels unseen since the Great Depression and entire industries in limbo, financial uncertainty is now the norm for millions of households. If the pandemic has you trying to overhaul your budget or beef up your emergency savings — or if you’re simply trying to get a better handle on what on earth is happening to the markets — there are plenty of podcasts offering guidance. Many long-running shows offer up-to-the-minute advice on personal finance, while others dig into first-person stories of money trouble or endeavor to make economics more fun. These seven shows will help you weather the financial storm with your sanity intact, and keep your bottom line in good shape long into the future. Inspiring though it can be to hear financial experts talk about building their fortunes, it can also feel alienating if you’re saddled with debt, struggling to make ends meet or simply intimidated by money. Enter Gaby Dunn, the very funny, very relatable host of “Bad With Money,” who spent many years in a financial hole and now shares wry advice on how to turn things around. As a queer millennial, Dunn is highly attuned to, and refreshingly blunt, about structural injustices of the financial system, whether it’s the student loan industry or health insurance maze. Enjoyable though Dunn’s interviews with experts and celebrity guests are, the real highlights of the show are her candid personal money confessions. At one point Dunn records herself making long-put-off calls to her bank and student loan provider, and in doing so explores the combination of shame and powerlessness that keeps many people from taking simple money steps. Starter episode: “Myths and Grossly Inaccurate Labels (aka ‘Millennials’)” This wisdom-packed, endearingly quirky show is one of the very best resources out there for those who don’t work a 9-to-5 shift, but aren’t high-rolling entrepreneurs either. The host, Lillian Karabaic, tailors her friendly, useful advice to artists, freelancers and small-business owners. Along with traditional explainers on how to pick a marketplace health plan or save for retirement if you don’t have access to a traditional 401(k) plan, there are episodes on meal prepping, credit card rewards for travel and other thrifty day-to-day hacks. Starter episode: “How much should you keep in an emergency fund?” Many of us grew up with the sense that money is a subject best avoided in polite company, but that culture of silence can be damaging both to our finances and to our psychology. This engrossing interview series from WNYC Studios prides itself on speaking the unspeakable, digging into “the things we think about a lot, and need to talk about more.” Anna Sale, the host, has a disarmingly gentle and thoughtful approach, which never fails to draw candid insights from her guests. The show’s coronavirus coverage has been characteristically compassionate and incisive; it has released a “Pandemic Tool Kit” and a Covid-19 call-in show titled “Alone Together” that’s guaranteed to make you feel less isolated. Starter episode: “A Former Debt Collector’s Unpaid Bills” There are few subjects less approachable to the average person than economics, and yet the average person has probably never had more reason to be curious about the state of the economy than now. For years, NPR’s trusty “Planet Money” has been explaining the economy through engaging stories about people, places and trends. Expect a balance of deep dives into complex processes — like the 2016 four-parter in which the hosts Stacey Vanek Smith and Robert Smith bought 100 barrels of oil and followed them from the earth to the gas tank — and entertaining answers to questions you’d never thought to ask, like “Why is the milk always at the back of the grocery store?” Starter episode: “We Buy Oil” One of the oldest and most respected personal finance shows out there, this thrice-weekly podcast is a one-stop shop to find the answer to just about any money question. Farnoosh Torabi is an author and finance expert whose most recent book was “When She Makes More,” an exploration of the gender dynamics of money in relationships. On the show, she offers snapshots of her own financial life in between interviews with a variety of guests — from actresses like Busy Philipps to fellow finance experts like Suze Orman — and answers listener enquiries with a clear, no-nonsense approach. Starter episode: “Ask Farnoosh: How to pay off debt while saving and paying bills?” Between the gender gap in both income and investing, and outdated social messages about “frivolous” female spending, women have long been underserved by traditional financial advice, but this iHeartRadio show flips the script. A relatively new offering with just one 16-episode season, “She Makes Money Moves” focuses on first-person stories from women in disparate regions and walks of life. Hosted by Glamour’s editor in chief, Samantha Barry, the show tackles subjects like budgeting as a single mother and the challenges facing female business owners. But several memorable episodes explore the dynamics of money in relationships, and specifically the toll that an income gap takes on friends or romantic partners. Starter episode: “I Love My Life — But I Can’t Afford It”: If the idea of following a line-item budget makes you wince, Paula Pant’s approach is worth exploring. The title of Pant’s podcast comes from her philosophy that you can afford anything, just not everything, and her approach to budgeting focuses more on big picture changes than on tracking every expense. On each episode of the show, Pant tackles familiar personal finance subjects — eliminating debt, emphasizing savings, leaving your 9-to-5 behind — in a breezy conversational style that feels accessible even to money novices. In recent weeks a new segment, “PSA Thursdays,” has offered tips on how to navigate the specific financial chaos of the pandemic, illuminated by Pant’s own candid and fascinating discussion of contracting Covid-19. Starter episode: “PSA Thursday: How Can I End 2020 In A Stronger Position Than I Started It?”The adult male scarlet tanager is a medium-size songbird with glaring crimson feathers and jet-black wings. It can be hard to spot, because the species tends to forage among the upper branches of tall trees. But it does come down to earth, and sometimes can be caught hanging out with pigeons outside of the Freeport Wild Bird Supply store in Maine. It is the kind of sighting that can spark a lifelong interest in bird-watching, said Derek Lovitch, 42, a birder and biologist who runs the store with his wife, Jeannette. “The scarlet tanager is one that gets a lot of people into it, because you’ve got to know: What is that thing?” Mr. Lovitch said. Business is booming at his supply store, and he’s seeing younger customers than usual. But it’s not the scarlet tanager that has gotten so many people interested in birds in recent months. It’s the coronavirus pandemic. “There is definitely a craving for engagement with nature, especially considering how limited our ability to move is right now,” Mr. Lovitch said. Bird-watching has surged in popularity this year. According to the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, birders set a world record on May 9 for Global Big Day, an annual bird-spotting event. Participants using the lab’s eBird platform reported more than two million observations — the most bird sightings documented in a single day — and recorded 6,479 species. Spring is always a busy season for bird-watching, said Marshall Iliff, a project leader at the Cornell lab. “But this year is sort of off the charts,” he said. At a time when humans are nervously tracking the spread of a virus as it seeps through communities and leaps across borders, new birders are finding relief in tracking the migratory patterns of great blue herons, mountain yellow-warblers or ruby-throated hummingbirds instead. For Layla Adanero, who was working as a business analyst in Manhattan until she was furloughed in April, bird-watching has been a respite from the faster-paced life she left behind when she moved back home to London. Now the chirps and coos in her backyard, once ignored as background noise, have become clues to understanding an entire ecosystem. “It’s quite meditative to watch another life form go about its day,” said Ms. Adanero, 23. “It’s like another way of practicing mindfulness.” Her recent sightings include an adult long-tailed tit, a fluffy little bird with a white head and dramatic black tail feathers; and a great spotted woodpecker in a busy pattern of black and white, with spots of red. There’s something symbolic about watching the birds fly while she is in lockdown, Ms. Adanero said: “They represent the ultimate freedom of movement.” Corina Newsome, 27, an avian expert and graduate student of biology at Georgia Southern University, said the coronavirus lockdowns coincided with spring migration — the perfect time for new birders to look to the sky. “I think it will end up making us better stewards of our natural space, as well as give us peace and calm to see that even though our rhythm is interrupted, there is a larger rhythm that continues to go on,” Ms. Newsome said. This month, she was excited to spot a purple gallinule, a jewel-toned species that uses its long legs to hop across lily pads. Ms. Newsome noted that the birding community was not particularly diverse and might not seem welcoming to everyone. “Birding groups are typically white and older people,” she said. “It can feel uncomfortable as a young black person.” But anyone can take up birding, she said, adding that it was incumbent on white birders to condemn racism in the community, and helpful for bird watchers of color to encourage each other. During the lockdowns, she has been fielding more birding questions on social media from newbies, amateurs and parents introducing the pastime to their children. In New Orleans, Rebekah Bradshaw, 41, started bird-watching as a way to keep her three children active after schools closed. Her son Liam, 11, said he had used a phone app to log about 150 species, including ruddy turnstones and yellow-crowned night herons. “He’s at that age now where he can really get sucked into the screen,” Ms. Bradshaw said. “So I was like, ‘Let’s go bird-watching.’ Both of my big kids really got into it, and even the baby now walks around outside looking at the sky saying: ‘Bird! Bird!’” Some birds are drawn to the Bradshaws’ area because they live close to the Bayou St. John and Lake Pontchartrain. But birding is a hobby that city dwellers, rural residents or suburbanites anywhere can try. Nathalie Couzon, 31, has been largely confined to her third-floor apartment in Bangkok because of the coronavirus. She usually makes YouTube videos about her travels, but lately she has been turning her camera on the birds that gather in treetops outside. “I transferred my hobby from the national parks to my balcony,” she said. Her sightings there have included yellow-vented bulbuls, Asian koels and the coppersmith barbet — her favorite — so named because its metronomic calls ring out like a hammer hitting metal. “You can hear it everywhere,” Ms. Couzon said. “It’s pretty small, but so colorful. If you see it, you will love it from the very first glance.” Sightings like these are useful to scientists, too. Amateur birders can contribute to global databases like eBird at Cornell, which helps biologists and conservationists track bird populations and migration patterns. “It’s been used by researchers all over the world in ways that we never predicted,” said Mr. Iliff, the project leader from the lab. Ms. Newsome uses the program, and the data entered by her and other birders helps contextualize sightings for people who use the lab’s free Merlin app. That’s the one Liam uses in New Orleans. In London, Ms. Adanero uses an app called Smart Bird ID to identify species, and she has nudged her 10-year-old sister to do the same. And in Bangkok, Ms. Couzon is relying on an old-fashioned paperback: “A Field Guide to the Birds of Thailand.” She is considering buying binoculars, and she knows what she’s after next: the red-eyed greater coucal, a rusty-winged bird whose haunting call she hopes to capture on camera. It will require patience. But she has cultivated a lot of that in lockdown, with bird-watching as one of her favorite ways to pass the time. “If you’re staying at home, especially in confinement, and you want to see some nature,” she said, “you can just open your window.”Kelly Vohs is probably one of the most important people to know if you’re one of the 28,000 New Yorkers who live in Stuyvesant Town or its sister housing complex, Peter Cooper Village, which together comprise 56 buildings on 80 acres just north of Manhattan’s East Village. Mr. Vohs is the chief executive of Beam Living, the residential district’s property management company, which is owned by the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm. He is also a former Green Beret, and has used some of his military skills to navigate the pandemic in his corner of the city. Over the past few months, Mr. Vohs and his team have converted an empty storefront into a temporary food distribution and aid center, set up a 1,500-person volunteer network, put in place a financial hardship program, and dispatched the complex’s own ice cream truck to dole out over 22,000 free ice creams to health care workers across the city. “I’m heartbroken because some people on my team have lost family members, including a wife, sister, and brother,” he said. “But I’m also proud and grateful to see everyone come together to help organize and fix things, because if you’re doing something one percent better than you did the day before, that’s progress.” Mr. Vohs, 42, lives in Peter Cooper Village with his wife, Brandi Vohs, 39, the director of operations for an orthodontist practice, and their three children, Morgan, 15, Mason, 13, and Marek, 9, along with their three dogs, Mingo, Marley and Cooper. BEFORE SUNRISE Normally I wake up between 3:30 and 4 a.m. I got a late start today because I was up late the previous night working on a video about the Stuy Town pantry. I cherish these early mornings, it’s my quiet time. It gives me a chance to read, meditate, drink a nutrient shake and some black tea. MIND AND BODY During this quarantine, I’ve found that there’s too much screen time in my life. So lately I’ve been writing in a notebook. I like reading blogs and speeches of famous people. I often read about one person and jot down 20 to 30 quotes that jump out at me. This helps me get focused and keep myself in check. I ask myself what is my reason for being in this world? I do this in the morning to help me figure out what I need to do to be in the service of others and being focused on the “right now.” I then work out for about 45 minutes. FOCUS ON THE FAMILY I walk the dogs and get a coffee at Starbucks for my wife. I cook eggs for myself and Brandi, but my younger son gets a strawberry smoothie with whipped cream and sprinkles. By 10 a.m., I roust the older kids to get out of bed. I normally never stop working and I’ve had hundreds of Zoom calls with my team about security, food, rent, deliveries. But I’ve been making a conscious effort to try and be focused to be present for my family during the quarantine. PUBLIC SAFETY As I head to the office, I bump into my guys disinfecting one of the laundry rooms. They look like the characters from the movie “Ghostbusters,” especially with their backpacks of chlorine spray. At the public safety command center, I check in with a lieutenant to discuss the status of an elderly resident who went missing overnight. The over 3,000 cameras helped us work with the N.Y.P.D. to find the resident. She returned home safely. LITTLE BOXES I check to see how the pantry is running. We took an unused commercial space and fixed it up pretty quickly by spackling and painting the walls white. Over the past four weeks, we have been getting deliveries from City Harvest, which volunteers then repackage into individual boxes. Anyone in Stuy Town can get a food box at any time, but most of the goods have been distributed to people outside of the complex. We’ve been able to pack about 2,000 boxes a week. The whole operation reminds me of my time in the military, when I set up medical facilities in the middle of nowhere in not-so-nice places. I know what it’s like not to have anything so it’s important to me to be able to figure out what the problem is, and then solve it. Today it’s food distribution. BIG THOUGHTS, SMALL STEPS I’m home by midafternoon so I play Mario Kart with Marek on his Nintendo Switch. Even though the whole situation with the coronavirus is a mess, I think in some ways it made people come together. I am especially thrilled to be able to have regular family dinners, which has made me extremely happy. Tonight we had a big bowl of our version of a Greek salad, with cucumber, tomato, feta cheese and olives. After dinner, I work on my video a little bit more and get myself organized for work. I think about what we’re all going to do when this is all over. Right now, I believe it’s about thinking big but taking small steps to accomplish the goals.The coronavirus pandemic has plunged New York City into the most dire fiscal crisis it has faced in generations. More than 900,000 people have lost their jobs since February, and thousands of businesses have closed. The streets remain empty of workers and visitors: Nearly 117,000 people filed new unemployment claims in the second week of May, a staggering 2,206 percent increase from the previous year. Tourism, which generates roughly $70 billion a year in economic activity, has disappeared. The real estate market is stagnant; sales are projected to be down by a third. People are not spending money; sales tax revenue is expected to drop by $1 billion — part of an anticipated $9 billion shortfall in city tax revenue that could force drastic cuts to essential city services. The grim outlook has forced top officials to contemplate a maneuver that has been disparaged ever since it brought New York to disrepair and the brink of bankruptcy in the 1970s: allowing the city to borrow billions of dollars to pay for its basic operating expenses. Numerous fiscal experts and public officials, including Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, are leery of giving the city permission to solve its budget problems by taking on significant debt, sensitive to the reckless borrowing that began more than 50 years ago under Mayor Robert F. Wagner and accelerated under the city’s next two mayors, John V. Lindsay and Abraham D. Beame. The shortsighted economic strategy — Mr. Wagner blithely called it a “borrow now, repay later” philosophy — was one reason New York City reached the brink of bankruptcy in 1975, leading to the creation of the New York State Financial Control Board, which was given broad oversight of the city’s financial management. Mayor Bill de Blasio, who has asked legislative leaders to grant him permission to issue bonds to cover the city’s operating costs, has said he would only do so as a “last resort.” Doing so, however, has increasingly become a real possibility: Legislative leaders, returning this week from a nearly two-month hiatus to vote on a raft of coronavirus-related bills, are discussing the issue with the governor’s office and city officials. “What do you do if you don’t have the option of some amount of borrowing? You have to do massive cuts, massive cuts to all city agencies,” Mr. de Blasio said on Thursday. “That will undermine any possibility of the right kind of restart and recovery. So, borrowing the right way, it makes sense.” The city is far from alone in confronting an economic collapse. New York State is expecting as much as $13 billion less in tax revenue this year; California faces a $54 billion budget deficit, and Los Angeles has a 24 percent unemployment rate. Nine states, including New York and California, have borrowed from the federal government to reinforce their unemployment insurance trust funds. And in New York State’s recently passed budget, lawmakers included a provision that gave Mr. Cuomo the ability to borrow up to $11 billion, giving budget officials increased flexibility amid uncertain revenue forecasts. State Senator Liz Krueger, chairwoman of the Senate Finance Committee, said the city is merely asking for the same leeway that the Legislature recently granted the governor. But New York City’s problems, and its request to potentially borrow its way out of them, have added resonance because of how disastrously that scenario played out in the mid-1970s, the city’s last and most famous brush with the fiscal abyss. The Financial Control Board forced the city to absorb drastic spending cuts: Workers were let go and hospitals were closed. Crimes and disorder rose; tens of thousands of residents fled the city, as New York turned into a national symbol of urban decay.  Mr. Cuomo, who prides himself on being fiscally conservative and would need to sign the legislation, referenced the 1970s nadir as he cautioned against granting New York City borrowing capacity. He said on Thursday that although government has long issued bonds to pay for long-term capital projects, doing so for operating expenses was fiscally questionable. “We don’t want to create a situation where the state or any local government borrows so much money that they can’t repay it, and then you have to start to cut service and now you’re in that vicious downward spiral,” Mr. Cuomo, a third-term Democrat, said during a briefing at the New York Stock Exchange in Manhattan on Tuesday. “New York City has been there before.” Indeed, economists frown on borrowing to cover operating expenses, saying that debt should ideally only be taken on for large, long-term projects — ideally those, like tolled bridges and roads that generate income. Borrowing for short-term needs, much like taking a loan to cover rent, does nothing to fix the cause of the deficit while shifting the debt to future generations. Scott M. Stringer, the city comptroller, said that if the city borrowed $7 billion to cover current expenses, it would most likely be on the hook for more than $500 million a year in debt payments for the next 20 years. “That $500 million means less for teachers, child care and restricts our ability to borrow for needed infrastructure improvements,” he said. But the mayor said on Wednesday that he cannot make further reductions without leading the city to a “horrible place where we would be cutting back basic services, cutting back personnel, furloughs, layoffs, things we do not want to see, things that go against everything that we believe is right for New York City.” Mr. de Blasio, a Democrat, said that his $89.3 billion executive budget, released in April, already included $2.7 billion in cuts to a bevy of municipal services, including traffic safety enforcement, tree pruning and a program that provided thousands of poor young people with summer jobs. The city has also had to spend $1.4 billion to fight the pandemic, a sum that officials anticipate will rise to $3.5 billion by the end of the year. In the negotiations over whether state lawmakers should give the city the latitude to borrow money, the possibility has been raised of giving the Financial Control Board, whose broad control over the city’s budget expired decades ago, the added power to formally approve any bond issuances. The board has seven members, three of whom are appointed by the governor, who also serves on the board. City officials oppose giving the board any added oversight power. The state last authorized the city to take on debt for operating costs after the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11. The move — which followed an appeal from Michael R. Bloomberg, who was then mayor — gave city officials financial breathing room and allowed them to issue so-called recovery bonds. Lawmakers from the city, who dominate the Democratic-led Legislature, say that the current situation calls for similar measures. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. In February, before the economy shuttered, the city had 4,669,000 million jobs, according to the Independent Budget Office. By April, the city had 3,756,900 jobs — a loss of 912,100. Certain sectors like the hospitality industry were hit particularly hard: Hotel occupancy plummeted to 15 percent in the last week in March, down from an average of 88 percent in 2019. “The city is in distress,” said Michael Gianaris, a Democratic state senator from Queens who serves as deputy majority leader. “And we should do what is reasonable to avoid billions of dollars of service cuts.” Senator Krueger, a Democrat who represents the East Side of Manhattan and introduced the borrowing bill, said that giving the city the authority to borrow up to $8 billion “doesn’t mean they’re actually going to use it,” adding that it was “not an unreasonable ask for the city to make.” Legislators don’t plan to vote on the bill this week after failing to reach an agreement with the governor and city officials, but negotiations continue, and the proposal could be brought up for a vote in the coming weeks. Both the mayor and the governor have said that without substantial federal recovery funds, essential city and state services, like policing, health care and education, would be endangered. Indeed, Republican resistance to additional financial support for the states has increased in Washington, particularly for states led by Democrats. Last month, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, sparked a furious retort from Mr. Cuomo after referring to possible additional federal funding for state and local governments as a “blue-state bailout,” chastising such states for past fiscal irresponsibility. That line of attack was echoed by President Trump, who met with Mr. Cuomo in the White House on Wednesday. Mr. Cuomo said that allowing the city to borrow could dissuade Congress from giving New York the billions of dollars in federal funding the governor and mayor have said are critically needed. Mr. de Blasio is already relying heavily on reserve funds to balance the budget. The city is drawing $2.6 billion from the retiree health benefit trust, $900 million from general reserves and $250 million from the capital stabilization reserve to balance the 2021 budget, according to the Independent Budget Office. Andrew Rein, the president of the Citizens Budget Commission, a fiscally conservative watchdog, said the city could still find additional savings in its budget. Getting permission to borrow could lead city officials to avoid “making the hard choices today,” he said. “Borrowing, it seems painless, but it’s not at all,” he said. “Basically what you do is make future New Yorkers pay for your bills. It’s pretty clear to us that the city should not go there yet. There is a lot more that it could do.” Progressive lawmakers, whose election in 2018 helped Democrats regain control of the Legislature for the first time in nearly a decade, have proposed another potential solution: a series of new taxes on the wealthy — from taxes on the superrich and stock buybacks to a levy on pieds-à-terre — which activists say will raise billions of dollars in new revenue. Those proposals, however, are not on the Legislature’s agenda this week. “This form of shared sacrifice is totally appropriate when you’re in a time of crisis,” said Michael Kink, the executive director of Strong Economy for All, a coalition of progressive groups and unions. “Mitch McConnell is not going to save New York. I think we are going to have the wealthiest New Yorkers pay more at some point.” Mr. Cuomo’s budget officials have argued that high-income New Yorkers already pay some of the nation’s highest taxes and that new taxes could lead many of them to decide to flee, shrinking an important part of the state’s tax base.Venice Ray was eager to return to work when Texas announced last week that child care centers, like the one she was laid off from in March, could immediately reopen. But re-enrolling her 4-year-old son? That gave her pause. As many restaurants, hair salons and shopping malls across the country welcome back customers, some states are allowing day care centers and preschools to reopen, acknowledging that child care plays a foundational role in the American economy. But for millions of working parents like Ms. Ray, the choice to send their children back to a place known for spreading germs, even in more normal times, is not an easy one. And in an industry operating on razor-thin margins, the survival of many child care centers is in doubt. The coronavirus cost the industry more than 355,000 jobs in March and April, about a third of the pre-pandemic total. And a survey by an industry group showed that many providers were so short of cash that they could go out of business permanently, unable to pay rent, mortgage payments or other fixed costs. Democrats in Congress are introducing bills this week and next that would spend $50 billion to keep centers afloat and provide tuition relief to families. The bills would also help put in place new safety measures, which could be vital to ensuring that parents feel safe re-enrolling their children. In a majority of American families, both parents hold jobs, making child care essential for a functioning economy. But the United States is rare among industrialized nations in not providing a universal option, leaving families with the burden of figuring it out themselves. Many struggle even in the best of times. Experts now worry that if licensed centers disappear during the pandemic, more families will resort to ad hoc arrangements, such as relying on relatives, friends or neighbors who lack experience, let alone formal training in safety or education. But for families balancing professional and economic pressures with health concerns, the idea of re-enrolling in center-based care can be profoundly anxiety-provoking, even with new sanitation and social distancing practices required by federal and state guidelines. That is the situation the Ray family found itself in. Ms. Ray is confident that the new procedures will make it safe for her to return to work when her employer, a day care and preschool associated with a Longview, Texas, church, reopens on June 2. But as a mother, she felt unsure about whether her son should go back, too. In particular, she was concerned about her in-laws, who have been babysitting her older children. What if the youngest, their 4-year-old son, brought the virus home and passed it on to them? “It’s a really tough one,” she said. After days of debate, she and her husband decided that Ms. Ray would go back to work — the family needs her $475-per-week salary, and she loves her job — but their son would go to his grandparents for care. A similar conversation took place in Alison Larkin’s home in Chicago. Before the coronavirus outbreak, Ms. Larkin, a 35-year-old social work consultant, had a dream situation for her toddler, Clementine: a coveted spot in a respected day care just a few minutes away. But now she and her husband, who have been trading child care shifts while working from home, are preparing for their current arrangement to last until there is a vaccine, even though Illinois is allowing day care centers to reopen this week. “My sense of things is that the virus is not going anywhere for quite some time,” Ms. Larkin said. “This could be an indefinite state of being.” Mandy Zaransky-Hurst, a mother and corporate executive in Chicago, has been sorely missing her 4-month-old’s day care since it was shut down in March. She has a full-time job as the chief operating officer of a training and development company. Her husband, who is also working from home, is a lawyer. “It’s not sustainable,” Ms. Zaransky-Hurst said of their current arrangement, which requires her to frequently rise at 4 a.m. to begin a 10-hour workday, while also caring for their 6-year-old. But at the same time, she worries that day care is not safe, given the constant flow of teachers and children in and out. “How can companies really expect their employees to return to work in a normal fashion?” she asked. “What true flexibility and understanding will companies give to employees who can’t send their kids back to day care?” So far, there have not been major coronavirus outbreaks reported in child care centers in the United States, although one in Canada was the site of an alarming cluster of cases. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The industry typically serves more than 12 million children in the United States under 6, the majority of whom attend day cares in private homes. Providers are licensed by state and local governments, and must follow regulations for education, health and safety. Generally, experts recommend that one trained caretaker be responsible for no more than four infants, six toddlers or 10 preschoolers. Under normal circumstances, the physical space required for a center to maintain social distancing depends heavily on the developmental stage of the children being cared for. Infants are more interested in adults than other babies, and are easier to space out than toddlers and preschoolers, who are social and frenetic. The space required for effective social distancing will vary greatly depending on the ages and temperament of children in a center. Coronavirus guidelines from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention call for child care centers to disinfect surfaces and shared objects several times per day; avoid toys, like stuffed animals, that cannot be easily washed; stagger children’s arrival time to limit contact between parents; and to seat and nap children at least six feet apart from one another. States are issuing their own guidelines, which can differ significantly. Tennille Smalls, who runs a child care center out of her home in New Haven, Conn., is among the providers trying to make the necessary changes. Her business is surviving during the pandemic, but only precariously. Enrollment has fallen to four children from nine; their parents are essential health care workers. Ms. Smalls received about $11,000 in federal relief loans, not nearly enough to cover her lost revenue and the costs of moving the center to a larger space over the summer, which is necessary for children and employees to maintain social distancing guidelines. She has already signed a lease and begun planning renovations, such as installing toddler sinks and mounted dispensers for sanitizer, masks and gloves. To make ends meet, she and her business partner have reduced their own salaries. “I’m nervous, but I’m not fearful,” Ms. Smalls said. She hopes her spacious new location will reassure nervous parents. “Families will be able to tour it and say, ‘This is somewhere that I’m going to feel comfortable putting my most prized possession.’ ” Ben Casselman contributed reporting.Some people bring home magnets, key chains and maps from their travels; I bring home accessories. Floral scarves, beaded headbands, colorful hats, kitschy coin purses. But more than anything else, I bring home jewelry. Not crazy, need-a-bodyguard, can’t-check-my-luggage jewelry. Fun jewelry. Some of my frill is extra, but most of it isn’t; some of it is pricey, most of it is not — a pair of almond-shaped silver studs from the Grand Bazaar in Istanbul that cost a few lira; a pair of triangular gold dangling earrings bought from a store in the center of Athens on the day I found out I was accepted to graduate school; a pair of blue circular earrings from the Malcolm Shabazz market in Harlem some 20 blocks away from my apartment (local travel, am I right?). Some has been bought for me by friends on their own trips. Over the years, my friend Ari has given me earrings from Uganda, Ethiopia and South Africa, as well as a necklace from Kenya and a bracelet from Paris. Oluseyi gave me a necklace made of the black, white, red and green paper beads that are popular in French Guiana. Selina gave me sparkling teal earrings from Istanbul when I graduated from college. And it was a long purple wooden necklace, given to me the summer before my senior year of high school by my friend Imani after her trip to Spain, that first had me daydreaming about when I too would visit the Mediterranean. If this all sounds like a lot, you have to understand that everything about my sense of style is maximalist: I love bright colors, feathers, fringe, animal print — typically not all together, but sometimes … all together. Let’s just say that I prefer to ignore Coco Chanel’s advice to take one accessory off before leaving the house. But my proclivity for holding onto ornaments doesn’t exactly conform to an age where a Marie Kondo-endorsed sense of minimalism is in vogue. There’s also the practical matter that my apartment is a 400-square foot studio, and one woman’s cheerful collection of objects is another’s sanity-stretching clutter. Sometimes I am both of those women. In March, as quarantine began, like many others, I set some personal goals. I promised myself that I would declutter my closet. I would use this extra time at home to tidy up and redecorate, to care for my plants and to finally organize my jewelry. I would accept that I will not, in fact, turn the remaining earring of a lost pair into a necklace or a ring. I would let go of the items that I’ve outgrown and haven’t worn in years, along with the earrings that have been given to me that I could never work up the courage to re-gift out of fear that the person who gave them to me would one day ask if I still owned them. As I confronted my collection, I realized that my reluctance to get rid of jewelry over the years has been less to do with personal laziness or a maximalist style ethos, and more to do with what these souvenirs give me. Stuck at home, going through my jewelry has been an escape to past adventures and a reminder of friends who are now far away. Each time I wear certain items, I’m transported to a certain city and moment in my life. The chunky, oversize blue, turquoise and aquamarine beaded necklace that my friend Paola picked out for me from her mother’s store in Abruzzo, transports me to the final weeks of our senior year of college, a time of trepidation and joy. Days after Paola gave me that necklace we submitted our theses, and soon after our parents arrived in Rome. When I wear it, I am right back in those heady days of feeling like the world was opening up in front of us. The sequined navy, silver and black band that doubles as a headband and necklace reminds me of romping through Paris in the winter at 21. The neon rainbow fringe earrings from Marbella remind me of my best friend’s wedding there a few years ago. A silver floral pendant was a gift from my primary school dorm mates, given to me days before I left Zimbabwe for the United States. Friends who recently visited Lisbon gave me a pair of winged gold earrings created by a designer whose work I stumbled upon years ago. Those earrings remind me of the friends who gave them to me, but they also remind me of the day I spent exploring Lisbon, and how I tripped and fell on the front step of a boutique. I got up, walked in and came out with new earrings and a necklace. One of the reasons we travel is to connect with other people. In years of shopping for jewelry around the world I’ve always come away with more than just a new bauble: I’ve learned about the history of a town while having a bracelet made; about the customs of a country while trying on rings. I’ve met fascinating artists and business owners, people who shared their stories — and their favorite local haunts, the kind that you’d never find in a guidebook — with me. I’ve also made lasting friendships. Years after I left Italy, I met a colleague who had a silver ring inspired by the Roman aqueducts that for 500 years brought water into the city’s center. She’d studied in Italy about a decade before I did and upon visiting Rome with her children years later, she bought the ring. When I returned to Rome, I went to the same store and bought the same ring in gold. And so the ring has come to encapsulate something slightly different: that Rome, stoic and unchanging, has imprinted its effects on new generations of visitors and inhabitants, uniting us all in shared reverence. Follow New York Times Travel on Instagram, Twitter and Facebook. And sign up for our weekly Travel Dispatch newsletter to receive expert tips on traveling smarter and inspiration for your next vacation. Dreaming up a future getaway or just armchair traveling? Check out our 52 Places list.Regístrate para recibir nuestro boletín con lo mejor de The New York Times. En los últimos días España se zambulló, otra vez, en otro episodio de nacionalismo rabioso y torpe. Este mes, decenas de vecinos salieron a las calles de Salamanca, un barrio acomodado de Madrid, a golpear cacerolas al grito de “libertad, libertad, libertad”. Otro grupo estacionó sus autos en una avenida obedeciendo a una convocatoria del partido de extrema derecha español, Vox, para reclamar la renuncia del presidente del Gobierno, Pedro Sánchez, por su manejo de la pandemia. Casi en simultáneo, una piña de jóvenes recorrió la ciudad vistiendo camisetas pardas y con banderas de España reclamando que la patria es de quienes pelean por ella. El acto más pintoresco, sin embargo, ocurrió en Santander, una ciudad en el norte del país: un hombre recorrió las calles en el asiento trasero de un descapotable conducido por su chofer revoleando su bandera española al grito de “gobierno dimisión, gobierno dimisión”. Esta imagen retrata de cuerpo entero a la peor derecha española desde el retorno de la democracia, la más banal y peligrosa. La ultraderecha ha salido a las calles de España —uno de los países más afectados por la pandemia— a reclamar libertad sobre los cadáveres de miles de muertos por el virus, y ha advertido que este es solo el inicio. Es mejor prestar atención; a menudo consiguen más de lo que se espera. En el pasado, España ya se tomó en sorna el discurso alucinado de Vox, confiada en que estaba inmunizada a los experimentos de los populismos de derecha que crecían en Europa gracias a que un partido —el Popular— institucionalizaba el discurso de toda la derecha. Vox salió con el pecho hinchado de las elecciones en las que Sánchez llegó al gobierno. Ahora sus seguidores recorren las calles de Madrid con banderas llamando a recuperar la patria parasitando preocupaciones legítimas de la mayoría, como el miedo al presente y la incertidumbre por el futuro. Pongamos algo en la mesa: el gobierno de Sánchez falló en el manejo de la crisis del coronavirus. Hay críticas severas a la gestión de la pandemia en varias naciones, pero esos reproches coinciden con gobiernos donde sus líderes menospreciaron los riesgos desde el cinismo. Allí están Donald Trump en Estados Unidos, Jair Bolsonaro en Brasil, Andrés Manuel López Obrador en México, Boris Johnson en el Reino Unido o Daniel Ortega en Nicaragua, pero no es el caso de España. Como otros líderes europeos, Sánchez subestimó el impacto de la pandemia y reaccionó tarde, pero no ha respondido con cinismo ni tiene un plan autoritario de control social. Los manifestantes de Salamanca protestan como protestaría cualquier persona en una situación crítica. ¿Quién no quisiera ir a trabajar, salir, ver familiares? ¿Quién no viajar? Todos deseamos alguna forma de normalidad. Es un reclamo válido, pero su validez es limitada. Y en la crisis que atraviesa y atravesará España, la vocinglería acomodada está en la tercera lista. Duele enumerar el incendio que se viene: caída del PIB, desempleo récord, pobreza en alza, marginación y exclusión crecientes. Y antes que eso: la pandemia aún no ha terminado, el riesgo de rebrote se mantiene. Esto es, la emergencia sanitaria va primero; sin gente sana tampoco hay economía. Otro cuento se narra cuando esas protestas —aceptables aun siendo insolidarias— son promovidas, copadas o cooptadas por una organización política con vocación de poder. En este contexto y tratándose de Vox, la protesta es un acto de oportunismo radical. La activación de la protesta por la derecha opera sobre los miedos, deseos y necesidades de una población asustada por un virus sin vacuna ni tratamiento efectivo que ha matado en el mundo a cerca de 400.000 personas. Actúan sobre el hartazgo del encierro y el apuro de no perder más ahorros, trabajos o tiempo. Pero el reclamo político poco tiene que ver con la crisis: es una batalla por el poder y dominio del relato ante la opinión pública. Encubre sus intereses reales bajo demandas razonables. La derecha española hoy propagandiza que su país está en manos de comunistas y chavistas. En el colmo de la alucinación, suponen el confinamiento pandémico como un arresto domiciliario en un gulag sanitarista. El reclamo de “libertad, libertad, libertad” y el pedido de dimisión del gobierno se acoplan. En el discurso de las derechas extremistas siempre hay una invasión en proceso y un enemigo claro. Lo hicieron los nazis —el “virus” eran, sobre todo, los judíos—, las dictaduras sudamericanas de los setenta y ochenta —el “virus”, los socialistas— y lo flamean Trump y los nacionalismos nativistas hoy —el “virus” es el otro—. El tronco es común: recuperar la nación —lo que ellos creen que es la nación, siempre un concepto restringido— de los que la pervierten, dañan. La enferman. Es fácil tomarse a broma eso, porque suena y es absurdo. Pero nunca desprecien a un alienado. Esta nueva derecha es antipolítica y ama atacar desde los márgenes. Se presenta como víctima de persecuciones y opresión y la defensora de los derechos más privados de las personas. Un hilo invisible une a los manifestantes fogoneados por Vox con los tipos armados que ocupan parlamentos locales en Estados Unidos: todos demandan business as usual. El mundo conocido, la realidad manejable. Pero apelan a un discurso libertario que, en medio de una pandemia, es un ataque al bienestar común. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Vox apuesta al incendio. Su discurso no es construir: primero destruye, después instaura. Un virus antidemocrático. No corrige la plana de Sánchez para mejorar; su plan es derruir su gobierno hasta hacerlo caer y recuperar una normalidad de privilegios de casta. Business as usual. Un señor embanderado en un convertible con chofer. España no necesita proselitismos durante una crisis sanitaria que requiere disidencia con trabajo conjunto. Son tiempos de reunir ideas, creatividad y solidaridad local y global. La derecha institucionalista haría bien en distanciarse de Vox y sus provocaciones. Ante el fuego, la demanda es contribuir a apagarlo, no echar combustible para ver todo arder. Diego Fonseca es colaborador regular de The New York Times y director del Institute for Socratic Dialogue de Barcelona. Voyeur, su nuevo libro de perfiles, se publicará próximamente.Covid-19 hasn’t only forced schools, gyms, parks and health clubs to shut down, it put an end to what hoopsters on every level throughout the city cherish: their “run.” Doesn’t matter where. Tillary Street Park in Brooklyn on Saturday mornings, longtime friends 30 to 40 years old still pounding, arguing over calls, running five on five. Lawyer and banker white collar leagues at the Reebok Club on the Upper West Side of Manhattan. Gifted late teens and comers at Lincoln Park in Queens, West 4th in Lower Manhattan, Gun Hill Road in the Bronx, doing battle in the early evenings. Nowadays — or at least the days before the pandemic — with refs, sponsors and even scoreboards. Teachers, brokers, old-timers conspiring to pay off janitors at public schools to get inside for their Saturday morning run. That combination of the old and the new, the has-beens with the never-was, with everyone trying to get better. Some real with the skills, some still stuck in their comforting fantasies. All of them in love, not merely with the escape and competition, but the joy of being there, together, sharing what New Yorkers are trained to do: make the extra pass, set the screen, don’t “chuck.” It’s the embrace of the round ball, the first bounce, the metal or glass backboards, the hole in the fence and orange rim that is so familiar. The sweat matters, but not as much as the language when it’s over, “see ya next week." Go away Covid, will ya? We get it. In “Fauci We Trust.” But with the N.B.A. making plans to return, we need some good news, too. We’ll put on masks, we’ll wash our hands. We don’t play much defense on the run anyway, so Mr. Mayor — all 6-5 of you — creating distance isn’t that much of an issue. While we wait for “next,” we promise to honor the six-feet rule. Our wives, husbands, and maybe even our kids, will show some worry, and tell us to bring hand wipes, as they quietly usher us out the door, secretly relieved. They know hoopsters live for the run. My three sons are lucky. In our Long Island hideaway, they get to shoot outside on the basket which was the selling point for the house. They know they are the minority. Almost everyone else is stuck. I remember as if it were yesterday, living in a one-bedroom, one-bath, Castro convertible pullout on Brighton 7th Street, and feeling trapped inside. Oh God, I would go crazy feeling so trapped right now. I think of kids I’ve coached, Kareem from South Shore, Ibrahim from Mount St. Michael’s, Quran from Christ the King, begging to go out. Ballers need to dribble, to practice their moves, to repeat, to talk it, touch it, to share, laugh, pretend, to work. Yeah sure, “The Last Dance,” the playoff reruns, NBA TV … OK, nice, but all of that is just a distraction from the real deal. At 70, my body and mind are permanently separated: knees, L4, L5, shoulders, surgeries. I can’t run, jump or shoot for a lick anymore. Yet, I see the openings, “just fake him, go left and in.” Not possible. Last week, all stretched out, feeling pretty good, I got out for a game of 2-on-2, me and the three sons. We go with “Brooklyn rules.” Straight seven, win by two, take it behind the line except if you miss everything. And if you call a foul it better be obvious. I have to rough Luke up or else he’ll destroy me. He starts to complain to the oldest, Jake, that he’s not seeing the ball. He tries to make a call, “no way,” I shout. We win the first, 10-8, we win the second, 7-4. I am limited to my role: set screens for Sam, pass, box out. I’m not sinking a basket while Sam scores them all: long J’s, runners, tough drives from both sides, except, except the cruncher, the last one. I post up, turn around, it hits the rim, bounces up, in, from 15 feet: game, set, match, run. The kids are eager to get back to life. We children of 40, 50, 60, 70 years old are itching to get back too. We want to run. Dan Klores is a Peabody Award-winning filmmaker who directed the documentary, “Basketball: a Love Story.”Growing up, we had a nickname for our mother: “Mrs. Worst Case Scenario.” Peril, it seemed, was everywhere. An invitation to go on a ski trip inevitably meant a broken leg. Swimming in the ocean spelled certain death from unseen riptides — everyone knew the lifeguards weren’t really watching. And then, at age 22, when I told her I planned to travel cross country, her response was resolute: “Absolutely not. You’ll get raped, murdered or worse,” she said, failing to clarify what might be worse. Negotiations ensued, and five weeks later, I unzipped my tent in Yosemite National Park in search of a pay phone. I found a little convenience hut and asked the attendant for directions. “Excuse me,” she called as I walked away. “By any chance is your name Maggie? Maggie from New Jersey?” There’s almost no favorable scenario in which a national park campground clerk can accurately guess your name and home state. In my case, I knew what this meant: It meant park rangers. Possibly all-points bulletins. I pictured search dogs fanning the wilderness with only the stale scent of a college T-shirt for guidance. It meant I’d forgotten to call home. One of the many terms of our agreement had been this: I must call home every six hours, leaving a voice mail message with the time of day, current highway and the nearest exit, along with any additional details helpful to local law enforcement. “So they’ll know where to start looking for your body.” Mom had said this through clenched teeth on the day of my departure, angry that I would risk her peace of mind on this ridiculous whim. She’d stuffed business cards in the glove compartment of the Chevy Corsica we were traveling in and into random pockets of my duffel bag, presumably to notify my next of kin. The Yosemite story became lore. When chatting with someone who didn’t know my overprotective mother, a friend would gush: “Tell them the ‘Maggie from New Jersey’ story!” It became my pièce de résistance about my crazy mother. But now, as a mom myself in a perilous era, I’ve begun to understand. These days, nearly every moment feels like a cautionary tale for my children’s survival. They are living amid a pandemic where simply touching the monkey bars could spell disaster. Not that Covid-19 has quashed their more dangerous fantasies: My oldest passes a parked motorcycle and talks of her plans to ride one. “Absolutely not,” I hear my mother say. Only, now, it’s my own voice that I hear. My daughters are 7, 5 and 1 — hardly ages to be let loose into the wilds. Yet, on a recent hike, I shirked every request. The rocks my children wanted to climb? Covered in slippery moss. The narrow path begging exploration? A breeding ground for ticks. My mother often spoke about my body as if it were a Roth I.R.A. she’d cultivated. But as angry as she made me, I see now that I’ve no stones to throw, as I’ve been raising my daughters in that same glass house — retrofitted as a germ-proof bunker. I’m only seven years vested and already feel like I should have a lifetime controlling share in any decisions that might result in bodily or emotional harm. And isn’t that nearly every decision? Therein lies my covetous secret. That bunker isn’t for my children. It’s for me. Because, if something terrible happened to them, I wouldn’t survive. I realize now what my mother had been referencing, so many years ago — what could be worse than being raped or murdered: those unspeakable things happening to one’s child. That’s the fear that comes with loving someone almost to the point of irrationality. Less than an hour after I’d asked about the pay phone, my traveling companions and I scrambled free of Yosemite’s cellular dead zone, the sun bearing down as we cleared the forest and hit a straight patch of highway. I watched as my cellphone came back to life: Twenty-two new messages — my father, siblings, best friends, a boyfriend, all trying to track me down at my mother’s behest. The final message came at 2 a.m. saying simply: “This is your mother and I am NOT asleep.” I spent that three-hour drive to San Francisco, half terrified, half resentful of the tether that felt more like a noose around my neck. But 20 years later, my indignation has dimmed. My reflection, these days, is about the sheer magnitude of maternal love: That if you set off into the world, there is someone who loves you so fiercely, so irrationally, that they will find you in the wilds of California. That the attendant in a campsite sundries hut will know your name. That, without knowing you’re safe at 2 a.m., your mother will not be asleep. At the time, I couldn’t dream of a world in which I’d ever feel comforted knowing someone cared about my exact location. That I would ever marvel at a love so encompassing that it expressed itself through stashed business cards and all points bulletins. I want to call my mother and explain all of this, but, of course, I can’t. She died at 64, not from the risks she’d feared for me, but from cigarettes smoked in her youth — an enemy from which her own mother didn’t even know to protect her. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. And so here I am, motherless, left to navigate the wilds of this deranged love, unable to ask her: Would she have done it any differently? And should I? The past few months, I’ve contained my children in the equivalent of that bunker — our small, quarantined rowhouse — shielded from nearly every outside variable. I finally have my protective bubble, but it’s far from satisfying. Lost is the glimmer in their eyes encountering something new, the growth that comes with testing out the world on their own. But eventually, we’ll leave these confines. Someday they’ll make their own decisions. Will I really be able to watch them pull out of our driveway in somebody else’s old Chevy and sleep in an unprotected tent? Will I be able to stand in the doorway as they embark on an adventure, knowing that inherent in every adventure is risk? That’s when I remember: “Mrs. Worst Case Scenario” herself stood in that doorway and sent me out into the wild — albeit with her own irrational parameters. The selfless side of mothering won out, even if I couldn’t recognize it then. It was a truth I never considered as we drove west out of Yosemite, the lines of sequoias fading into the horizon line, thinking only of ourselves, the possibilities of the open road, and what adventures the night held in San Francisco. Maggie Master, a writer based in Baltimore, is working on her first novel for young adults.It was a difficult question even before the coronavirus pandemic hit: When self-driving cars eventually rule the roads, will Americans own their cars or make use of ride-hailing fleets? The challenge is now threefold. Self-driving car technology had already reached a plateau, and getting to full Level 5 autonomy will be more difficult than many had thought. With the nation’s economy hobbled by the virus, investment is slowing. And to car owners, their private automobile is now a sanctuary, and it’s unclear how long that attitude will persist. A CarGurus.com poll of 400 active car shoppers, conducted in May for this article, asked, “What is your overall opinion about the development of self-driving cars?” It showed 22 percent of customers were excited by the prospect. A survey of auto owners in 2019 showed 31 percent of them were excited for autonomous cars. The question about the long-term future for the world’s cars is far from settled, and the experts (some of whom see disaster for the planet if people own autonomous cars as we own our cars now) differ sharply in their perception of where we’re heading. Last year, Tesla’s chief, Elon Musk, predicted that his company would have a million “robotaxis” on the road in 2020. To put it mildly, that’s not happening. Mr. Musk said in April that the cars would simply have the “functionality” this year. “Regulatory approval is the big unknown,” he said in a tweet. The outlook is now cloudy. “The top priority of automakers around the globe is to conserve cash and generate revenue as they ramp up plants,” said Michelle Krebs, executive analyst for Cox Automotive. “That has pushed future technologies, like autonomous vehicles and even some electric vehicles, not off the stove but to the back burner temporarily.” Jessica Caldwell, executive director of Insights at Edmunds.com, adds that achieving the twin goals of autonomy and electrification “was challenging even back when the market was healthy and functional.” Americans had been opening up to the idea of the robotaxi, but the pandemic is making passengers think about the last person to ride in any ride-share vehicle, driver or no. A survey by the IBM Institute for Business Value, released this month, found that half of those surveyed intended to make reduced or zero use of shared ride-hailing once restrictions are lifted. There was equal skepticism about public transit. “A large percentage of the population will look to alternatives, like the personal vehicle,” said Ben Stanley, global automotive business lead at the IBM unit. “You control who’s in that.” Robin Chase, a co-founder of Zipcar, which offers hourly rentals, argues that private ownership of self-driving vehicles is a recipe for more congestion and pollution, unemployment for millions of drivers, and huge losses of transportation revenue from taxes, parking, traffic tickets and registrations. She added that attitudes toward the automobile were changing. “Most people think of cars in a very utilitarian way,” she said. “For some of us, cars are a status symbol, but for most, especially millennials, they’re a means to an end. People don’t want to spend all their money on cars.” Ms. Chase is one of many who look forward to an era of shared autonomy that will take a big chunk of today’s autos off the road, freeing up space for people. In this scenario, the cars left on the road would be in use most of the time, efficiently serving a multitude of consumers and eliminating the need for a great deal of parking. Today’s cars are, on average, parked 95 percent of the time. Susan Shaheen, professor of civil and environmental engineering and co-director of the Transportation Sustainability Research Center at the University of California, Berkeley, agreed via email that shared automated vehicles “have the potential to support pooled rides and reduced vehicle ownership,” but she cautions that more research is needed to understand their full impact on consumer behavior — including vehicle miles traveled. The effect of the virus “on consumer perceptions regarding hygiene, and the health and safety of shared and pooled vehicles, will need to be carefully considered,” she added. Still, a major turnabout in vehicle ownership could be in the offing. “Autonomous cars will definitely be shared,” said Sam Abuelsamid, the Detroit-based principal analyst at Guidehouse Insights, who cites practical reasons. He added that consumers were already paying $38,000 on average for new cars and trucks, and that especially in the early years, self-driving technology would add $5,000 to $20,000 to the vehicles’ price. “Self-driving cars will remain very unaffordable for a long time,” he said. John DeCicco, associate director and research professor at the University of Michigan Energy Institute, takes the opposite view. He doesn’t think there is a business case for huge fleets of shared autonomous cars. “The reason the privately owned automobile has been so successful is that individual owners capitalize the largest cost of the system — we buy the cars, and put a lot of emotional content into them,” he said. That willingness to buy into the system does not extend to the expensive and shared self-driving car, Mr. DeCicco said. “When it’s not their own car, people want the cheapest ride possible,” he said. “They don’t want to pay for the acquisition of the vehicles or their upkeep.” The costs of the fleets fielded by Uber, Lyft and other such services are borne by their gig economy drivers, but the switch to autonomy could require ride-hailing services to become large-scale fleet owners or lease holders. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “The fundamental financial equation for mass-scale, non-individually owned vehicles is difficult, and always has been,” Mr. DeCicco said. In a 2019 Energy Institute report, Mr. DeCicco laid out a nightmare scenario for environmentalists. “Although the timing of full automation and the forms it will eventually take are highly uncertain, its long-run effect is likely to be greater transportation activity over all because it will cut the cost of mobility and increase the convenience, flexibility and variety of ways to move both people and goods,” the report said. Some analysts see a mix of cars on the road, including in Europe. “Some clearly will be privately owned, but having empty cars running errands or circling for their owners is something that city streets were simply not designed for,” Philippe Crist, adviser for innovation and foresight at the International Transport Forum of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, said via email. That means that European cities will favor shared use of autonomous cars, he added. The question of ownership is unsettled, in part, because the technology is still evolving. “The real challenge has been to make automated vehicles that consistently equal or surpass the driving performance of an average safe driver in all conditions and in all situations,” Mr. Crist said. “It turns out humans are pretty good at that.” Self-driving cars might move faster to full autonomy if they could talk to each other and to technology-enhanced buildings, traffic lights and other elements of the infrastructure. Mr. DeCicco laments that the federal government has been slow to adopt so-called vehicle-to-everything regulations, also known as V2X. “An unwillingness to invest in V2X will slow down progress,” he said. Advances were finally being made even without federal standards, Mr. Abuelsamid said, although there are two competing technologies. Some V2X was first installed on Cadillacs in 2017, and elements of the technology will be made available on Ford and General Motors vehicles in 2022 and 2023, he said. “V2X is definitely a benefit,” Mr. Abuelsamid said. “With just onboard technology, cars can’t see what’s around that blind curve or what’s in front of that truck. If V2X is widely deployed, it will result in extended situational awareness.” And faster deployment of autonomous cars. In 2017, Ms. Chase instigated the Shared Mobility Principles for Livable Cities, created with the World Resources Institute, the Rocky Mountain Institute, the Natural Resources Defense Council, Transportation for America, C40 Cities and the World Business Council for Sustainable Development, among others. There are more than 180 public and private endorsers. One principle is that autonomous vehicles “are part of shared fleets, well-regulated, and zero emission.” It does seem likely that self-driving cars will be electric, because the industry is moving in that direction in tandem with its push for autonomy. But whether they’ll also be shared is far from certain.NEW DELHI — Its coronavirus cases are skyrocketing, putting it among the world’s most worrisome pandemic zones in recent weeks. Nonetheless, India is reopening, lifting its lockdown at what experts fear may be the worst time. Migrant workers are becoming infected at an alarmingly high rate, leading to fresh outbreaks in villages across northern India. Public hospitals in Mumbai are so overwhelmed that patients have taken to sleeping on cardboard in the hallways. Doctors fear that the lockdown, which started over two months ago, has been eased too soon, after slowing the virus but failing to flatten the new-case curve as effectively as other nations have. If India does not find a way to curb the virus in high-risk states, epidemiologists project that its total caseload could approach a million within several weeks. “India is not out of the woods,” said Dr. Ashish Jha, the director of the Harvard Global Health Institute. “From a public health point of view, I do think the lockdown has brought the disease under control,” he said. “But of course, as restrictions have lifted in the last week or 10 days, the number of cases has started to rise quickly.” At first, India moved aggressively to contain the coronavirus. In late March, Prime Minister Narendra Modi implemented one of the most severe lockdowns anywhere, ordering all Indians to stay inside, halting transportation and closing most businesses. But the lockdown was brutally hard on the poorest Indians and those who rely on day labor to survive. And the country’s economy, which had already been ailing, was sustaining deep wounds. Government officials began lifting some restrictions last month, hoping to ease the suffering, and the lockdown may end entirely as soon as Sunday, if Mr. Modi does not decide to extend it. Infections are rising quickly now, however, with outbreaks in some states that had reported few cases. This month, India’s doubling rate for new infections averaged about 12 days, putting it on par with countries of high concern like Brazil. That number compares poorly to those of other nations where stay-at-home orders were imposed. In the United States, the doubling rate improved from around 26 days at the start of May to about 50 days on Monday. Italy crossed the 100-day mark early this month. But in India, a nation of 1.3 billion people, locking down has posed different challenges than in many Western societies. Its metro areas are among the world’s densest, with millions living in packed slums, sometimes sleeping eight to a room. Almost half of India’s cases have been traced to just four cities: New Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Ahmedabad. AFGHAN. CHINA New Delhi PAKISTAN NEPAL UTTAR    PRADESH BIHAR INDIA Ahmedabad MAHARASHTRA Mumbai Bay of Bengal Arabian Sea Chennai 500 Miles By The New York Times “Social distancing is inherently very difficult in India,” Dr. Jha said. “I don’t know if India could realistically get to 26 days, or 50 days.” Testing has also been severely restricted, making it tough to gauge the scope of the outbreak. India has administered only two tests for every 1,000 people, one of the lowest ratios among the world’s worst-afflicted countries. It is conducting many more tests than it had been — roughly 90,000 a day through May, up from around 4,200 daily tests in late March. But officials have sounded alarms about an increasing proportion of positive results in recent samples. Dr. G.C. Khilnani, a public health expert and pulmonologist, said a peak in infections might not be reached until the end of July. He said India’s relatively low number of total cases per capita (about 160,000 infections and 4,706 deaths) should not be taken as a sign that the country had necessarily escaped the worst. “Nobody can predict to what extent the numbers will go up,” Dr. Khilnani said. As many parts of India continue to see days with record-high infections, a political consensus on how to fight the virus has deteriorated, giving way to acrimony and finger-pointing. “We are the only country in the world where the virus is exponentially rising,” Rahul Gandhi, a leader of the opposition Indian National Congress party, said in a video statement. “What India is facing now, in front of us, is the result of a failed lockdown.” Amit Malviya, a spokesman for Mr. Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party, fired back in a television interview. He accused Mr. Gandhi of not taking stronger action to contain infections in Maharashtra, India’s hardest-hit state, which is governed by a coalition that includes the Indian National Congress. “Maharashtra is completely over the top, it’s bleeding, people are dying, the health infrastructure’s crumbled,” Mr. Malviya said. Health officials have traced nearly 40 percent of India’s cases to the state. Questions have also been raised about whether the lockdown played a role in spreading the virus to remote areas of India. When Mr. Modi announced the restrictions, he gave Indians just four hours to prepare before they went into effect. Millions of migrant workers were stranded in cities. With bus and train services suspended, some walked hundreds of miles to reach their villages, using dirty pieces of cloth to cover their faces. The human suffering has been staggering. Shiv Dutt Gupta, a member of a government task force crafting the lockdown exit plan, partially attributed the surge in new cases to laborers bringing the coronavirus into rural India. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. Test results for several hundred migrant workers who traveled from New Delhi to the state of Bihar this month found that one in four had contracted Covid-19. Bihar now has one of the steepest infection curves in India, and troubling clusters have also been tracked to laborers traveling to their homes in Uttar Pradesh, the country’s most populous state. “The rate of positive cases among the migrant workers is very high,” Mr. Gupta said. “That is alarming.” But he said the lockdown could not go on forever. Around 122 million Indians lost their jobs in April, according to the Center for Monitoring Indian Economy, a leading business analytics company. Some industries have teetered on the edge of bankruptcy. If the lockdown continues, Mr. Gupta said, “We will be devastated economically.” Officials have justified loosening rules by pointing out that not all of India has been hit equally, with hopeful improvements in states like Kerala. And doctors note that the lockdown did buy the government time to ramp up infrastructure in the country’s already overburdened health facilities. India’s public health sector has long been overstretched, with around 0.5 hospital beds for every 1,000 people, according to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. By comparison, Germany has 8 and Japan has 13.1. “Two months of lockdown has helped us fine-tune our treatment protocols, our isolation protocols, our quarantine protocols,” said Naresh Trehan, a prominent Indian surgeon. Now, the resumption of cross-country transportation and industry has raised the prospect that previously spared states may find themselves confronted with imported outbreaks. But many Indians seem ready to venture out, despite the numbers. After weeks of self-isolating at home, Mujtaba Rizvi, an artist living in Chennai, said he went for a walk last weekend and was stunned by what he saw. Streets were clogged with cars. Shoppers spilled out of crowded shops without wearing masks or observing social distancing. At this point, Mr. Rizvi said, it appeared there was no turning back. “Freedom comes at a price, and people seem to be ready to pay,” he said. “Even if more people die now, it would be difficult to send us back into isolation.” Suhasini Raj contributed reporting.This briefing has ended. Read live updates on the coronavirus here. 新冠病毒疫情最新消息 Its coronavirus cases are skyrocketing, putting it among the world’s most worrisome pandemic zones. Nonetheless, India is lifting its lockdown — at what experts fear may be the worst time. Migrant workers are becoming infected at an alarmingly high rate, leading to fresh outbreaks in villages across northern India.  Almost half of the country’s 160,000 known cases have been traced to just four cities: New Delhi, Chennai, Ahmedabad and Mumbai, where public hospitals are so overwhelmed that patients have taken to sleeping on cardboard in the hallways.  Testing has also been severely restricted, making it tough to gauge the scope of the outbreak. India has administered only two tests for every 1,000 people, one of the lowest ratios among the world’s worst-afflicted countries. The testing is increasing, and officials have sounded alarms about an increasing proportion of positive results. The lockdown, which started over two months ago, was one of the most severe anywhere. Prime Minister Narendra Modi ordered all Indians to stay inside, halting transportation and closing most businesses. The conditions were brutally hard on the poorest Indians and those who rely on day labor to survive. And the country’s economy, which had already been ailing, was sustaining deep wounds. Government officials began lifting some restrictions last month, hoping to ease the suffering, and the lockdown may end entirely as soon as Sunday, if Mr. Modi does not decide to extend it.  In the end, the effort slowed the virus but failed to flatten the new-case curve. If India does not find a way to curb the virus in high-risk states, epidemiologists project that its total caseload could approach a million within several weeks. Dr. G.C. Khilnani, a public health expert and pulmonologist, said a peak in infections might not be reached until the end of July.  “Nobody can predict to what extent the numbers will go up,”  Dr. Khilnani said. If the reopening of offices, restaurants and other public places within countries amid the pandemic has seemed dizzying, the rules on travel between nations are shaping up to be bewildering. Travel bubbles and airline corridors to allow free movement between certain cities or countries, quarantines and an assortment of other measures add up to a puzzle that even the most intrepid traveler will likely have trouble navigating. Nowhere are the logistical challenges more daunting than in Europe, where optimistic pronouncements about easing restrictions in time for the summer travel season have run into the reality of a patchwork of policies. For people living across the continent, the sudden closure of borders came as a shock and fundamentally reordered life for millions who came of age in an era defined by frictionless travel between the 26 countries that are part of the Schengen Zone. “It would be great if all this could be compressed into something easy to understand, but it is a very complex picture,” said Adalbert Jahnz, a spokesman for home affairs, migration and citizenship at the European Commission, the executive branch of the European Union. European officials are working on an interactive map with all the rules among member states in one place. Even when the platform is up and running, though, it will likely offer a  confounding picture of closed and open borders, with individual member states reaching bi-lateral and multi-lateral agreements with neighbors. For instance, Bulgaria, Serbia and Greece are expected to open borders to each other starting June 1. Greece, desperate to save its tourism industry, also released an expanded list on Friday of 29 countries it will allow travel from starting June 15. (Nope, the United States is not on that list.) The Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia have already started implementing a similar arrangement. France, Germany and other western European nations have talked about easing border controls to other EU member states on June 15. That is the day that the European Commission’s guidance calling for the suspension of all non-essential travel into the E.U. will expire.  The issues confronting bureaucrats regarding travel from outside the bloc is perhaps even more difficult than the issues within the zone. If one country allows travel from outside the bloc — and borders between countries in the E.U. are fully open — then, in effect, every country has allowed in the travelers. The European Commission, which can only offer guidance, is still discussing what posture to take before the June 15 deadline. But officials said that it would be hard to do anything short of either keeping the guidance in place as it stands or completely lifting it. If they were to call for more targeted restrictions on countries based on criteria like virus caseloads, it could create a whole new set of scientific, diplomatic and political challenges. If there was one bright spot for believers in a united Europe, it is that the value of open borders  among its countries will likely not soon be taken for granted after this pandemic is over. For Mr. Jahnz of the European Commission, the crisis has shown  “just how essential borderless travel is to our economy and our way of life.”  transcript China has total control over the World Health Organization despite only paying $40 million per year compared to what the United States has been paying, which is approximately $450 million a year. Chinese officials ignored their reporting obligations to the World Health Organization and pressured the World Health Organization to mislead the world when the virus was first discovered by Chinese authorities. Countless lives have been taken and profound economic hardship has been inflicted all around the globe. We will be today terminating our relationship with the World Health Organization, and redirecting those funds to other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs. The world needs answers from China on the virus. We must have transparency. After spending weeks accusing the World Health Organization of helping the Chinese government cover up the early days of the coronavirus epidemic in China, President Trump said on Friday that the United States would terminate its relationship with the agency. “The world is now suffering as a result of the malfeasance of the Chinese government,” Mr. Trump said in a speech in the Rose Garden.  In his 10-minute address, Mr. Trump took no responsibility for the deaths of 100,000 Americans from the virus, instead saying China had “instigated a global pandemic.” There is no evidence that the W.H.O. or the government in Beijing hid the extent of the epidemic in China, and public health experts generally view Mr. Trump’s charges as a way to deflect attention from his administration’s own bungled attempts to respond to the virus’s spread in the United States. Public health experts in the United States reacted to Mr. Trump’s announcement with alarm. A spokeswoman for the W.H.O. in Geneva said the agency would not have a response until Saturday. It is not clear whether the president can simply withdraw the United States from the World Health Organization without Congressional approval. The W.H.O. was founded in 1948 as part of the postwar creation of the United Nations and is the world’s premier global health organization. The coronavirus has been the leading cause of death in the United States since mid-April, killing roughly 100,000 citizens to date. By comparison, China has recorded only 4,600 citizens who have died of the infection. When the coronavirus pandemic hit this winter, it stilled the anti-establishment protests that had erupted across the world last year. Demonstrations are now creeping back into public spaces, with the coronavirus part of protesters’ new reality. As Hong Kong brought local Covid-19 transmissions to a standstill this spring, thousands of people began returning to the streets — in masks, and sometimes at a healthy distance from each other — to protest Beijing’s contentious national security legislation for the territory. At a protest near Beijing’s representative office in Hong Kong last week, some demonstrators tried to obey virus-related rules that ban public gatherings of more than eight people — by marching in bands of eight. One of them, the pro-democracy district councilor Lo Kin-hei, said on Twitter that he had been fined by the police anyway. Hong Kong’s pro-Beijing government has extended the ban on large gatherings until June 4, the day an annual candlelight vigil to commemorate the Tiananmen crackdown in 1989 is usually held at a local park. Protest organizers, who say that the timing is no coincidence, have called on residents to light candles across the city instead of gathering. And in the United States, where the coronavirus pandemic has kept many people from large gatherings for months, mass protests have erupted in a number of cities over the death of a black man, George Floyd, in police custody. Masks have often been in evidence, social distancing somewhat less so.  Overnight, a police station was set on fire in Minneapolis, where Mr. Floyd died on Monday after a police officer pinned him to the ground with a knee to the neck. Some in the crowd brought up the disproportionately large toll that the virus has taken in minority communities. The virus has infected more than 6,118,200 people in at least 177 countries. The Spanish government approved an emergency aid package that will provide about 850,000 households with what it calls a minimum income guarantee, seeking to soften the economic blow caused by the coronavirus lockdown. The anti-poverty package, which will cost Spain about €3 billion, or $3.3 billion, a year, allows eligible households to receive an amount ranging from €462 to €1015 a month, about $515 to $1,130, that will be essential for many families if the country’s economy is pushed into a recession, as expected. The aid was fast-tracked by the left-wing coalition government, but it is in line with the anti-poverty plans outlined by the administration of Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez, who pledged to redistribute the tax burden when he took office in January. “There is no freedom if people must dedicate all their energy to surviving rather than living,” Pablo Iglesias, Spain’s deputy prime minister, told a news conference on Friday. Mr. Iglesias leads the Unidas Podemos party, which is Mr. Sánchez’s coalition partner and is pushing for tax increases for the wealthy to help cover the heavy toll taken by Covid-19. The Bank of Spain recently forecast that Spain’s economy could shrink by as much as 13 percent in 2020. Lines at Spain’s main food banks and welfare handout centers have been building up since mid-March, when Spain went into lockdown. Raúl Flores, the technical director of the Foessa foundation, which is part of the Cáritas relief agency, said that about six million of the 47 million people living in Spain were walking “a tight rope.” The minimum income guarantee is the first such nationwide scheme in Spain, where most of the welfare programs have been handled by regional administrations. The program will be rolled out starting next month and is expected to reach about 2.3 million people, according to the government. Recipients must be below 65 years old, the age when Spaniards stop paying into the pension system, and their eligibility will be determined by examining recent tax returns, as well as other assets. Weeks after reopening the schools and days after letting restaurants get back to business, Israel reported more than 100 new cases on Friday, the level that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu had warned would prompt the reinstatement of a strict lockdown. Mr. Netanyahu’s office did not immediately respond to word of the day’s new cases, which was disclosed after the start of the Sabbath, but he was expected to meet with ministers and senior health officials on Saturday. So far, Israel has fared relatively well in the pandemic, with only 284 reported deaths. New cases had averaged about 20 a day for several weeks, but a surge on Thursday and Friday, with positive tests at 31 schools scattered across the country, prompted a top health official to scold the public for its “euphoria and complacency” and “laxness of attitude” about masks, hygiene and social-distancing rules. Moshe Bar-Siman-Tov, the director general of the health ministry, warned at a 6 p.m. news conference that a second wave of the coronavirus could result. “The road from here to 100, 200 or 300 new patients per day is short, and from there the road to 750 or 1,000 new patients per day is even shorter,” he said. Two hours later, a ministry spokesman said the day’s new cases had reached 101. When Mr. Netanyahu announced the end of Israel’s lockdown on May 4, he said that 100 new cases in a single day would be the trigger to restart it. When experts recommend wearing masks, staying at least six feet away from others, washing your hands frequently and avoiding crowded spaces, what they’re really saying is: Try to minimize the amount of virus you encounter. A few viral particles cannot make you sick — the immune system would vanquish the intruders before they could. But how much virus is needed for an infection to take root? What is the minimum effective dose? A precise answer is impossible, because it’s difficult to capture the moment of infection. Scientists are studying ferrets, hamsters and mice for clues but, of course, it wouldn’t be ethical for scientists to expose people to different doses of the coronavirus, as they do with milder cold viruses. Common respiratory viruses, like influenza and other coronaviruses, should offer some insight. But researchers have found little consistency. For SARS, also a coronavirus, the estimated infective dose is just a few hundred particles. For MERS, the infective dose is much higher, on the order of thousands of particles. The new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, is more similar to the SARS virus and, therefore, the infectious dose may be hundreds of particles, Dr. Rasmussen said. But the virus has a habit of defying predictions. Generally, people who harbor high levels of pathogens — whether from influenza, H.I.V. or SARS — tend to have more severe symptoms and are more likely to pass on the pathogens to others. But in the case of the new coronavirus, people who have no symptoms seem to have viral loads — that is, the amount of virus in their bodies — just as high as those who are seriously ill, according to some studies. Russian officials have said the country’s coronavirus death toll is so low that it is a “miracle.” But after weeks of scrutiny, Moscow health authorities now say they have “improved” their count and found that more than twice as many people died in the Russian capital in April as they initially reported. The new figures, announced by Moscow’s municipal health department late Thursday, are a retreat from strident denunciations Russian officials had issued against news organizations that had questioned the official numbers. Under the new revision, health officials said 1,561 people died in the capital with coronavirus in April, more than twice the previous number of 639. The new counting methodology includes fatal diseases accelerated by the coronavirus as a “catalyst” but not necessarily directly caused by it, the statement said.   The health department said that even with the new numbers, far fewer people have died of coronavirus in Moscow as a proportion of known cases than in other countries, a measure known as the case-fatality rate. Moscow’s case-fatality rate in April was still “undeniably lower” than London’s or New York City’s, it said. But the case-fatality rate is a flawed way to compare cities, researchers say, because it is highly dependent on the level of testing. As more cases are confirmed, the rate shrinks. Russia has tested more aggressively than many other countries, performing 10 million tests nationwide.  Until now, Russia had adopted a different standard of what counts as a coronavirus death than the United States and Western Europe. Even if a patient tested positive for Covid-19, some death reports gave a narrower cause of death, researchers say. Russia carries out autopsies on all those who die and has argued that this gives a more precise accounting the cause of death. Moscow’s number of deaths from all causes saw a significant spike in April. But it was not anywhere near the levels seen in the hardest-hit cities in Europe, Latin America and the United States. With 387,623 infections as of Friday, Russia has the third-largest known outbreak after the United States and Brazil. The April data gives an incomplete picture, as the outbreak hit Moscow hard only in the middle of the month. Mortality figures for May will provide a clearer view of Russia’s status. Moscow health officials warned this week that deaths could rise sharply this month. When The New York Times and other news organizations reported earlier this month that Moscow’s coronavirus death toll for April appeared significantly higher than reported, the authorities demanded that the stories be retracted while legislators called for a criminal investigation into fake news and the expulsion of foreign journalists. New York City, long the epicenter of the global coronavirus crisis, is poised to start reopening in slightly more than a week, setting the stage for a slow and tentative recovery after two months of suffering, social isolation and economic hardship. Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo said on Friday that he expected the city to meet several benchmarks that would permit millions of virus-weary residents to enjoy the first signs of a normal life as early as June 8. Retail stores could open for curbside or in-store pickup, and nonessential construction and manufacturing could resume, part of an initial phase that could send as many as 400,000 people back to work. As other parts of the nation, including less populated sections of New York State, have already reopened, New York City, which lost more than 20,000 lives to the virus, has taken much longer to recover. It required a gargantuan effort to even reach the point where officials were comfortable with loosening the restrictions on movement and commerce that were put in place in March. Deaths in New York have dropped to dozens a day, rather than the 700 or 800 a day that were taking place in April, and the number of virus patients on intensive care in the city’s public hospitals has fallen by more than half. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. That progress largely came because many New Yorkers followed the rules, and have been wearing masks and maintaining social distance as requested. The rewards of vigilance have been manifest not only in decreasing fatalities, but also in the declining number of people testing positive for the virus and those requiring hospital stays because of it. But even with the strides the city has made, the road to normalcy will no doubt be steep and rocky. Since February, nearly 900,000 local jobs have vanished and thousands of businesses have closed their doors — some forever. Revenues from sales taxes are expected to drop by $1 billion, part of a frightening $9 billion estimated budget shortfall that could push officials into risky borrowing and force drastic cuts to essential city services. Major cities like Washington D.C. and Los Angeles were set to continue easing restrictions, with Washington reopening outdoor seating at restaurants. Restaurants and hair salons in Los Angeles will be able to reopen as soon as this weekend if they meet the county’s guidelines and safety protocols. Jerome H. Powell, the chair of the Federal Reserve, said central bankers had seen the need to use their tools “to their fullest extent” as coronavirus restrictions caused United States unemployment to soar. Economists say that the path ahead for the economy is wildly uncertain, as massive questions loom over whether additional virus outbreaks will shutter the economy again. On Friday, Baghdad was almost completely still. Traffic had been halted throughout the city and stay-at-home orders were enforced by neighborhood blockades. All travel between Iraqi provinces was stopped for a second time in response to the country’s mounting awareness of the spread of the coronavirus. The growth in cases was hidden for months, both by the country’s low testing capacity and by the large numbers of the infected who remained asymptomatic. Many Iraqis also hid their illnesses, believing that the infection would bring shame on their families. Since the middle of this month, the increases have become consistently greater and harder to ignore.  Baghdad has become a hot spot, with more than half  of the country’s nearly 5,900 cases. And on Friday, there was more bad news. Iraq’s Health Ministry registered 416 new coronavirus cases in the country, the highest daily total since the ministry announced its first case in February.  But even before the latest news, the country was starting to close down again. On Thursday, the order came to shut Sadr City — the poorest and most crowded area of Baghdad, and the one with the most coronavirus infections — to traffic. Soon after that, the police and the army stopped almost all movement in the rest of the city. Stay-at-home orders and blockades have hit poorer communities the hardest. In Sadr City, the desperation was palpable. Motley collections of vehicles that power the slum’s economy converged on one intersection after another, trying to find a way out. But the army and the police were unyielding. Tuk-tuks, cars, trucks piled high with watermelon, and horse-drawn carts loaded with cooking gas canisters were turned around. Inside homes, where extended families often live in two small rooms and no one wears masks or gloves, there was a feeling of despair. One resident, Um Teeba, said she and her husband believed that their faith would keep them safe, but she is a nurse at Sadr City Hospital, where there is only limited personal protective equipment for the staff. She looked uneasily at her 10-year-old daughter, who ran into the courtyard to sneeze. “It seems we are being shut in with people who are sick,” she said. “So then of course we will get sick too.” About eight million people worldwide earn their living making cars and trucks. It’s now becoming clearer that not all of them will come out of the pandemic with jobs. The French carmaker Renault announced an emergency cost-cutting plan on Friday that is likely to serve as a grim template for an industry that was in deep trouble even before the coronavirus pandemic brought sales to a near standstill. Renault said it would cut nearly 15,000 jobs worldwide, or about 8 percent of its work force, and pull out of China. The company also said it would drastically reduce in production. Sales in the European Union, Renault’s most important market, fell nearly 80 percent in April, when lockdowns closed dealerships and kept most buyers at home. “It’s not just Renault,” said Peter Wells, the director of the Center for Automotive Industry Research at Cardiff University in Wales. “There are too many factories, too many models, too many dealers. A crisis like this is ruthless in exposing the vulnerabilities of these companies.” Nissan, Renault’s partner in a global automaking alliance, said Thursday that it would close factories in Indonesia and Spain as it reduces car production by a fifth. The announcement came after Nissan reported a loss for the fiscal year ending in March of 671 billion yen, or $6.3 billion. Volvo Cars said last month that it would cut 1,300 white-collar jobs in Sweden, its home base. Other carmakers, like Fiat Chrysler and PSA, which makes Peugeot, Citroën and Opel vehicles, will be under pressure to make similar cuts. By contrast, American carmakers cut thousands of jobs last year and have not announced new rounds of layoffs caused by the pandemic. Recently they have been gearing up production after factories were closed to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.  But with demand unlikely to return to pre-pandemic levels for years, even the American automakers will not be able to avoid further painful cuts, Mr. Wells said. Our Berlin-based reporter Patrick Kingsley and Laetitia Vancon, a Times photojournalist, are driving more than 3,700 miles around Europe to document changes on a continent emerging from coronavirus lockdowns. Here is the second dispatch from their trip. Clad in masks, the waiters were nervous. How would the diners see their smiles? The sommelier wondered: How would he smell the wine? The head chef worried: How ready was the new menu? Was the cold pea soup too salty? The ice cream too sweet? Pauly Saal, one of Berlin’s most-lauded restaurants, was minutes from reopening. Staff members were glad to be back after a two-month shutdown — “a little bit of light at the end of the tunnel,” said one waiter, Dennis Rohde. But they were anxious as well as excited. The authorities’ sudden decision to allow restaurants to reopen had left them with only 24 hours to perfect a radical revision of their working practice. And amid a profound economic crisis, there was also a more existential question: With no tourists in the city, was there still a market for Michelin-starred gastronomy? Like all German restaurants, Pauly Saal was abruptly ordered to close in March. After an easing of restrictions in Germany, it is reopening in a strange, changed world — a barometer of the extent to which fine dining can survive during a pandemic. “It’s a completely different style,” said the restaurant’s longest-serving waiter, Michael Winterstein, who joined at its founding in 2012. “And we have to make that work,” added Mr. Winterstein, once a professional composer, “without it looking like a medical station in a hospital.” The full dispatch can be found here. Improvisation and the ability to draw on their environment define the music made by Bolivia’s Orquesta Experimental de Instrumentos Nativos, or Experimental Orchestra of Native Instruments. Those skills have also helped the musicians navigate 80 days in unexpected lockdown on the grounds of the 18th-century Rheinsberg palace north of Berlin. Days after their arrival for a five-day concert tour in mid-March,  international flights were grounded and Bolivia shut its borders.  With luck, they may be returning home on Monday, said Timo Kreuser, a German composer and artistic director  who has been looking after the orchestra. Awaiting them at home is a  14-day quarantine in hotels they have to pay for after three months without work —  and a much higher profile. Reports have reached Bolivia that the 25 musicians were living in a “haunted castle surrounded by wolves.” But the site, while comfortable, resembles a well-kept  hostel more than a palace, and only a few of the musicians have caught sight of wolves — from a safe distance — Mr. Kreuser said. Berno Odo Polzer, the artistic director of the MaerzMusik festival, said the organization covered the 84,000 euros, or $93,500, for accommodation and food for the orchestra from March to May. The group was to play at the festival on its opening day, March 20, but it was canceled. Crowdfunding has helped cover the cost of  other necessities, but the musicians still face five-figure debts for rebooked flights, lost income and medical and other expenses Mr. Kreuser said. What they have is their music.  “Right now we are channeling everything through our music,” one of the musicians, Tracy Prado, 32, told the German newspaper Die Zeit. “That is probably why nobody has gone crazy.” Thailand could lose as many as 8.4 million jobs this year, many of them in the hard-hit tourism industry, officials said on Thursday, reflecting how much the pandemic has hurt a country that received nearly 40 million visitors last year. The government hopes to stimulate employment through government spending, including a plan to boost domestic travel starting in July. But it has banned all foreign visitors until at least July because of the coronavirus, and the number of tourists in 2020 is expected to fall dramatically. The plan to increase domestic tourism in the third quarter could include hotel room subsidies, according to local news reports. “Tourism should be a fast economic stimulator,” the head of the National Economic and Social Development Council, Thosaporn Sirisumphand, told reporters earlier this week. “If the situation improves, we may open for tourists to come in.” Thailand, the first country outside China to report a case of the virus, has handled the pandemic better than most with measures such as closing schools, limiting business activity and imposing a nighttime curfew. It had 3,065 infections as of Thursday, including 57 deaths, and most new cases are Thais returning from abroad.  But before the virus struck, travel and tourism accounted for more than 20 percent of Thailand’s gross domestic product and employed nearly 16 percent of its work force. The nation’s flagship airline, Thai Airways, which was already suffering financially before it halted international flights in March, is now seeking rehabilitation in bankruptcy court. Not only people have been out of work. More than 1,000 elephants also have lost their jobs because of the decline in visitors, and their owners now struggle to feed them.   Reporting was contributed by Kai Schultz, Sameer Yasir, Marc Santora, Jack Ewing, David M. Halbfinger, Melissa Eddy, Alissa J. Rubin, Raphael Minder, Andrew Higgins, Josh Keller, Allison McCann, Emma Bubola, Christopher F. Schuetze, Mike Ives, Elaine Yu, Sarah Mervosh, Megan Specia, Patrick Kingsley, Martin Selsoe Sorensen, Kai Schultz, Sameer Yasir, Vivian Wang, Richard C. Paddock, Roni Caryn Rabin, Jason Gutierrez, Choe Sang-Hun, Jin Wu, Alex Marshall, Donald G. McNeil Jr., Andrew Jacobs, Apoorva Mandavilli and Jenny Gross.One of my exes wants to know how my new dog is doing. Another asks if eating three cheeseburgers counts as exercise if done while downloading the Nike Training Club app. A third found an old manuscript of mine. Dylan, my most recent ex, is worried he sounds too zeitgeist-y for reaching out in the first place, but given the times — the pandemic, the fact my father has bad asthma and sleeps with a CPAP — he’s curious how I’m holding up. And I too am guilty of wanting to engage, even if just as a name on a screen held by a familiar hand. It’s some kind of closeness. “It’s like a pandemic Bingo square,” my friend Jacqueline says. But when we can check on social media what someone has been up to, or simply to confirm that they’re alive, why intrude? Why drum up the past? What I really want to ask Dylan is what he did with the roses. Late for Valentine’s Day reservations this past February, we had stuffed the roses in his refrigerator and rushed out. By the next morning, we had broken up. He had a personality, in his own words, like walking fast. Zippy. Going somewhere. Where? Couldn’t tell you. He was smart, funny and driven. We had been together for six months, and I would miss him. But my take has always been, however nice it feels to reconnect, it’s nicer not to relive old feelings of hope and disappointment. So I usually opt for the clean break. [Sign up for Love Letter, our weekly email about Modern Love, weddings and relationships.] “I like you so much, but please do not text me,” I had said to Dylan that last morning in bed, relegating him to the Tough Love Graveyard in my brain, a place with a fence around it. I hoped he would do the same. Now we’re sheltering at home with our separate families in separate states, and he’s wandered out of that graveyard, suddenly among the living again, with a “Hey, I’ve been thinking about you.” I didn’t want to reply. It was a reversal, in a way. Dylan and I had just started dating when, for an entire half day, I was dead. Then came back to life. It was late August, the city still sticky with summer. I had returned from a friend’s place on Nantucket — a few days away from all the stuff: emails, trains, pigeons, endless robocalls with catch-free offers. The plane landed and I rushed home to shower before the dinner date he had planned. He would pick me up. I liked that. We sat street-side at a table in the cooling night air. The asphalt was wet; you could hear it on the tires of cars passing. A cab pulled over and tapped its horn. I loved being there, inside that feeling. I seemed to notice everything except the range of my own arms. Exclaiming, I knocked over my glass of wine. “Damn.” “Go off,” Dylan said with a laugh, reaching for a napkin. The thing that tips, the night spilling open. Our server gave us a free round, pity with a wink. By then, I had already died. Taken a backward plunge four stories down to a city street not unlike where we were dining. But news of my death would not reach me until the next morning. Dylan, late for work, hurried to put his clothes on while I stayed in bed and went back to sleep. My phone started ringing. “Max?” Jacqueline said. “Is that you?” “No,” I said, yawning. “It’s Barbara.” “What?” “Barbara Walters,” I said. “I’m serious,” she said. “Are you all right? Are you safe?” She texted me the New York Post article. I opened the link. On speakerphone, she began to explain. She was right: According to the article, a different Max McDonough, my same age, had fallen to his death from an Upper East Side roof party the night before. “Isn’t that where that new guy you’re seeing lives?” she said. “I was so worried. I thought — ” We agreed how odd and horrible the coincidence was. We talked a while longer, caught up, then said goodbye. I went about my day, grabbed a coffee at my neighborhood place. Since it was sunny, I walked all the way down to Central Park and back. I declined the incoming calls from various unknown numbers. Robocalls, I thought, promising to forgive my student loans (if only). My roommate was making bacon when I returned to the apartment. I said, “You’ve got to see this,” and showed him the article. But it was afternoon by then, and the story had been updated. “Are you sure this isn’t you?” he said as the bacon sizzled and popped. Then his face changed. “No, I think this is definitely you. They’re calling you a ‘drunk writer’ and they link to your website.” He handed me the phone. I felt a little insulted, thinking he was horsing around. But it was true. Since I had last checked hours ago, The New York Post had updated the article to include my personal information. “Drunk writer” were their words, not his. As if on cue, my phone started ringing again. Another unknown number. “You probably should take that,” my roommate said. I picked up. “Hello?” “Is this Max McDonough?” It was a man’s voice. “Yes, this is Max McDonough,” I said. “And who is this?” “But are you sure this is Max McDonough?” the voice said. It turned out to be the lawyer husband of the co-founder of the company I worked for. By the time I had persuaded him that I was indeed still alive, he said, “Reports of your death are greatly exaggerated.” Then another call, this time from my boss, crying: “What the hell. Some reporter reached out to PR. I was in the park with my kids and about to call your parents. My whole body is shaking.” “But everything’s OK.” I didn’t know what else to say. “I’m just here, pacing around my apartment. But thank God you didn’t call my parents.” Later, in person, I would tell Dylan all of this. But for now, I texted him the story and said, “I’m dead?” It made for a good story, albeit without an end. Of course, out of frame, the other 27-year-old Max McDonough really had fallen. He had a real family somewhere grieving. Maybe they were as livid as my own family for all the confusion, the lack of integrity, the mix-up. I wasn’t sure how to talk about all this before the pandemic. It seemed to be a spectacle without meaning, which made me feel shame. I felt guilty about the friends reaching out — joking that I should stay away from balconies, railings, rooftops. Some of them I hadn’t heard from in years. They told me what I had meant to them, were glad I was still alive. Meanwhile, there was this other person who had died. The part I didn’t expect: Some of his friends reached out as well — emailed, sent me direct messages — terrified, asking for clarification. Maybe they hoped not to receive an answer from me, which would have meant good news? Life goes on, work happens, the weather changes. I got swept up falling in love with Dylan. For months, he and I walked everywhere. Whether we were getting along, or weren’t, we walked. Up through Washington Heights, turning back at the Harlem River, and down the Upper East Side until our feet were fried. On these walks, arm in arm, I couldn’t help but wonder which block it had been, and what building, from which the other Max had fallen. The Max who could’ve been me but wasn’t. Instead, I was here — with Dylan. His hands were sweaty. And where were we going? A bakery, a train stop, the river, a kiss, dinner reservations, roses in the refrigerator. This is what I mean about drumming up the past. It’s a circuit, difficult to leap out of. I think, when I was reported dead, that I got a small taste of what the pandemic has heightened for everyone: a dose of uncertainty, a reminder of our mortality, a distillation of what matters. We’re worried for ourselves and loved ones. We’re asking in new ways: What does it mean to be alive to each other? Maybe this is why the exes are texting. We all have these moments we carry around in our heads. They are specific and bodily and sometimes, when we are afraid of loss, they rise above the noise of daily life. I don’t know what Dylan’s moment would be. For me, it’s the night of the death report, after the spilled wine but before the cab home, his laugh in the wet air, the warm light, a car’s stray horn and the feeling something was about to happen, something important, though I couldn’t have told you what. I took a few hours to decide about breaking my silence, but I already knew. “I think about you too,” I typed. Max McDonough is a writer and poet in New York City. Modern Love can be reached at modernlove@nytimes.com. Want more? Watch the Modern Love TV series, now on Amazon Prime Video; sign up for Love Letter, our weekly email; read past Modern Love columns and Tiny Love Stories; listen to the Modern Love Podcast on iTunes, Spotify or Google Play Music; peruse our T-shirts, totes, sweatshirts and temporary tattoos on the NYT Store; check out the updated anthology “Modern Love: True Stories of Love, Loss, and Redemption”; and follow Modern Love on Facebook.Republicans planning their party’s convention traded demands with North Carolina’s Democratic governor this week over holding the event in Charlotte in August, as President Trump pressures Democratic leaders in the state to allow him to host the kind of convention he wants despite concerns about the coronavirus pandemic. The Republican National Committee chairwoman, Ronna McDaniel, and the president of the convention committee, Marcia Lee Kelly, wrote to Gov. Roy Cooper on Thursday, giving him a deadline of June 3 to approve safety measures to prevent the spread of the virus during the event. On Friday, Mr. Cooper’s administration shot back with a letter of its own, asking Ms. McDaniel and Ms. Kelly to detail the R.N.C.’s plans to protect convention participants, and to specify whether the president was still set on holding a large-scale nominating event where attendees in the crowd would not wear face masks. The president has tried to force Mr. Cooper and Vi Lyles, the mayor of Charlotte, to commit quickly to a Republican plan for a party celebration in the biggest city in a state that Mr. Trump won in 2016. The two Democrats, citing public health concerns, say it is too soon to make a determination whether the event can be held safely. The Republicans’ letter also appeared to be an effort to put the onus on Mr. Cooper and Ms. Lyles, both of whom are Democrats, if Republicans end up trying to stage their convention in another state. “We still do not have solid guidelines from the state and cannot in good faith, ask thousands of visitors to begin paying deposits and making travel plans without knowing the full commitment of the governor, elected officials and other stakeholders in supporting the convention,” Ms. McDaniel and Ms. Kelly wrote. Their list of suggested safety measures included health questionnaires for attendees, thermal scans before boarding “sanitized” prearranged transportation, widely available hand sanitizer, and a requirement that attendees pass a health screening before entering the event. The letter did not mention social distancing or masks. And the reference to a health screening did not specify whether it would include some form of rapid testing. In the Cooper administration’s letter, the state’s secretary of health and human services, Mandy Cohen, requested that the R.N.C. tell the state specifically how many people, including delegates, elected officials, guests and journalists, it expected to pack into the Spectrum Center, the main convention venue. The letter also asked the R.N.C. to detail how it would implement health screenings, social distancing, and the wearing of face masks, and to clarify whether Mr. Trump still wanted to hold the nomination event in a “crowd-like setting” where people did not wear masks or practice social distancing. It also asked for clarification over whether the R.N.C. was still considering testing attendees. The letter said that while North Carolina still supported hosting the convention “if it can be done safely,” there needed to be “several scenarios planned that can be deployed depending on the public health situation.” The party entered a contract two years ago with officials in North Carolina to hold the convention, an enormous gathering that would bring thousands of delegates, alternates, journalists and other attendees to the state’s hotels and restaurants over a four-day period. Mr. Trump has repeatedly insinuated that the Democratic officials in the state are playing politics around the Republican convention, which is scheduled for Aug. 24 through Aug. 27. But both Ms. Lyles and Mr. Cooper have said that it is too early to decide whether a convention can be held, and that they will be guided by health officials about what can be done to avoid accelerating the spread of the virus. Privately, Republican officials and North Carolina state leaders had been discussing a range of options being considered in lieu of a full convention, according to a person familiar with the talks. But over the weekend, Mr. Trump abruptly and publicly pressured North Carolina officials to give an answer “immediately” as to whether the event could be held at “full capacity.” Mr. Trump has mused to aides about whether the event could be held in a hotel ballroom in Florida. The state’s governor, Ron DeSantis, a Republican ally of Mr. Trump’s, has made a public pitch for moving the convention there. Ms. McDaniel held a call with North Carolina officials on Tuesday, two people familiar with the call said, during which she mentioned that the president didn’t favor the televised optics of masks and social distancing at a convention, although one person said Ms. McDaniel did not say that was Mr. Trump’s demand. The R.N.C. chairwoman also mentioned the possibility of testing for attendees, the people familiar with the call said.This is the Coronavirus Briefing, an informed guide to the global outbreak. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. The pandemic’s pace is quickening worldwide, with nearly 700,000 new known infections reported in the last week. More than 40 million people — about one in four American workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since mid-March. The Boston Marathon was canceled for the first time in its 124-year history. Get the latest updates here, plus maps and a tracker for U.S. metro areas. The coronavirus pandemic has shown clearly what happens when a new pathogen gets loose in a population where no one has had it before: It spreads like wildfire. Long-familiar viruses, even ones that are every bit as contagious, can’t do that, because of a phenomenon called herd immunity. It works like this: The more people there are in a community who have protective antibodies, either through vaccination or past exposure, the less likely an infected patient is to encounter someone who lacks them and pass the virus along. Above a certain threshold, the virus can’t spread readily enough for an outbreak to grow. That’s why diseases like measles and chickenpox have become rare in the United States even though not everyone gets vaccinated: Enough people do to achieve herd immunity. Scientists and policymakers hope we’ll get to that point with the coronavirus, too. But a crop of new studies suggests that herd immunity is still very far away. Epidemiologists don’t know yet exactly where the threshold is for the coronavirus, but they expect to find it somewhere between 60 and 80 percent of the population. Even New York City, the center of America’s worst outbreak, is still far below that: Only around 20 percent of residents tested in a survey in early May showed any antibodies, and that may be an overestimate. Some countries — notably Sweden, and briefly Britain — experimented with minimal social distancing restrictions in an effort to develop immunity in their populations. But no more than 7 to 17 percent of people there seem to have antibodies so far. “We don’t have a good way to safely build it up, to be honest, not in the short term,” said Michael Mina, an epidemiologist at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health. “Unless we’re going to let the virus run rampant again — but I think society has decided that is not an approach available to us.” Unproven premise: The hopes for herd immunity — and for a vaccine — rest on the belief that the antibodies will protect against reinfection. There is some evidence suggesting that people do achieve immunity to the coronavirus, as they do with many other viruses. But it is not yet certain whether that’s true in all cases, or how robust the immunity may be, or how long it will last. The Times is providing free access to much of our coronavirus coverage, and our Coronavirus Briefing newsletter — like all of our newsletters — is free. Please consider supporting our journalism with a subscription. Groceries, packages, elevator buttons, doorknobs. Many people worry about touching all kinds of surfaces that others may have handled, for fear of infection. Should they? Surface transmission is possible, but it is not thought to be the main way the virus spreads, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says. To catch the virus that way, a series of things has to happen in just the right way. Droplets from an infected person’s sneeze or cough would have to get onto the surface; then you would have to touch it while enough virus particles remained viable; and then you would have to touch your eyes, nose or mouth. Our Well editor Tara Parker-Pope explains that timing and quantity are important. The virus is fragile and begins to disintegrate within hours; though some particles can last up to three days on plastic or steel, there may not be enough left by then to infect you. And you can break the chain of contamination completely with the pandemic’s golden rules: Wash your hands often, and avoid touching your face. After two months of stay-at-home restrictions, New York City has flattened its curve — but many people are still becoming infected. More than 13,000 people in the city tested positive for the virus in the last two weeks. Our colleague Andy Newman told us that after seeing mask-wearing in the city “go from being a weird outlier thing to the near-universal conduct,” he wondered: “How is it that people are still managing to get sick?” Epidemiologists, doctors, health officials and patients told him that the people catching the virus now in the New York area include essential workers and their families; elderly people; people who cannot socially distance at home; poor residents of the Bronx; and farm workers who live outside the city. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. That’s who — but what about how? Andy said he did not find a complete answer for that, in part because the public health experts he spoke to were puzzled, too. It’s a particularly difficult question, he told us, “because many people who get the virus don’t have any idea themselves how they got it.” In an assertion of sovereignty, more than a dozen Indian casinos in California have reopened, defying Gov. Gavin Newsom. Parts of Washington, D.C., and the Northern Virginia suburbs will start to loosen restrictions on Friday, even though the metropolitan area is one of the few where more than 10 percent of virus tests are still coming back positive. Campgrounds in the West are reopening with new and conflicting laws that vary from state to state and also depending on whether the campground is on federal, state or private land. Cases are still increasing in Wisconsin, two weeks after the state’s highest court overturned a stay-at-home order and effectively removed all restrictions. Cyprus said it would reimburse tourists who contract the coronavirus while on vacation there, as part of an effort to attract visitors. Here’s a roundup of reopenings and remaining restrictions in all 50 states. Order food in safely. Takeout and delivery both pose little risk when you follow common-sense precautions. Contact the restaurant first to make sure workers wear masks and gloves, and eliminate touch points by skipping utensils and paying in advance. Prepare for transformed air travel. If you fly this summer, bring hand sanitizer, wipes and a mask. Before you reach security, put items like wallets and phones in your carry-on, to reduce contact with the bins. Use the airline’s app for touch-free boarding. Childproof your home. Accident risks loom larger when children are cooped up and parents are juggling work and caretaking. These tips will help you spot and reduce hazards indoors and out. The Trump administration will not issue a midyear update to its economic forecasts this summer, sparing it from revealing how deeply the recession is harming economic growth. While some businesses are requiring that employees and customers wear masks, a few have banned them. Senator Tim Kaine, Democrat of Virginia, is the second senator with a confirmed case of Covid-19. A French study found one in 10 Covid-19 patients who were diabetic died within a week of being hospitalized.  To pass the Army’s new combat fitness test, soldiers will be expected to run, do push-ups and leg tucks, lift and drag weights — and wipe down the equipment afterward. Teenage twin brothers pasted 100 copies of the front page of Sunday’s New York Times on a wall at Duke University to illustrate what a death toll of 100,000 looks like, The News and Observer reports. I’m in quarantine in the basement for two weeks after traveling home from school. My mom and I like to sit at opposite ends of the staircase each night and play gin rummy with our own decks of cards. It helps pass the time, and it’s nice to feel like I’m engaging with someone without a screen, even if we’re far apart. — Nicole McHenry, Seattle Let us know how you’re dealing with the outbreak. Send us a response here, and we may feature it in an upcoming newsletter. Sign up here to get the briefing by email. Lara Takenaga and Jonathan Wolfe helped write today’s newsletter.PRISTINA, Kosovo — The Constitutional Court ruled late on Thursday that a new government can be formed without holding a snap election, a decision opposed by the caretaker prime minister’s party, which has vowed street protests. The government of Prime Minister Albin Kurti was dismissed on March 25 after less than two months in office, following disagreements with its main partner, the Democratic League of Kosovo, or LDK, over its handling of the coronavirus pandemic and removal of tariffs on Serbian goods. “The biggest political party does not have the exclusivity to propose the candidate of the prime minister to form the government,” the court said in its verdict. Mr. Kurti backed a snap election after seeing that other parties had rallied together with his former coalition partner the LDK to form a new government. His party said it will organize protests in coming days. The task of forming the government is now being given to the LDK nominee Avdullah Hoti, a former deputy prime minister and finance minister. Mr. Hoti has promised he will return to negotiations with Serbia to normalize ties under European Union and United States mediation. Such talks were halted in 2018 when a previous government introduced a 100 percent tariffs on goods produced in Serbia. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. The move has angered the E.U. and the United States, which backed Kosovo’s declaration of independence from Serbia in 2008 after wars tore apart the former Yugoslavia. Mr. Kurti has said the change in government is being fueled by President Hashim Thaci, who Mr. Kurti said agreed to a land swap with Serbian President Aleksandar Vucic. Mr. Thaci has denied the accusations. Hi. Welcome to On Politics, your guide to the day in national politics. I’m Lisa Lerer, your host. Sign up here to get On Politics in your inbox every weekday. The country hit a grim milestone yesterday, when the U.S. death toll from the coronavirus ticked past the 100,000 mark. Far more Americans have died of this virus than the number who perished in the Vietnam War, the war in Afghanistan, the Iraq war and the Sept. 11 attacks — combined. It’s as if everyone in Albany, N.Y., or Flint, Mich., died over the course of a season. Beyond their sheer size, what has been most striking about these staggering numbers has been the silence. America has a long tradition of honoring its fallen. We award Gold Stars and build monuments, we stand for moments of silence and sit at memorial services. These rituals give the country a way to confront tragedy on a grand scale, building a sense of common purpose for the challenges ahead. But in the face of these deaths, Americans have been left to their trauma. To mourn, alone. While there has been an outpouring of public gratitude — nightly applause for health workers, food sent to hospitals, masks sewn and shipped across the country — there has been a remarkable lack of public grief. In part, the silence reflects the nature of this illness. Death happens alone, the last gaze of a loved one often just a tinny image framed by the blue light of a computer screen. Funerals, if they happen, are private. Bodies pile up in crematories, cemeteries and refrigerated trucks. But moments of national crisis also reveal truths about our leaders. President Trump has long shirked his role as consoler in chief, preferring to focus on the country’s “transition to greatness” and “incredible” days ahead. After months of deaths, he ordered flags to be lowered at half-staff last week, under pressure from Democratic leaders. But his schedule this week contains no special commemoration of the 100,000 lives lost. His only comment about the “very sad milestone” came in a tweet this morning, where he offered his “heartfelt sympathy & love for everything that these great people stood for & represent. God be with you!” While Mr. Trump has the biggest bully pulpit, he doesn’t have the only one. Last night, Joe Biden, the presumptive Democratic nominee, released a video address telling the bereaved that “this nation grieves with you.” The staging resembled a traditional Oval Office address, meant to contrast the former vice president’s capacity for empathy with the current president’s. “To those hurting, I’m so sorry for your loss,” Mr. Biden said. “Take some solace in the fact that we all grieve with you.” But it was hard to escape the feeling of smallness that surrounded the whole endeavor: a two-minute video, shot from his home in Delaware, watched on social media. A moment noted by retweets, shares and tiny heart emojis. After the 9/11 attacks, dozens of members of Congress from both parties stood side by side on the steps of the Capitol, a powerful joint appearance. Many hugged, some cried. Today, a half-empty House chamber observed a moment of silence. Perhaps members shed private tears. No one hugs, anyhow. Clearly, social distancing complicates the staging of large memorial events. But we live in extraordinary times. Members of Congress cast their first-ever remote votes this week. School districts have distributed iPads, and so many of us have learned to work from our bedrooms. If politicians wanted to mourn, their strategists would find a way. They always do, after all. The unspoken political truth is that public mourning acknowledges the toll of the virus on Americans, prompting a glance backward to whether a better response could have saved lives. Those are questions that many American leaders, particularly in the White House, would prefer to avoid. They’ve chosen silence; we grieve alone. Drop us a line! We want to hear from our readers. Have a question? We’ll try to answer it. Have a comment? We’re all ears. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com. Donald Trump was an early adopter of Twitter, joining the platform as @realDonaldTrump in March 2009 and sending out his first tweet that May, hyping his upcoming appearance on “The Late Show.” Six years later he used his popularity on the site to transform himself into the most successful insurgent presidential candidate in modern history. And now, as president, Mr. Trump has turned his Twitter account into a personal, often rageful, font of misinformation. Many have come to view his aggressive governance by tweet as deeply harmful, even dangerous — including two Opinion writers focused on media and tech, Charlie Warzel and Kara Swisher. Both praised Twitter’s decision this week to label two of Mr. Trump’s false tweets about mail voting as “potentially misleading,” complete with links to articles fact-checking him. “Twitter pretty much called Mr. Trump a liar and brought the receipts,” Ms. Swisher wrote in her column. “No surprise that the president reacted with his usual rage — on Twitter, of course — accusing the platform on Tuesday of ‘stifling FREE SPEECH.’” Mr. Warzel asked, “What Would Happen if Twitter Banned Trump?” After listing some hypothetical benefits, he ultimately rules against it: “Banning Mr. Trump from Twitter, just like fact-checking one or two of his lying tweets, might feel good and might make the platform feel less toxic for a while. But it’s still just tinkering on the margins. It won’t fix the deeper structural problems that have created our information apocalypse.” Figuring out how to solve those structural problems, or even finding broad agreement on what exactly they are, is a debate that is sure to continue. — Talmon Joseph Smith Mandy Patinkin’s quarantine is a delight. Thanks for reading. On Politics is your guide to the political news cycle, delivering clarity from the chaos. On Politics is also available as a newsletter. Sign up here to get it delivered to your inbox. Is there anything you think we’re missing? Anything you want to see more of? We’d love to hear from you. Email us at onpolitics@nytimes.com.For millions of Americans left out of work by the coronavirus pandemic, government assistance has been a lifeline preventing a plunge into poverty, hunger and financial ruin. This summer, that lifeline could snap. The $1,200 checks sent to most households are long gone, at least for those who needed them most, with little imminent prospect for a second round. The lending program that helped millions of small businesses keep workers on the payroll will wind down if Congress does not extend it. Eviction moratoriums that are keeping people in their homes are expiring in many cities. And the $600 per week in extra unemployment benefits that have allowed tens of millions of laid-off workers to pay rent and buy groceries will expire at the end of July. The latest sign of the economic strain and the government’s role in easing it came Thursday when the Labor Department reported that millions more Americans applied for unemployment benefits last week. More than 40 million have filed for benefits since the crisis began, and some 30 million are receiving them. The multitrillion-dollar patchwork of federal and state programs hasn’t kept bills from piling up or prevented long lines at food banks. But it has mitigated the damage. Now the expiration of those programs represents a cliff they are hurtling toward, for individuals and for the economy. “The CARES Act was massive, but it was a very short-term offset to what is likely to be a long-term problem,” said Aneta Markowska, chief financial economist for the investment bank Jefferies, referring to the legislative centerpiece of the federal rescue. “This economy is clearly going to need more support.” Even the possibility that the programs will be allowed to expire could have economic consequences, Ms. Markowska said, as consumers and businesses gird for the loss of federal assistance. President Trump and other Republicans have played down the need for more spending, saying the solution is for states to reopen businesses and allow companies to bring people back to work. So despite pleas from economists across the political spectrum — including Jerome H. Powell, the Federal Reserve chair — any federal action is likely to be limited. The House voted overwhelmingly Thursday to give businesses more time to use money borrowed under the Paycheck Protection Program, which offers forgivable loans to small businesses that retain or rehire their workers. The bill’s fate in the Senate is uncertain, but a deal seems likely. A bipartisan group of lawmakers has separately proposed expanding a tax credit meant to subsidize wages, and the expanded unemployment benefits program may be extended. But Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, has said that any additional aid package must be far narrower than previous packages. The delivery of aid has been far from seamless. Many applicants waited weeks or months for payments. But the assistance has had an impact on millions of families. “I have people regularly who are calling me just crying because they’ve gotten their payments and they can actually pay rent and pay back some of the things that they were defaulting on,” said Michele Evermore, a senior policy analyst at the National Employment Law Project. When Nakitta Long was laid off on March 30, her first thought was the $900 rent payment due two days later. She was barely getting by on $507 a week as a temporary employee at a North Carolina automotive plant. Now she would be receiving just $223 per week in unemployment benefits — if she could get through to apply, which took weeks. Federal assistance provided a bridge. In April she got a $2,200 stimulus payment — $1,200 for her and $500 for each of her two minor children — which covered rent and her car payment. Then she started collecting the $600 per week in additional unemployment benefits, which means she is earning more than she was at work. “I don’t know where I would be,” Ms. Long said. “If I wasn’t getting the unemployment that I’m getting, and then the $600 boost and the stimulus, we would have been homeless.” Ms. Long, 44, is figuring out what to do when the help runs out. She is scared to return to work with the virus still spreading, and unsure how she will do so if schools and day care centers remain closed. Most available jobs pay less than $15 an hour, which won’t cover her bills. “I’ll have to take whatever’s available, to be honest with you,” she said. “I don’t think I’ll have time to weigh it. Rent’s going to have to be paid. Lights are going to have to be paid.” The Democratic-led House passed a $3 trillion package this month that would extend the extra jobless benefits, send another round of $1,200 checks to households and provide aid to state and local governments, among other provisions. The measure stands no chance of becoming law as written. “I think about a month from now, we’ll take a look at how things are going and be able to make a more intelligent decision than a grab-bag of $3 trillion,” Mr. McConnell, the Senate leader, said Thursday at an event in Kentucky. To some Republican lawmakers, extra unemployment benefits and other assistance made sense when businesses were shut down and the government was discouraging people from leaving home. But as the economy reopens, they say, the benefits could impede the recovery by providing an incentive not to return to work. Many economists feel those fears are overblown. Generous benefits might be a deterrent to work in normal times, they argue, but these are hardly normal times. Even the most optimistic forecasters expect the unemployment rate to be well above 10 percent when the extra benefits expire, meaning there will be far more jobless workers than available jobs. “The idea that — at an unemployment rate drastically higher than at the worst part of the great recession — we’re going to pull back support is just unbelievable,” said Jay Shambaugh, director of the Hamilton Project, an economic policy arm of the Brookings Institution. Research routinely finds that unemployment insurance is one of the most effective parts of the safety net, both in cushioning the effects of job loss on families and in lifting the economy. In economists’ parlance, the program is “well targeted” — it goes to people who need the money and who will spend it. Various studies have found that in the last recession, the system helped prevent 1.4 million foreclosures, saved two million jobs and kept five million people out of poverty. The impact could be greater in this crisis because the program is reaching more people and giving them more money. The government paid $48 billion in benefits in April and has reached $86 billion in May, according to the Treasury Department. Ms. Markowska, of Jefferies, expects government data on Friday to show that personal income actually increased in April thanks to the unemployment benefits, stimulus payments and other programs. That money has flowed through the economy in rent payments, grocery store trips and other spending — not only helping the recipients but also preventing a steeper downturn. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “These are paycheck-to-paycheck folks, who are going to spend this money,” said Elizabeth Ananat, a Barnard College economist who has been studying the effects of the pandemic on low-wage workers. “They’re going to spend this money, keeping us from having a rent-payment crisis and from having a malnourished-children crisis. That strikes me as pretty good for the economy over all.” When Julie Glasser was summoned to an online department meeting in late March, she thought she might learn how her company, a vacation-rental start-up in Portland, Ore., was scaling back acquisitions or adapting to the growing pandemic. It took until the end of the meeting for her boss to deliver the real news: Everyone on the call was laid off, immediately. A single mother of two, Ms. Glasser applied for unemployment benefits the same day. She enrolled in health insurance through the Affordable Care Act and signed up for food stamps. Still, there was no way she could cover her costs. “I did the quick math and realized that I could pay my mortgage and maybe get a few groceries and that was it,” she said. A week later, Congress passed the CARES Act. In mid-April, Ms. Glasser received her first unemployment check with the extra money. But she is thinking about what will happen when that money runs out. “It’s a huge relief, and then it’s also this thought bubble up above my head of, ‘How long is this going to last?’” she said. “I definitely would not be able to survive right now on the payment that the state unemployment is making.” The risk for Ms. Glasser and millions of other job seekers is that the pullback in government assistance will lead to a new round of layoffs just as they must try to return to work. All that uncertainty could lead to a pullback in spending even before programs expire. Laura Mocker, an actress in New York City, has been out of work since mid-March, when theaters began canceling performances and the restaurant where she worked as a server shut down. It took her until April 12 — Easter Sunday — to get through to the state unemployment office. Now that she is getting her benefits, Ms. Mocker has been able to pay the rent and other bills accrued during weeks of joblessness. But as the July 31 cliff approaches, she has cut back what little discretionary spending remained as she tries to build up her savings. “It’s pretty simple if you think about it,” she said. “If people don’t have money, they can’t spend it. And the people that do have money won’t spend it because they’re worried.” Emily Cochrane and Jim Tankersley contributed reporting.東京―4月14日、川崎市の住宅街で、シマダタケヒロさんは、思いもよらないことを実行した。20年以上経営してきたセブン−イレブンの店舗の照明を落とし、ドアに鍵をかけたのだ。 今年1月までなら、この決断は、日本でもっとも有力で、いたるところで目にする会社の一つで、その社が長年にわたり貫いてきた1日24時間、週7日の営業体制に対する、過激な抗議活動と受け止められただろう。 しかし、シマダさん（54歳）は、コロナウイルス感染の広がりから、休業を決意し、本部の密やかな容認を受け、休業を決めた国内の多くのセブン−イレブンのフランチャイジーの初の店舗となった。 死に至る感染症は、オーナーらが成し遂げられなかった悲願を実現したのだ。セブン−イレブン·ジャパンの親会社であるセブン&アイホールディングスは、長年にわたり死守してきた方針から、いくつかの店舗を免除することを余儀なくされた。 ウイルス感染のずっと以前から、わずかな収益を上げるために長時間営業を続け、さらに非常事態宣言によって、労働者が自宅で過ごすことで、売り上げが下がる状況を見てきたオーナーらには、これは安堵だった。 「オーナーは、時短をするチャンスです」と、商品があふれる在庫部屋からオンラインインタビューに応じたシマダさんは言った。「非常事態宣言が理由です。これ以上に可能性のある理由はない」 しかし、日本では、先週から全国のほとんどの都道府県で非常事態宣言の解除が広がり、フランチャイジーのなかには、今回の変化の核心は、パンデミックの後も続くだろうかと疑問視している人もいる。 深夜の営業時間の短縮や祝祭日の間に、休業許可をオーナーに与えることは、大したことではないかもしれない。しかし、日本中のいたるところにあることから、国のインフラの一部とも見なされているセブン−イレブンは、日本中の21,000店舗で一貫したサービスこそ、ブランド価値にとっては不可欠であるとみなしている。多くのフランチャイズ同様に、店内のレイアウトから従業員の服装、客への挨拶にいたるまで、厳格に規定されているのだ。 12月に大阪のオーナー松本実敏さんが、日本でもっとも重要な祝日にあたる元旦に休業すると決めた後、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、契約を解除した。同社は、契約解除の理由を、松本さんに対する顧客からの苦情が多いための決定だと説明した。この件は、現在、双方が訴訟を起こしている。 パンデミックのただ中でも、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、ルール変更には消極的なようだ。 3月末、ウイルス感染が拡大する中で、川崎市のオーナー、シマダさんは、自らの店舗と従業員への感染リスクを案じるようになり、臨時休業を認めるように会社に迫った。それまで、シマダさんが休業したのは、二週間の改装時の一度きりだ。 シマダさんによると、当初、上層部からは反応がなく、同時期に、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、本部社員に対して全く異なる対応を取り、東京本社の社員には、在宅勤務を推奨、店舗を巡回する担当者は、訪問の頻度を減らす指示を出していた。また、同社は、鉄道のビル内の店舗には、休業を認めていたのだ。 契約期間のほぼ全ての時間を費やし、自らの店舗経営に対する権限の拡大を求めて闘ってきたシマダさんが、自分が目にしたことは、ダブルスタンダードではないかと指摘したところ、会社はすぐに折れたのだった。 それ以降、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、「かなり広い範囲の自由」をオーナーに与えてはじめていると、コンビニオーナーらが加盟する小規模のユニオン（コンビニ加盟店ユニオン）の執行委員長の酒井孝典さんは、述べた。 「店舗が求めていることの多くは、時短です」と、京都府の西、兵庫県で、自らライバルチェーンのファミリーマートを経営する酒井さんは語った。 「このような事態は、過去にはありませんでした」と話し、そして、「パンデミックが収束した後、これをスタンダードにするチャンスです」と続けた。 セブン−イレブン·ジャパンによると、日曜の時点で、休業している店舗数は、全国で236店。しかし、時短営業の店舗数については、デリケートな事案であることを示唆するように、公表しなかった。 セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、シマダさんの店舗についても、コメントは差し控えると回答した。そして休業については、「コロナウイルス関連の現在の休業や時短営業は、個店ごとの臨時対応である」と述べた。 理論上は、フランチャイジーは、営業時間を選択する権利があるが、会社からの圧力、制限の強い条件、極めて厳しいインセンティブチャージの構造により、選択肢はないのだと、オーナーたちは言う。 多くの店舗は、通常通りに営業を続けている。別のチェーン、ローソンが、70％の売上減少を発表するなか、都内のかつて賑わっていたビジネス街では、深夜もセブン−イレブンの看板は灯り続けている。 長時間営業に対する不満は、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンに限ったことではないが、1991年に日本法人として経営権を取得し、全国55,000店のコンビニの40％近くを占める同社は、業界全体の方向性を左右する。 セブン−イレブン·ジャパンの店舗の大多数を経営するフランチャイジーらが、営業で収益を維持できるように、経済的決断ができる裁量の拡大を求め、メディアでのキャンペーンや政治的な集会を通して、同社に働きかけを行ったことは、国内で大きな関心を集めた。 コロナウイルスが蔓延するよりはるか以前から、高齢化による労働力が減少するなか、働き手を奪い合い、そして、コンビニチェーン各社が、縮小する市場シェアを巡り、犠牲をともなう争いを繰り広げ、急速に新規開店を続けるなか、セブン−イレブンの店舗の多くは、利益が減少し、経営コストは上昇し続けてきた。 利益が先細っていく悪循環に陥っているセブン−イレブンのフランチャイジーらは、高度経済成長の時代に編み出された年中無休の方針は、日本経済の成長鈍化と人口減少が進むなか、もはや金銭的に割りに合わないと指摘している。 シマダさんをはじめとする異端のオーナーらは、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンが24時間営業に固執することは、フランチャイジーが、不均衡に高い割合の店舗の営業コストを負担し、利益が圧迫する商慣行の一つであると語る。 オーナーらは、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンから直接仕入れる生鮮品を過剰にストックするよう圧力を受け、フランチャイズ契約の解約には巨額な違約金を請求される方針により、店舗は負債の罠に陥るのだと訴える。 Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. このような苦情に押され、日本政府も対応に乗り出し、昨夏、コンビニ業界のビジネスのあり方検討会が開催された。同時期に、セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、シマダさんをはじめとするオーナーらに、時短営業の実証実験プログラムへの参加を認めた。 4月末に公表された同社の中間報告では、ごく一部のフランチャイジーにあたる234店舗に対し、同プログラムでの時短を許可していると発表した。時短営業の場合、オーナーは、売上利益から2％のチャージを返上しなくてはならない。 サンドイッチやおにぎりの売上は、人々が通勤しなくなって以降、激減したと、東京郊外の八王子で、長年優良店を経営しているマスダトシロウさんは語った。 アーティストであり、かつて学生運動の活動家でもあったマスダさん（71歳）は、長年、良い意味で、遠慮なくセブン−イレブン·ジャパンを批判し、メディアに登場して会社の欠点をはっきりと指摘し、母校の名門、早稲田大学時代の友人と共に、年に一度開催される株主総会で経営陣に対して苦言を呈してきた。 非常事態宣言が発令されて以降、深夜の帰宅途中にコーヒーやタバコを購入する客は減っていると、マスダさんは語った。深夜の売上は、ほとんどない。「最初は、時短も考えたのですが、アルバイト店員らから、営業を続けて欲しいと懇願されました」と話し、厳しい経済的圧力にも関わらず、アルバイト店員が賃金を受け取れるように、通常時間で営業を継続しているという。 ウイルス感染は、オーナーたちに金銭的な負担も強いている。セブン−イレブン·ジャパンは、マスクや防護備品を提供したが、それに加え、多くのオーナーたちは、手袋、ゴーグルなどを自費で購入し、従業員や自らを病原体から守るためにプラスチックの壁を設置している。 3月以降、国内の少なくとも32店舗は、数日から1ヶ月の期間にわたり、従業員の感染によって休業している。休業による金銭的負担のほとんどは、フランチャイジーに課される。廃棄した食品を入れ替えるだけでも、3,000−4,000ドルに上り、一部店舗の数週間分の売上に相当する額だ。営業を再開したとしても、客は、しばしば感染が知られている店舗への入店を躊躇することもあるのだ。 コンビニチェーン（セブン−イレブン·ジャパン）は、オーナーと従業員たちに対する補償として、ある程度は対応を取っている。先月、同社は、各店舗に対して10万円、そして従業員には、食料品やその他の必要品の購入に使えるプリペイドカードを支給した。 さらに先週水曜日には、500万円の無利子融資、売上が10％以上落ち込んだ店舗には、さらに10万円を支給すると発表した。 コンビニ加盟店ユニオンの執行副委員長の吉村英二さんは、対策は、ただのうわべにすぎないと語った。 東京の中心部のセブン−イレブンオーナーである吉村さんは、会社は、「絆創膏を一枚、そして、また一枚貼るだけで、結果としては、それらの店舗も最終的に赤字になるのです」「基本的に、何も解決されません」と話した。 セブン−イレブン·ジャパンの新たな緩和措置を利用したオーナーは、それが続くとは確信が持てない。 シマダさんは、金曜日から営業を再開したが、時短営業は継続する予定だ。 次の展開は、オーナーにかかっていると、シマダさんは考えている。みんな本部を恐れているが、しかし、「声を上げるべきです」と強調した。 「オーナーたちは、死亡するか破産するまで働き続けている」と述べた。「今こそ変革の時なのです」Upon arriving at work, employees should get a temperature and symptom check. Inside the office, desks should be six feet apart. If that isn’t possible, employers should consider erecting plastic shields around desks. Seating should be barred in common areas. And face coverings should be worn at all times. These are among sweeping new recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention on the safest way for American employers reopening their offices to prevent the spread of the coronavirus. If followed, the guidelines would lead to a far-reaching remaking of the corporate work experience. They even upend years of advice on commuting, urging people to drive to work by themselves, instead of taking mass transportation or car-pooling, to avoid potential exposure to the virus. The recommendations run from technical advice on ventilation systems (more open windows are most desirable) to suggested abolition of communal perks like latte makers and snack bins. “Replace high-touch communal items, such as coffee pots, water coolers, and bulk snacks, with alternatives such as prepackaged, single-serving items,” the guidelines say. And some border on the impractical, if not near impossible: “Limit use and occupancy of elevators to maintain social distancing of at least 6 feet.” The C.D.C., the nation’s top public health agency, posted the guidelines on its website as states are beginning to lift their most stringent lockdown orders. Shops, restaurants, beaches and parks are reopening in phases. But white-collar office employees at all levels mostly continue to work from home, able to function effectively with laptops, video conferencing and Slack. Some of the measures are in keeping with what some employers are already planning, but other employers may simply decide it’s easier to keep employees working from home. “Companies, surprisingly, don’t want to go back to work,” said Russell Hancock, president and CEO of Joint Venture Silicon Valley, a nonprofit think tank that studies the region. “You will not see the drum beat and hue and cry and rush to get back to the office.” Citing extreme examples like Twitter, which has said it may never return to corporate office space, Mr. Hancock said that he has heard similar things from both Silicon Valley companies and those outside the region. Many are planning to stay safe by thinning who is required to come to work, along with making plans consistent with the C.D.C. guidelines. “Incessant disinfecting of surfaces, cleansing out your HVAC,” he said, referring to the ventilation system, “opening windows, ventilation, all of those things.” Tracy Wymer, vice president of workplace for Knoll, Inc., a large office-furniture company, who has been in discussions with numerous companies about the safest way to reopen, said he agreed with much of what the C.D.C. was advising but he added that a big part of successful reopening would involve employee compliance. “The biggest factor is on the work force and the personal responsibility they must take in making this reality work,” he said. The C.D.C. addressed that part too, reiterating what has become a kind of national mantra: regular hand washing of at least 20 seconds; no fist bumps or handshakes; no face touching. The C.D.C. recommended that the isolation for employees should begin before they get to work — on their commute. In a stark change from public policy guidelines in the recent past, the agency said individuals should drive to work — alone. Employers should support this effort, the agency said: “Offer employees incentives to use forms of transportation that minimize close contact with others, such as offering reimbursement for parking for commuting to work alone or single-occupancy rides.” Smaller companies also have already been discussing how to reopen, some with the kinds of ideas the C.D.C. is recommending. But there are distinctive challenges in many offices. For instance, those that do not have windows that open to the outside, permitting ventilation; have little or no access to outdoor space; or are small and open, with floor plans that were de rigueur just six months ago and now are verboten. Peter Kimmel, the publisher of FMLink, a publication serving the facilities management industry, said that the C.D.C. guidelines are “a good checklist of what needs to be done.” But they also raise numerous questions, he said, including how social distancing will work. “This means many fewer workplaces per floor, reducing the density considerably. Where will the remaining workers be housed? Will the furniture work in the new layout?” he asked. Updated May 28, 2020 States are reopening bit by bit. This means that more public spaces are available for use and more and more businesses are being allowed to open again. The federal government is largely leaving the decision up to states, and some state leaders are leaving the decision up to local authorities. Even if you aren’t being told to stay at home, it’s still a good idea to limit trips outside and your interaction with other people. Touching contaminated objects and then infecting ourselves with the germs is not typically how the virus spreads. But it can happen. A number of studies of flu, rhinovirus, coronavirus and other microbes have shown that respiratory illnesses, including the new coronavirus, can spread by touching contaminated surfaces, particularly in places like day care centers, offices and hospitals. But a long chain of events has to happen for the disease to spread that way. The best way to protect yourself from coronavirus — whether it’s surface transmission or close human contact — is still social distancing, washing your hands, not touching your face and wearing masks. Common symptoms include fever, a dry cough, fatigue and difficulty breathing or shortness of breath. Some of these symptoms overlap with those of the flu, making detection difficult, but runny noses and stuffy sinuses are less common. The C.D.C. has also added chills, muscle pain, sore throat, headache and a new loss of the sense of taste or smell as symptoms to look out for. Most people fall ill five to seven days after exposure, but symptoms may appear in as few as two days or as many as 14 days. If air travel is unavoidable, there are some steps you can take to protect yourself. Most important: Wash your hands often, and stop touching your face. If possible, choose a window seat. A study from Emory University found that during flu season, the safest place to sit on a plane is by a window, as people sitting in window seats had less contact with potentially sick people. Disinfect hard surfaces. When you get to your seat and your hands are clean, use disinfecting wipes to clean the hard surfaces at your seat like the head and arm rest, the seatbelt buckle, the remote, screen, seat back pocket and the tray table. If the seat is hard and nonporous or leather or pleather, you can wipe that down, too. (Using wipes on upholstered seats could lead to a wet seat and spreading of germs rather than killing them.) More than 40 million people — the equivalent of 1 in 4 U.S. workers — have filed for unemployment benefits since the pandemic took hold. One in five who were working in February reported losing a job or being furloughed in March or the beginning of April, data from a Federal Reserve survey released on May 14 showed, and that pain was highly concentrated among low earners. Fully 39 percent of former workers living in a household earning $40,000 or less lost work, compared with 13 percent in those making more than $100,000, a Fed official said. There is an uptick in people reporting symptoms of chilblains, which are painful red or purple lesions that typically appear in the winter on fingers or toes. The lesions are emerging as yet another symptom of infection with the new coronavirus. Chilblains are caused by inflammation in small blood vessels in reaction to cold or damp conditions, but they are usually common in the coldest winter months. Federal health officials do not include toe lesions in the list of coronavirus symptoms, but some dermatologists are pushing for a change, saying so-called Covid toe should be sufficient grounds for testing. Yes, but make sure you keep six feet of distance between you and people who don’t live in your home. Even if you just hang out in a park, rather than go for a jog or a walk, getting some fresh air, and hopefully sunshine, is a good idea. Taking one’s temperature to look for signs of fever is not as easy as it sounds, as “normal” temperature numbers can vary, but generally, keep an eye out for a temperature of 100.5 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. If you don’t have a thermometer (they can be pricey these days), there are other ways to figure out if you have a fever, or are at risk of Covid-19 complications. The C.D.C. has recommended that all Americans wear cloth masks if they go out in public. This is a shift in federal guidance reflecting new concerns that the coronavirus is being spread by infected people who have no symptoms. Until now, the C.D.C., like the W.H.O., has advised that ordinary people don’t need to wear masks unless they are sick and coughing. Part of the reason was to preserve medical-grade masks for health care workers who desperately need them at a time when they are in continuously short supply. Masks don’t replace hand washing and social distancing. If you’ve been exposed to the coronavirus or think you have, and have a fever or symptoms like a cough or difficulty breathing, call a doctor. They should give you advice on whether you should be tested, how to get tested, and how to seek medical treatment without potentially infecting or exposing others. If you’re sick and you think you’ve been exposed to the new coronavirus, the C.D.C. recommends that you call your healthcare provider and explain your symptoms and fears. They will decide if you need to be tested. Keep in mind that there’s a chance — because of a lack of testing kits or because you’re asymptomatic, for instance — you won’t be able to get tested. Charity Navigator, which evaluates charities using a numbers-based system, has a running list of nonprofits working in communities affected by the outbreak. You can give blood through the American Red Cross, and World Central Kitchen has stepped in to distribute meals in major cities. “While there are many solutions, these often require substantial thought and a budget that likely doesn’t exist,” he said. Mobify, a Vancouver-based company with 40 employees that helps build digital storefronts for major retailers, moved back into its office last week and has already made a number of the changes recommended by the C.D.C. The building’s landlord now requires mask use in the elevator. Other changes the company made on its own. “One person per table. We put arrows on the floor so people will go to the restroom one direction and come out the other,” said Igor Faletski, the company’s chief executive. “No more shared food. Sanitation stations with wipes.” At the same time, he said, there may be a larger force at work: the impulses of the workers themselves. “Since we opened up last week, only five employees have come in,” he said. “Because the office is quite big, there was room for people to sit in different corners.”Listen and subscribe to our podcast from your mobile device:Via Apple Podcasts | Via Google Podcasts | Via Spotify Note: This episode contains strong language. It began as a baseless conspiracy theory planted on a fringe corner of the internet. It swept through social media platforms and gained traction across the online world. QAnon believers say the planet is run by a deep, elite network of evildoers, and it’s their job to unspool their crimes. We look at how the QAnon community is scaling and evolving through the powers of the internet. “Rabbit Hole,” a narrative audio series with the tech columnist Kevin Roose, explores what happens when our lives move online. Follow Kevin on Twitter: @kevinroose. Email us at thedaily@nytimes.com. On today’s episode: Kevin Roose, who covers the intersection of technology, business and culture for The New York Times. Ali Watkins, a reporter on the Metro desk of The Times, covering crime and law enforcement in New York City. Andy Mills, a producer and reporter for The Times. Background reading: QAnon began in 2017, when a pseudonymous user of the online message board 4chan, claiming to be privy to top-secret information from the Trump administration, started posting cryptic messages. Here’s an inside look into the origins of QAnon. The influence of QAnon has surfaced in political campaigns, criminal cases, merchandising and education. Read more about the growing effects of QAnon on the offline world. Reported by Kevin Roose, Andy Mills, Julia Longoria and Sindhu GnanasambandanProduced by Andy Mills, Julia Longoria and Sindhu GnanasambandanManaging Producer: Larissa AndersonEdited by Larissa Anderson and Wendy DorrTechnical Director: Brad FisherMixed by Brad Fisher and Dan PowellMusic by Peter Lalish, Dan Powell and Nate HenricksSound Design by Andy Mills, Dan Powell and Julia LongoriaExecutive Producer, NYT Audio: Lisa TobinAssistant Managing Editor, NYT: Sam DolnickSpecial thanks to Charlie Warzel, Mike Benoist, Julia Simon, Mahima Chablani, Nora Keller, Ali Watkins, Neena Pathak, Jazmín Aguilera, Topher Routh and Trey ShiltsThe Seacoast Repertory Theater revival of “The Marvelous Wonderettes” that opened on May 16 looked like fully produced live theater, because it was. The costumed cast of four was acting and singing up a storm in real time and on real sets, backed by an actual four-piece band. The retro, pastel-colored jukebox musical popped. But there was no audience in the house — the ticket-holders, kept home in the age of Covid-19, were all streaming. “I was flabbergasted, watching our friends around the country, other regional houses big and small, just closing their doors, going home and saying ‘See you in 2021,’” Brandon James, the co-artistic director, said on the phone. “People in the industry thought ‘no live audience means no live theater.’ We thought we just had to change our delivery system.” As most American theaters have pared down their offerings to a mix of Zoom readings, artist conversations, and archival streams, Seacoast Rep, in Portsmouth, N.H., has been web-casting new productions since mid-May and has them planned for every weekend until at least July 5. (The next, the “Marvelous Wonderettes” sequel “Caps and Gowns,” starts Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets are $20 per person — the theater relies on the honor system when it comes to how many members of a household are watching.) New Hampshire declared a state of emergency on March 13 and its stay-at-home order went into effect on March 27. By then Seacoast Rep had shuttered its main stage production of “A Chorus Line” and launched both a radio station and virtual music, improv and dance classes, as well as health and fitness workouts, which allowed them to stay open under the law. “We fell under two categories of essential business operations: Being a radio station we were a news and media service, and we also offered distance learning and educational programs,” said James, 37. He and Ben Hart, 34, have been running the theater for about a year. A big reason Seacoast Rep was able to move on to actual productions was its adherence to the repertory model, which has over time been abandoned by most other theaters: It has six full-time local performers on the payroll. Four of them joined a skeleton crew of 10 employees who were willing to remain quarantined, avoid seeing their friends and families, and only venture outside to go to the theater. The company manager does grocery shopping for all of them. The rest of the staff works from home. While Seacoast Rep occasionally hires members of Actors’ Equity, it is generally a non-Equity house. They have not heard from Equity or other unions in relation to their current situation or plans. “I just walk to the theater — that’s it,” said Alyssa Dumas, Seacoast’s 28-year-old associate artistic director, who portrayed the Marvelous Wonderette Betty Jean. “I haven’t gone anywhere else. My birthday was in April, so that was a weird scenario, but that’s the choice we made: It’s all for a bigger purpose.” Of course, participants are closely monitored. “We have procedures where everyone has to check in with either the production manager or the stage manager,” the theater’s executive director, Kathleen Cavalaro, said. “They’re asked screening questions, we have no-touch thermometers, and there’s regular sanitation every few hours. The musicians are not included in the 10 so they are backstage six feet apart from each other, with their own entrance and exit, and they follow the same procedures.” Seacoast Rep removed seats to install a streaming system, and moved light and sound equipment into the house. The lighting had to be reconfigured to accommodate the demands of video. Then it was all hands on deck, like a modern, high-tech remake of a movie about Mickey Rooney and Judy Garland putting on a show in a barn. The tech team is one sound person and one lighting person, with James multitasking in the back of the room. “I’m basically a one-man television production studio: I’m running all the cameras, doing the pans and the zooms on our iPad, switching between cameras and communicating with sound and light,” he said. At the same time, Hart is backstage helping with props and quick changes; he even pops up in the show to play the teacher Mr. Lee. For actors used to the instant gratification of applause after a number, an empty house required some getting used to “Everything felt like a dress rehearsal,” said Jason Faria. Like most at Seacoast, the 27-year-old resident performer wears many hats: On a recent Saturday, for example, he led an online morning story hour in the vein of “Pee-Wee’s Playhouse” as his drag character Honey Punch, then played Wonderette Cindy Lou in the evening. The toughest hurdle, however, was not so much how to do a show but how to find one. At first, James, Hart and Cavalaro looked in the public domain. “Most Shakespeares and Gilbert and Sullivans required too large a cast, and we also felt that other people had already well covered that stuff,” Hart said. They considered turning J.M. Barrie’s obscure comic fantasy “Dear Brutus” into a jukebox musical with public-domain songs, but eventually decided they wanted a newer property. The problem was that nobody wanted to grant them stage and streaming rights. “The industry has not caught up with the time,” James said. “The biggest request from our audiences was, ‘Give us a show, give us storytelling’ and we kept telling them ‘We’re trying!’ We were getting hard nos.” Until they reached out to Roger Bean. The creator of “The Marvelous Wonderettes” and its (lesser-known) sequels, who also runs the licensing company Stage Rights, gave his approval immediately. “I think theaters that are constantly engaging their audience with some sort of streaming option will rise to the top and survive,” Bean said on the phone. “Because their audience is being talked to and treated compassionately throughout this thing.” A key condition was that the shows could only be watched live, and there is a 200-ticket cap per “Wonderettes” performance — sales have averaged half that so far. Seacoast Rep’s other programs are available on replay via their theater’s streaming platform, Crowdcast. Patreon subscriptions are available, and James notes that ‘we’re monetizing some offerings way more after they’ve gone live.” (The by-appointment model, incidentally, is spreading as a compromise between rights holders and theater companies itching to find material. London’s Old Vic, for instance, has just announced Old Vic: In Camera, a program of livestreamed performances in the theater, socially distanced but without audiences, that will start with Claire Foy and Matt Smith in the two-hander “Lungs.”) Web-casting could also make partial reopenings possible. “You could imagine that there’s, say, a 70-person limit to an audience, but you can also sell livestreaming tickets and you can potentially sell out the technical maximum number of seats,” Hart suggested. James agrees about the potential of new technologies for live arts. “We are under no illusion that this is going to replace live theater, and we don’t want it to,” he said, “but streaming is certainly better than nothing. It has kept this organization’s nose above water.” And of course, seeing full performances live online may well whet theatergoers’ appetite for more, instead of satiating it. “Some people have offered us a thousand dollars a ticket to see a show,” Cavalaro said, laughing.