(WASHINGTON) — The European Union on Saturday urged President Donald Trump to rethink his decision to terminate the U.S. relationship with the World Health Organization as spiking infection rates in India and elsewhere reinforced that the pandemic is far from contained. Trump on Friday charged that the WHO didn’t respond adequately to the pandemic and accused the U.N. agency of being under China’s “total control.” The U.S. is the largest source of financial support for the WHO, and its exit is expected to significantly weaken the organization. Trump said the U.S. would be “redirecting” the money to “other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs,” without providing specifics. The head of the EU’s executive arm urged Trump to reconsider. “The WHO needs to continue being able to lead the international response to pandemics, current and future,” European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen said. “For this, the participation and support of all is required and very much needed.” The WHO wouldn’t comment on the announcement but South African Health Minister Zweli Mkhize called it an “unfortunate” turn of events. “Certainly, when faced with a serious pandemic, you want all nations in the world to be particularly focused … on one common enemy,” he told reporters. German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas called Trump’s decision the “wrong signal at the wrong time.” He said Berlin would have “intensive discussions” with Washington to try to convince the U.S. government to reconsider. “The number of people infected worldwide is increasing and the crisis is spreading,” Maas told Germany’s Funke media group. “We can’t tear down the dike in the middle of the flood and build a new one.” In China, where the virus outbreak began, only four new confirmed cases were reported Saturday, all brought from outside the country, and no new deaths. Just 63 people remained in treatment. After judging the situation there now safe, a chartered flight carrying 200 German managers back to their jobs landed in Tianjin, a port city east of Beijing. A flight carrying another 200 was due in Shanghai on Thursday. “I’m really happy that business is starting again,” said Karin Wasowski, a Volkswagen employee, before boarding the flight in Frankfurt. “I’ve been working from a home office but that is, of course, something completely different to being there.” More than 5,200 German companies operate in China, employing more than 1 million people. “This is an important step to reconnect China’s and Germany’s economies,” said Jens Hildebrandt, executive director of the German Chamber of Commerce in North China, which helped organize the flights. “It is our common interest to contribute in helping the economy return to normalcy and pre-virus levels.” Close to 6 million coronavirus infections have been reported worldwide, with more than 365,000 deaths and almost 2.5 million recoveries, according to a tally kept by Johns Hopkins University. The true dimensions are widely believed to be significantly greater, with experts saying many victims died without being tested. As some countries have lowered the rate of infections, they have moved ahead with relaxing restrictions while keeping a close eye on developments. In South Korea, credited with one of the most successful programs to fight the pandemic, 39 new cases were reported Saturday, most in the densely populated Seoul metropolitan area where officials have linked the infections to warehouse workers. Authorities have maintained the phased reopening of schools in the hope that the recent transmissions could be contained quickly. Elite sporting events will be allowed to resume in England starting Monday, but without spectators. It paves the way for the planned June 17 return of the Premier League, the world’s richest soccer competition. England’s deputy chief medical officer Jonathan Van-Tam warned that despite the easing, the situation overall remained precarious. “I believe this is also a very dangerous moment,’’ he said. “We have to get this right.” India registered another record single-day jump of 7,964 cases and 265 deaths. That put total cases at 173,763 with 4,971 deaths and 82,369 recoveries, according to the health ministry. The government had been expected to end a 2-month-old nationwide lockdown, but instead extended measures in so-called containment zones — areas that have been isolated due to coronavirus outbreaks — through June 30. However, India will allow all economic activities to restart in a phased manner outside those areas starting June 8, according to the Home Ministry. A ministry directive said that includes places of worship, hotels, restaurants and shopping malls. Russia recorded nearly 9,000 new cases overnight. The national coronavirus task force said Saturday that 4,555 Russians have died of COVID-19 and 396,575 infections have been recorded. The relatively low mortality rate compared with other countries has prompted skepticism. The U.S. has been worst hit by the outbreak, with more than 1.7 million cases and almost 103,000 deaths. Cities and states are under increasing pressure to reopen, however. The latest figures from the U.S. Labor Department brought to 41 million the running total of Americans who have filed for unemployment since shutdowns took hold in mid-March. But there have been worrying signs that as restrictions are eased, some people are not adhering to social distancing guidelines. German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s office said Saturday that as things stand with America’s pandemic situation, if Trump decides to go ahead with the Group of Seven summit in the U.S. as he has suggested, she would not attend in person. At the Vatican, Pope Francis recited a special prayer for the end of the pandemic in his biggest post-lockdown gathering to date, joined by a sampling of frontline workers. _____ Rising reported from Berlin. AP reporters from around the world contributed to this report. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(BERLIN) — Chancellor Angela Merkel will not personally attend a meeting in the U.S. with the leaders of the world’s major economies if President Donald Trump goes ahead with it, unless the course of the coronavirus spread changes by then, her office said Saturday. After canceling the Group of Seven summit, originally scheduled for June 10-12 at Camp David, Trump said a week ago that he was again considering hosting an in-person meeting of world leaders because it would be a “great sign to all” of things returning to normal during the pandemic. Immediately after that announcement, Merkel suggested she had not yet made up her mind on whether to attend in person or by video conference, but her office told the dpa news agency she has now made a decision. “As of today, given the overall pandemic situation, she cannot commit to participating in person,” her office said. It added that the chancellor would continue to monitor the coronavirus situation in case things change. Contact us at editors@time.com.

On Tuesday afternoon, 77-year-old August Nimtz Jr. joined a gathering of local residents in front of Cup Foods, a deli on Chicago Ave. in south Minneapolis. It’s where George Floyd was confronted by four police officers the previous day and died after one, Derek Chauvin, held him under arrest with his knee on Floyd’s neck for nearly nine minutes. “I’m a 77-year-old African-American male,” Nimtz, a professor of political science at the University of Minnesota, tells TIME with a chuckle. “I’ve gotta be concerned [about catching COVID-19], but at the same time there’s the importance of coming out into the streets. We had to do this. If we don’t do it the cops will get away with it again.” Unlike past protests against police brutality, rallies and activism in Minneapolis are happening now amid the COVID-19 pandemic, which has so far killed more than 100,000 people across America. Most fatalities have been within communities of color. Read more: ‘These Protests Are the Community Grieving.’ Activists Say Minneapolis Leaders Need to Make Drastic Changes After George Floyd’s Murder According to Nimtz, the majority of protesters he saw on Tuesday and at subsequent rallies wear masks, but social distancing is proving impossible. Still, he believes it is worth the risk to his health to participate. Nimtz has protested against police brutality for decades, he says, including helping to lead a 1992 protest after the arrest of Rodney King in Los Angeles. “We know from history that struggles, class struggles and particular issues around race and other kinds of social inequalities, will force people to come back out into the streets,” he says. “After two and a half months of being in lockdown, I think many progressive people have decided to come out.” As of May 29, Minneapolis has confirmed more than 3,000 cases of COVID-19, and 127 fatalities. According to the data from the city, black people make up 34% of COVID-19 cases, despite making up about 19% of its population. Comparatively, white people make up 24% of cases and 64% of the city population. The Powerderhorn Park neighborhood, where Floyd was confronted by police, is among Minneapolis’ hardest hit communities according to the city’s data. Statewide, Minnesota has seen more than 23,500 cases and 996 deaths as of Friday. Employees at meat processing plants, who are predominately people of color and immigrants, throughout the state have also been hard hit. Also at Tuesday’s protest was Marjaan Sirdar, a longtime community organizer and activist for racial equity. “I’m deeply concerned about the spread of COVID-19 in this community,” Sirdar tells TIME. “I’m deeply concerned that we will not have warriors to continue this struggle a month from now because we will lose them to the disease.” Since Floyd’s murder, thousands of people have joined rallies and demonstrations calling for police accountability and structural change in Minneapolis. Protests in solidarity have also sprung up across the U.S. in major cities including Los Angeles, Atlanta, Washington D.C. and New York. In recent days, some protests have become violent, including looting and property destruction as well as further instances of aggressive overpolicing. On Thursday night, the Minneapolis Police Department’s (MPD) 3rd Precinct was burned down; on Friday afternoon Chauvin, the former officer who knelt on Floyd’s neck, was charged with third degree murder and manslaughter. (The four officers involved in Floyd’s death had been fired from the MPD earlier in the week.) Minneapolis community organizers believe both the protests’ growing scale and intensity seen this week were inevitable. “This is a reaction from people who are angry, people who have been trapped in poverty and who have been screaming forever for relief and our leaders have failed to provide it. Many of us predicted this very moment was going to happen,” Sirdar says. “People in this community have been very concerned about the Minneapolis Police Department for a long, long time,” says Hans Lee, pastor at the Calvary Lutheran Church, just a block south of Cup Foods. “It was a tinder box.” Protests previously sprung up in Minneapolis, and beyond, after the officer-involved killings of Jamar Clark in 2015 and Philando Castile in 2016. (Castile was shot by an officer working for the St. Anthony’s Police Department, in a suburb north of the Twin Cities.) “I think there’s an overall awareness of vulnerability in the midst of this. We are vulnerable to COVID-19 and we’re also vulnerable to what someone referred to as COVID-1619,” Lee adds, referencing the year 1619, when slavery began in the U.S. “The black community is also the most highly affected by COVID-19. These things all flow together, you can’t look at them separately.” In this vein, officials and organizers in Minneapolis have tried to encourage protesters to social distance and wear masks to limit the potential for viral transmission. “We just want to encourage folks who may be gathering to please be mindful of the risk — and that [the] risk can be reduced, certainly not eliminated but reduced, by social distancing and wearing masks,” said Minnesota Health Commissioner Jan Malcolm at a press briefing Thursday. She added that gatherings the size of what Minneapolis has been seeing the past few days could “very predictably accelerate the spread.” Read more: After the Death of George Floyd: Voices Behind the Most Powerful Protest Photos Just up the street from Cup Foods are the offices of the Centro de Trabajadores Unidos en la Lucha (CTUL), a non-profit dedicated to the labor rights movement that has found itself at the center of the protests. “This happened on our block,” says CTUL spokesperson Isabela Escalona. “This is our community, this is where our members walk, that’s our bus stop, that’s our community right there. So as soon as we heard the news we immediately sprung into action.” CTUL members are now sewing masks and distributing them to protesters. “Paper masks especially burn the skin after being sprayed with tear gas,” Escalona explains, noting that tear gas has been deployed by the MPD on multiple occasions in response to protests. “Even a cloth mask is not something you want to put right back on after you’ve been sprayed … we’re going to need tons of masks as long as the police keep using force the way they are.” Escalona says she believes an uptick in coronavirus cases is just as inevitable as the protests themselves. But, she adds, the blame for that uptick lies with the public officials who didn’t act sooner to address racial inequality and immediately press charges against the officers involved in Floyd’s death. “Policing and racism are public health problems,” she says. “For us they’re one [and] the same.” Write to Jasmine Aguilera at jasmine.aguilera@time.com.

(WASHINGTON) — A divided Supreme Court on Friday rejected an emergency appeal by a California church that challenged state limits on attendance at worship services that have been imposed to contain the spread of the coronavirus. Over the dissent of the four more conservative justices, Chief Justice John Roberts joined the court’s four liberals in turning away a request from the South Bay United Pentecostal Church in Chula Vista, California, in the San Diego area. The church argued that limits on how many people can attend their services violate constitutional guarantees of religious freedom and had been seeking an order in time for services on Sunday. The church said it has crowds of 200 to 300 people for its services. Roberts wrote in brief opinion that the restriction allowing churches to reopen at 25% of their capacity, with no more than 100 worshipers at a time, “appear consistent” with the First Amendment. Roberts said similar or more severe limits apply to concerts, movies and sporting events “where large groups of people gather in close proximity for extended periods of time.” Justice Brett Kavanaugh wrote in dissent that the restriction “discriminates against places of worship and in favor of comparable secular businesses. Such discrimination violates the First Amendment.” Kavanaugh pointed to supermarkets, restaurants, hair salons, cannabis dispensaries and other businesses that are not subject to the same restrictions. Lower courts in California had previously turned down the churches’ requests. The court also rejected an appeal from two churches in the Chicago area that objected to Gov. Jay Pritzker’s limit of 10 worshipers at religious services. Before the court acted, Pritzker modified the restrictions to allow for up to 100 people at a time. There were no recorded dissents. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(OSAGE BEACH, Mo.) — Health officials said Friday that they were seeking to “inform mass numbers of unknown people” after a person who attended crowded pool parties over Memorial Day weekend at Missouri’s Lake of the Ozarks tested positive for COVID-19. Camden County Health Department said in a release that the resident of Boone County in mid-Missouri tested positive on Sunday after arriving at the lake area a day earlier. Officials said there have been no reported cases of the virus linked to coronavirus in residents of Camden County, where the parties seen in videos and photos posted on social media took place. Read more: Public Health Officials Urge Hundreds of Missouri Pool Party Guests to Self-Quarantine  Because “mass numbers of unknown people” need to be notified, the officials released a brief timeline of the person’s whereabouts last weekend, including stops at a bar called Backwater Jacks, a bar and restaurant that has a pool, as well as a dining and pool venue called Shady Gators and Lazy Gators. Backwater Jacks owner Gary Prewitt said previously in a statement that no laws were broken, though the images appeared to show people violating Republican Gov. Mike Parson’s state order requiring social distancing. Parson allowed businesses and attractions to reopen May 4, but the state order requires 6-foot (2-meter) social distancing through at least the end of May. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(NEW YORK) — A New York City police officer will face disciplinary charges for a violent arrest during a social distancing enforcement action that ended with him kneeling on a man’s back or neck, a technique similar to the one that led to George Floyd’s death in Minneapolis. Several other officers involved will also face discipline, the department said Friday, after an internal affairs investigation into the caught-on-video confrontation May 2 in Manhattan’s East Village. Police did not specify what violations the officers are alleged to have committed. Bystander video showed plainclothes officer Francisco Garcia pulling a stun gun on 33-year-old Donni Wright and leveling him in a crosswalk, slapping him in the face and punching him in the shoulder before dragging him to a sidewalk and kneeling on his backside to handcuff him. Read more: ‘We Cannot Police Our Way Out of a Pandemic.’ Experts, Police Union Say NYPD Should Not Be Enforcing Social Distance Rules Amid COVID-19 Garcia was stripped of his gun and badge and placed on desk duty after the incident, which Mayor Bill de Blasio called “very troubling” and “absolutely unacceptable.” He could still face criminal charges. The Manhattan district attorney’s office said Friday that it is “conducting an independent review of this incident.” A message seeking comment was left with Garcia’s union. The police disciplinary process sometimes involves an administrative trial, where a department employee acting as a judge hears testimony before deciding what, if any, punishment is warranted, such as a loss of vacation days all the way up to firing. The final decision is left to the police commissioner. Wright was treated at a hospital after his arrest and has filed a notice of claim with the city, the first step before a filing a lawsuit. Prosecutors deferred charges resulting from his arrest pending further investigation. Wright’s lawyer, Sanford Rubinstein, called the disciplinary charges a “step in the right direction” and said Garcia should be fired. The Rev. Kevin McCall, an adviser to Wright’s family, said: “We want to send a clear message that Donni Wright could have been dead today. Before we were calling George Floyd’s name, we could’ve been calling Donni Wright’s name. Thank God he wasn’t also killed by the actions of the police.” The video of Wright’s arrest was one of several that spurred outrage over the city’s use of police to enforce social distancing, along with data showing people of color were subject to the vast majority of distancing-related arrests and summonses in the city. Read more: Police Data Reveals Stark Racial Discrepancies in Social Distancing Enforcement Across New York City One video showed a police officer running at a black man and throwing him to the ground for mouthing off. Another showed an officer punching a man in the head as he lay pinned to a sidewalk, unable to fight back. The city later altered its approach, telling officers to stop citing people for not wearing face coverings. Minutes before the confrontation with Wright, video from a security camera showed officers using force to arrest a couple for allegedly failing to comply when asked to disperse. Police said officers saw that one of them had a “bag of alleged marijuana in plain view.” Bystander video of Wright’s arrest showed Garcia helping take one of those people to the ground before turning to Wright, who was walking toward the area of that arrest from about 10 to 15 feet away. Garcia turned toward Wright and cursed at him to “[get] back right now,” according to the video. At the same time, the officer pulled up his Taser and pointed it at Wright, possibly triggering the device. Garcia continued toward Wright and eventually holstered his Taser. It wasn’t clear what Wright was doing because he wasn’t in the frame the entire time, though just before Garcia tackled him, he stopped and stood in front of the officer with what appeared to be a clenched fist at his side. “What you flexing for? Don’t flex,” Garcia said, before grabbing Wright and wrestling him to the ground. Another officer then stepped in and helped handcuff Wright. A police spokeswoman said shortly after the arrest that Wright “took a fighting stance against the officer” when he was ordered to disperse. Over the years, Garcia been named as a defendant in six lawsuits that the city settled for a total of $182,500, according to court records and a Legal Aid Society database. In a case similar to the May 2 incident, Garcia and other officers allegedly threw a man to the ground and then punched and kicked him. In another, Garcia was accused of throwing a woman against a metal grate and onto a sidewalk and using a homophobic slur after she asked for his badge number. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(HARRISBURG, Pa.) — A bitter partisan fight over a Pennsylvania lawmaker’s decision to wait a week before disclosing his COVID-19 diagnosis spread to the House floor Thursday, and the state attorney general declined to investigate. A day after Republican Rep. Andrew Lewis’ announcement through a news release that he had self-isolated and recovered from the illness that has killed at least 100,000 people in the U.S., Democrats expressed anger and demanded changes that would require masks on the floor and in committee meetings. The Legislature has continued to meet during the pandemic under rules that permit lawmakers to vote from home or from their Capitol offices, or to vote in person. Lewis, from a Harrisburg-area district, said he was tested two weeks ago, learned the results last week and stayed quiet out of respect for others in his circle. Rep. Brian Sims, a Philadelphia Democrat who put an emotional video on social media after Lewis made his announcement, said in floor remarks Thursday that the decision to keep the positive test a secret put others at risk. Sims discounted House Republicans’ response, which has led at least two members to self-isolate because they sit near Lewis in the chamber. “To pretend that a member here coming to session only interacts with one, two, three people, that’s ridiculous, we all know better,” Sims said. Sims said House Speaker Mike Turzai, a Republican from north of Pittsburgh, should resign. Turzai said that he had been unaware of Lewis’ diagnosis and that as for himself, he would disclose if he became infected. “We are not using this facility to make those kind of statements,” Turzai said, scolding Sims for calling him by his first and last names only. “My title is Speaker.” Rep. Rob Matzie, a Democrat also from north of Pittsburgh, said lawmakers are held to higher standards than the general public and should all disclose if they test positive for the COVID-19 virus. “I have to believe that if Ben Franklin had COVID-19, he’d tell everyone,” Matzie said, invoking the name of a Pennsylvania hero. For most people, the coronavirus causes mild or moderate symptoms that clear up in two to three weeks. For older adults, people with existing health problems and some others, it can cause severe illness and death. Read more: The Coronavirus Crisis in the U.S. Is a Failure of Democracy Lewis said he had a fever for a day and a brief cough but has fully recovered. The majority-holding Republicans defeated a Democratic proposal to adjourn for more than a week to make time to change the policy on illness disclosures. House Minority Leader Frank Dermody, a Pittsburgh-area Democrat, proposed requiring face masks on the floor and during committee meetings, and to require disclosure of a positive test to leaders of both parties. It was not immediately acted upon as Dermody had requested. Attorney General Josh Shapiro declined requests by fellow Democrats to criminally investigate how Lewis’ diagnosis was handled. Shapiro released a statement urging lawmakers to “demonstrate common decency.” “While I understand their frustration and concern, a criminal investigation is not warranted based on our initial review,” Shapiro said. “Capitol staff and state House members with concerns about COVID-19 contact tracing and exposure should contact the independent chief clerk of the state House and continue to follow the guidance of the secretary of health.” Lewis’ news release said that other members and staff had also isolated. He has not responded to messages seeking comment. Leaders and GOP administrators followed state and federal guidelines and respected individuals’ health privacy rights, said Mike Straub, spokesperson for the Republican caucus. After Lewis tested positive, there was an effort to determine whom he had been in close contact with on May 14, his most recent day in the Capitol. House Republican human resources officials notified people who had been within 6 feet of him for about 10 minutes, and all of them subsequently isolated themselves, Straub said. “Today’s 14 days, and the folks that we’re aware of that have been self-quarantined have not shown any symptoms,” Straub said. House Democrats are doing their own contact tracing, trying to determine who might have been near Lewis and others who have self-isolated, spokesperson Bill Patton said. Aides and other staff members have been told to wear masks in the Capitol’s public spaces, but that requirement does not apply to elected representatives. Two Republicans from Lebanon County, Reps. Russ Diamond and Frank Ryan, have said they were told of Lewis’ positive test result. “From the moment I was notified I self-quarantined and was given a list of the symptoms to look for, and procedures to follow in event of illness,” Ryan wrote on Facebook. He has not experienced symptoms, he said. Diamond, who sits near Lewis and Ryan, said he has experienced no symptoms and has not been tested. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(WASHINGTON) — President Donald Trump said Friday that the U.S. will be terminating its relationship with the World Health Organization, saying it had failed to adequately respond to the coronavirus because China has “total control” over the global organization. He said Chinese officials “ignored” their reporting obligations to the WHO and pressured the WHO to mislead the world when the virus was first discovered. He noted that the U.S. contributes about $450 million to the world body while China provides about $40 million. The U.S. is the largest source of financial support to the WHO and its exit is expected to significantly weaken the organization. Trump said the U.S. would be “redirecting” the money to “other worldwide and deserving urgent global public health needs,” without providing specifics. The Trump administration may soon expel thousands of Chinese graduate students enrolled at U.S. universities and impose other sanctions against Chinese officials in the latest signs of tensions between Washington and Beijing that are raging over trade, the coronavirus pandemic, human rights and the status of Hong Kong. President Donald Trump said he would make an announcement about China on Friday, and administration officials said he is considering a months-old proposal to revoke the visas of students affiliated with educational institutions in China linked to the People’s Liberation Army or Chinese intelligence. Trump is also weighing targeted travel and financial sanctions against Chinese officials for actions in Hong Kong, according to the officials, who were not authorized to discuss the matter publicly and spoke on condition of anonymity. “We’ll be announcing what we’re doing tomorrow with respect to China and we are not happy with China,” Trump told reporters at an unrelated event Thursday, referring mainly to COVID-19. “We are not happy with what’s happened. All over the world people are suffering, 186 countries. All over the world they’re suffering. We’re not happy.” Although the student expulsions aren’t directly related to Hong Kong and China’s move to assert full control over the former British territory, potential sanctions against officials involved in that effort would be a result of Secretary of State Mike Pompeo’s determination that Hong Kong can no longer be considered autonomous from mainland China. Pompeo notified Congress on Wednesday that Hong Kong is no longer deserving of the preferential trade and commercial status it has enjoyed from the U.S. since it reverted to Chinese rule in 1997. Under a joint Sino-British agreement on the handover, Hong Kong was to be governed differently than the mainland for 50 years under a “one country, two systems” policy. Pompeo’s determination opened the door to possible sanctions and the loss of special perks Hong Kong has received from the United States. But neither Pompeo nor other officials were able Wednesday to describe what action the administration might take, an uncertainty related to the impact that such sanctions would have on U.S. companies that operate in Hong Kong and the city’s position as Asia’s major financial hub. Trump’s comments sparked a drop in U.S. financial markets. Serious consideration of the visa revocation proposal, first reported by The New York Times, has faced opposition from U.S. universities and scientific organizations who depend on tuition fees paid by Chinese students to offset other costs. In addition, those institutions fear possible reciprocal action from Beijing that could limit their students’ and educators’ access to China. In a nod to those concerns, the officials said any restrictions would be narrowly tailored to affect only students who present a significant risk of engaging in espionage or intellectual property theft. The officials could not say how many people could ultimately be expelled, although they said it would be only a fraction of the Chinese students in the country. Still, the possibility that the proposal may be implemented has drawn concerns from educators. “We’re very worried about how broadly this will be applied, and we’re concerned it could send a message that we no longer welcome talented students and scholars from around the globe,” said Sarah Spreitzer, director of government relations at the American Council on Education. “We don’t have a lot of details about how they are going to define ties to Chinese universities, what type of universities are they going to target, what would constitute a university having ties to the Chinese military,” she said. If the situation were reversed and another nation imposed limits on students from U.S. universities that receive Defense Department funding, she noted it would affect a wide range of schools. The U.S. hosted 133,396 graduate students from China in the 2018-19 academic year, and they made up 36.1% of all international graduate students, according to the Institute of International Education. Overall, there were 369,548 students from China, accounting for 33.7% of international students who contributed nearly $15 billion to the U.S. economy in 2018. The proposal to revoke the visas is not directly related to the dispute over Hong Kong, nor is it tied to U.S. criticism of China for its handling of the coronavirus outbreak. Rather, it is connected to various elements of trade and human rights issues that have seen U.S. officials complain about Chinese industrial espionage and spying and harassment of dissidents and religious and ethnic minorities. But the timing of a potential announcement could come at a time of increasingly heated rhetoric about the imposition of national security laws on Hong Hong in violation of the Sino-British accord. The proposal first began to be discussed last year when the administration moved to require Chinese diplomats based in the United States to report their domestic U.S. travel and meetings with American scientists and academics. At the time, U.S. officials said it was a reciprocal measure to match restrictions that American diplomats face in China. Those limits were followed by a requirement that Chinese state-run media in the U.S. register as “foreign diplomatic missions” and report their property holdings and employee rosters to the government. That was, in turn, followed by the limiting of the number of visas for Chinese journalists allowed to work in the United States. China retaliated for the visa limitations by expelling several reporters from U.S. media outlets, including The Washington Post and The New York Times. ____ AP Education Writer Collin Binkley in Boston contributed to this report. Contact us at editors@time.com.

When Virginia Governor Ralph Northam announced the tentative reopening of Virginia Beach for Memorial Day, he warned antsy residents that, if they didn’t abide by new restrictions such as social distancing and limits on group activities to mitigate the risk of new COVID-19 infections, he wouldn’t hesitate to re-close the area. He’s not alone. Coastline municipalities around the country are now instituting or contemplating similar liberties. To test how feasible it is for public spaces to reopen to those restless from weeks of stay-at-home orders, we’ve built a simulation. It uses the real-world coordinates of a two-block stretch on the southern tip of Virginia Beach covering 4.4 acres of sandy respite along a 600-foot coastline, and runs a real-time computational experiment in which each digital person acts according a randomly assigned behavioral model. Each person is visualized as a circle with a six-foot diameter, meaning any time two circles overlap (and turn red), social distancing has been violated. Depending on where you place the slider at the top, a certain percentage of beachgoers in the simulation will rigorously try to observe social distancing while others will bend the rules by a few feet. In the default setting, 75% of the 200 simulated beachgoers aspire to maintain a minimum of a six-foot distance, while 25% are willing to fudge that distance down to between 3 and 5 feet. In this case, about 20% of our tiny friends head straight for the water, while 30% plop down to sunbathe and the remaining 50% wander up and down the beach. After one hour in simulated time, at least 1,000 violations of social distancing typically occur as people move about, according to many tests of the simulation, which involves a small amount of variation due to the random nature of where people chose to move. This sort of exercise, in which each person in a simulated group has a personal set of rules and goals, is more than just a thought experiment. The success of any policy whose outcome is dependent on voluntary compliance, like the rules for Virginia Beach, is difficult to predict ahead of time because small, simple differences in how individuals behave can create enormously complex patterns when they interact with one another—what’s known as “emergent” patterns. While TIME’s implementation uses only a handful of variables, many researchers use this style of computer science as a powerful means to predict emergent patterns of group behavior in anything from crowds to traffic to ecosystems. The emergence we see here suggests that at least a modest amount of interaction inside 6 feet is inevitable as public spaces reopen. Even when limiting the crowd to only 200 people and assuming 100% those beachgoers try to cooperate, the model suggests it’s basically assured that people get too close to each other. Repeated trials indicate that the random movement of walkers, often impeded by stationary sunbathers, combined with the inevitable collisions between people at the bottlenecks at the entry to the beach, results in an average of about 200 accidental violations of social distancing in one hour. And that’s a highly ideal scenario, in which the crowd size remains unrealistically small and improbably obedient. As soon as you start adding more people or introducing even a small percentage of negligent actors, the number of collisions skyrockets. For 1,000 beachgoers at 75% compliance, there are typically more than 20,000 such run-ins over the 90 minutes (in simulation time) it takes for all of them to reach the beach. As desperate as the U.S. is for some form of normalcy over the warm summer months, every model we ran suggests that, without general acceptance of a new reality in which public spaces will need to be less populated, the health risks could be significant. As I wrote recently, even as new COVID-19 infections fall, Americans must reconsider the outdoors as an exhaustible resource that must be rationed. As this experiment tentatively indicates, even a fairly large amount of beachfront—4.4 acres is the equivalent of 3.3 football fields, not including the water—cannot tolerate more than a few hundred people without a dangerous degree of interactions that are too close for comfort, no matter how assiduous those people are trying to be. While Virginia Beach acknowledged this to some extent by limiting parking capacity to 50% over Memorial Day weekend, it could take far more drastic and undesirable limitations to make public spaces a place people can enjoy without an intolerable level of risk. This sort of experiment is known as “agent-based modeling,” in which each “participant” acts as an autonomous program that makes decisions based on its surrounding environment. While there are several JavaScript libraries that have implemented some degree of agent-based-modeling, this simulation was written from scratch to accommodate the specific use-case. In each step (which occur several times a second), every agent seeks to move approximately 20 feet toward his or her desired destination—either the water or an available spot on the sand. Unless the agent plans to sunbathe, once she reaches her destination she chooses a new one, whether it’s a spot on the beach on a nearby location in the water for swimmers. Except, As each time an agent “moves,” she “calculates” whether the move would violate another agent’s space below her minimum acceptable degree of social distancing—from 3 to 6 feet, depending how closely she is following recommended guidelines—and, if so, attempts a different route until one is appropriately spaced, up to five times. If, after five tries, the only option is to move inside another agent’s 6-foot radius, a collision occurs. The interactive tallies that as one violation. The simulation runs at about 40 times faster than reality and ends after either an hour or when every prospective person has reach the beach or water. This style of computer science was popularized by the free software NetLogo, a sophisticated descendant of the original LOGO program, popular in grade schools, that involved giving instructions to a “turtle” that would create patterns on the screen. While this simulation was not independently coded in that software, the author consulted a textbook on its structure to aid in the software design. Write to Chris Wilson at chris.wilson@time.com.

Most countries that have seen their COVID-19 cases explode in the last month—Sweden, the U.K. and the U.S.—have received fierce criticism from epidemiologists for their resistance to the tough social distancing measures necessary to stem the spread of the new coronavirus. For Peru, which now has the world’s second-highest per capita infection rate, it’s a different story. Peruvian president Martín Vizcarra declared a national state of emergency on March 15, when the country had just 71 confirmed cases of COVID-19. The order closed Peru’s borders and banned Peruvians from leaving the house except to access essential goods or perform essential work. It was one of the earliest quarantines in Latin America, and came in before lockdown orders in France, the U.K., and other European countries that were at the time far ahead of Peru in their contagion curves. But it hasn’t worked as hoped. By May 28, Peru had nearly 142,000 cases of COVID-19 and 4,099 coronavirus-related deaths. It’s the third highest toll in Latin America, a region which has become the new epicenter of the pandemic in recent weeks, led by its two largest countries, Brazil and Mexico. Read More: Brazil Is Starting to Lose the Fight Against Coronavirus—and Its President Is Looking the Other Way Speaking on May 23 as he extended most quarantine measures until the end of June, Vizcarra said that Peruvians needed to do more to keep to follow the rules of lockdown and avoid “individualistic” and “selfish” behavior. But public health experts say living and working conditions in the country of 33 million—where a fifth of people live on only around $100 a month—has made it near impossible for many Peruvians to comply with quarantine measures. Meanwhile, some government measures have backfired, inadvertently leading to bigger gatherings of people. Here’s what to know about how COVID-19 spread in Peru, despite quarantine measures. The virus has been spreading fast in Peru ever since the country confirmed its first case on March 6. The country surpassed 1,000 cases 25 days later, and 10,000 cases two weeks after that, on April 14, according to Reuters. Some 70% of cases are concentrated in Lima, the sprawling coastal capital which is home to a third of the population. Iquitos, in the Peruvian Amazon, the world’s largest city that cannot be reached by road, has also been hit hard.  The problem is that for many in the South American country, life is still structured in a way that makes it difficult for many people to avoid close contact with others, says Ivan Hidalgo Romero, academic director at the Institute of Government and Public Management in Lima. “The government’s [quarantine] strategy works for the 30% of Peru that is employed in the formal sector, that’s been growing economically,” he says. “But there’s another 70% of Peru, which is informal, that doesn’t have access to basic services of health, education, nutrition, or to pensions and financial safety nets.” Staying home for long periods of time is impossible for the 44% of households that do not have a refrigerator, according to a 2018 government survey, with families needing to leave the house regularly to access food. As a result, busy food markets have become a hub of infection. In late April, when authorities shut down one of Lima’s more than 1,200 food markets and performed rapid discard tests on traders, 163 of 842 came back positive. Forgoing several months work is even harder for Peruvians than it has been for people in wealthier countries like Italy, China and the U.S., which have shuttered their economies. More than 70% of Peruvians work for cash in the informal sector, with little job security and no possibility of sick pay. Working from home is impossible for the vast majority. Around 43% of the workforce is employed in agriculture or heavy industry, while construction and tourism make up the large bulk of the services sector. Less than a third of households have a computer. “We’re seeing the measures designed in the capital colliding with the reality of the country,” Hidalgo says. The government has given poorer families grants of around $220 each to help them weather the crisis—part of a massive economic response package that will cost 12% of Peru’s GDP. But critics say the distribution of that aid has contributed to spreading the virus. Most poorer Peruvians don’t have bank accounts, so recipients have needed to go to banks in person to collect their money. “This generated queues at the banks since dawn, without any respect for physical distancing,” Nora Espiritu, a doctor and health researcher wrote in The BMJ, a British medical journal,  It’s struggling. Ernesto Gozzer, a former director of Peru’s National health Institute a professor of Global Health at Cayetano Peruvian University, says the system is reeling from “at least 30 years” of underinvestment. “We started in this outbreak with a system that wasn’t prepared. That’s why the government tried to rapidly implement this bold quarantine order, even though it’s not an easy thing to do in Peru.” Gozzer says the government has moved fast to boost capacity in the healthcare system. “Before February we had only around 100 ICU beds in the country. In March that doubled to 200. And now we have 1,000.” The government says they will double that number again, to 2,000, over the next month. Health minister Victor Zamora Mesía has been blunt about the challenge facing his country. In an interview with La Republica newspaper, he compared Peru to Spain, a comparatively wealthy nation, about 1.5 times the population of Peru, that saw overcrowding in hospitals despite starting with roughly 8,000 ICU beds. “If Spain was overwhelmed, imagine the effort we’ve got to make here.” Nationwide ICU beds with ventilators in Peru’s hospitals are 85% full, according to the government. But with health care facilities unevenly distributed, some parts of the country, like the northern Amazon region of San Martin, have just a few beds left or have run out altogether. In mid-May, the president of Peru’s Society of Intensive Care Medicine said that ICUs in Lima were no longer admitting older patients, instead taking in younger ones who had a higher chance of survival. (Other health officials later said that decisions were made on a case by case basis and not on age alone). In some places—like isolated Iquitos—a shortage of basic medicines has led to price speculation in pharmacies. “We are at our limit,” Gozzer says.   Police have been cracking down on people breaking quarantine rules, but working without personal protective equipment (PPE), thousands of officers have fallen sick themselves. Going forward, the priority for security forces will be enforcing health protocols at food markets, President Vizcarra said May 22. He also announced an extension of quarantine measures until June 30. But certain businesses, including salons and food delivery services are now allowed to reopen. The government said May 25 that the number of new infections is leveling off in Peru, in what Vizcarra calls a “non-flat plateau”. But the following day the WHO included Peru in a list of Latin American countries where the rate of infection is “still accelerating.” The number of new infections per day has topped 5,700 since May 26, with a peak of 6,154 on May 27.  Zamora Mesía, the health minister, has been clear that the economy is also a major consideration in easing quarantine measures. According to a national telephone survey, 30% of Peruvians have lost their jobs since the lockdown began. “The impact on employment and the increase in poverty and extreme poverty translate into hunger, which also affects health,” he told La Republica. “We have to restore a balance at some point, and this is the first step: we begin to cautiously move the economy, in a way that doesn’t inflict a blow on what we’ve gained in health.” COVID-19 was slower to spread in Latin America than in Asia, Europe and the U.S. But this month has seen a spike of cases across the region, and as of May 28 the region accounted for 40% of daily deaths from the disease. It’s an alarming figure for a region with high rates of inequality and poverty, underfunded health systems, and highly urbanized populations.  Latin American governments have mounted drastically different responses to the pandemic. Leaders in some countries, like Mexico and Brazil, have resisted efforts to shut down the economy and performed very few tests for the virus. Other countries, from relatively well-off Chile to poorer Honduras, have implemented strict lockdowns. But even with such responses, analysts say limits on state aid and large informal economies have made it harder for Latin Americans to abide by quarantine orders, as in Peru.  Hidalgo says the next few months may bring a moment of reckoning for the region’s governments. Many Latin American countries have experienced rapid economic growth over the last two decades, but some have failed to channel that prosperity into strengthening the social safety nets and health systems that are now proving crucial to keeping COVID-19 at bay. “The pandemic is going to reveal how much governments have really invested in creating infrastructure for the poor and for the general population,” he says. “Every country will see their reality laid bare.” Write to Ciara Nugent at ciara.nugent@time.com.

When Eric Freeland, 34, started coughing at the end of March, he didn’t think much of it. But when his symptoms grew worse, Freeland’s mother began to worry. Freeland is a Native American living with his family in the Navajo Nation in the southwestern U.S., where access to healthcare is limited. He is also diabetic, putting him at greater risk to the coronavirus.  When Freeland’s breathing became short and stuttered, his mother drove him to the nearest hospital where within minutes of arriving, he lost consciousness. He awoke three weeks later, hooked up to a ventilator, from a medically induced coma. “We’ve had epidemics before. We’ve had viruses before. In general, we’ve had a lot of things attack us before,” says Freeland, who has since recovered fully. But this is “the worst case scenario.” The Navajo Nation, home to more than 173,000 people and spans across parts of Utah, New Mexico and Arizona, has been hard hit by COVID-19, with 4,944 confirmed COVID-19 infections in the community and 159 deaths as of May 29. Before the pandemic, the nation already faced a host of challenges, with up to 40% of people not having access to running water in their homes and 10% not having access to electricity. But despite the outbreak, the Navajo Nation has received little support from the federal government. “The efforts for battling COVID-19 were solely the Navajo Nation’s doing,” says Jonathan Nez, the President of the Navajo Nation. “There was little federal assistance when we were going through the peak of the crisis.”  The Navajo Nation is not alone. While Indigenous communities and cultures vary greatly in the United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, they face similar challenges when it comes to health problems and accessing medical care. The close to 10 million Indigenous people in these four countries who are descendants from the original inhabitants of their countries, have higher rates of chronic health issues making them more susceptible to severe COVID-19 cases. And yet, they say, federal funding to these communities continues to be insufficient. The COVID-19 stimulus law passed by the U.S. Congress mandates $8 billion for relief to Native American communities, but they had to sue the Treasury Department to access the funds. The support only began reaching the Navajo Nation in mid-May, long after the outbreak had started. Delays in distributing funding left frontline workers without proper protection and forced the Urban Indian Organization to close some of its health facilities due to a shortage of critical resources.  In Canada, where the government pledged to spend $216 million to protect Indigenous Canadians (who make up 4.9% of the population), experts pointed out it would only amount to only around $142 per person. The funding also does not go to Indigenous people living outside of Indigenous reserves, who make up over half of Canada’s Indigenous population. This prompted the Congress of Aboriginal People in Canada to file a federal court application on May 13, alleging that the government’s COVID-19 assistance is “inadequate and discriminatory.” (Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has since announced $54 million to support off-reserve Indigenous people.) Despite the lack of government support and limited resources, Indigenous communities are implementing public health measures to effectively curb the spread of the virus within their communities. Although the Navajo Nation has one of the highest infection rates per capita in the United States, surpassing New York and New Jersey, the community is testing far above the national average of 4.9%, with 15.64% of its population having been tested. “We are using our own sovereign ability to govern ourselves,” says President Nez. The community also implemented some of the strictest lockdown measures in the country after an outbreak began in their community, mandating that no one leaves home unless they are essential workers or there is an emergency. They say that has helped curb the spread of the virus. “The reason the Navajo Nation has managed this crisis isn’t because of the federal government,” President Nez says. “It’s because of us.” Indigenous communities have long received worse care during pandemics and witnessed higher mortality rates than the rest of the population. The New Zealand Māori mortality rate during the 1918 Spanish flu was 7.3 times higher than the non-Indigenous mortality rate. During the H1N1 Swine Flu outbreak in 2009, Indigenous Canadians accounted for 17.6% of deaths even though they account for only 4.3% of the country’s population.  “Historically, we have not been treated well when it comes to pandemics,” says Chief David Monias of the Pimicikamak Cree Nation in northern Manitoba. “While the rest of Canada received services [during previous pandemics], we were just left to die.” The lack of federal support for Indigenous communities is particularly dangerous, given that these communities—who face higher rates of chronic illnesses—are more vulnerable to COVID-19. In Australia, 50% of Aboriginal people live with one major chronic disease such as cancer, cardiovascular or kidney disease and nearly 25% have two or more chronic ailments. “If you look at Indigenous Australians, they have onset of kidney and cardiovascular disease earlier than non-Indigenous Australians,” says Jason Agost, an epidemiologist focussed on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health. In Canada, First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities have a lower life expectancy than the national average and in the United States, the mortality rates for preventable diseases such as asthma or diabetes are three to five times higher for Native Americans. While experts say there is no single reason for why Indigenous populations face poorer health outcomes, Stephane McLachlan, a researcher looking into effective responses to COVID-19 for Indigenous populations says it can be explained by “the long standing impacts of colonization” which have left Indigenous people poorer on average and lacking access to nutritious food, clean water and adequate housing. As well as higher rates of chronic illnesses that make them more vulnerable to the coronavirus, Indigenous communities often cannot implement precautionary measures to stop the virus spreading rapidly. In Canada, at least 61 First Nations communities have not had access to safe drinking water for at least a year. While some non potable water sources can be effective for washing hands, the Canadian government says that communities on a “Do Not Use Advisory” should not use tap water for washing hands. “The government keeps telling people to wash their hands,” Meredith Raimondi, a senior manager from the United States National Council of Urban Indian Health. “But how are Indigenous people supposed to do that when they don’t have clean water?” For many Indigenous people living in overcrowded homes, social distancing or isolation is also impossible. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are 16 times more likely to be living in an overcrowded house than non-Indigenous Australians. This was the case for Freeland, who like many Native Americans, lives with his extended family. Both his parents fell ill with the virus after he contracted it. “So many of us live in close quarters,” he says. “By the time my symptoms started to show, it was too late.” Keep up to date with our daily coronavirus newsletter by clicking here. Indigenous people also disproportionately struggle to access medical services if they do fall ill with COVID-19. Some Indigenous communities live in remote areas where governments have not invested in health infrastructure, resulting in people having to travel hundreds of miles to reach the nearest medical facility. In Northern Canada, many communities cannot be accessed by road and require planes or boats. Some remote communities in Australia only have a single nurse present on the ground, with doctors consulting patients over the phone. “So many Native Americans have to drive for hours to see a doctor or get to a grocery store,” Freeland says, noting that he is lucky he lives within close proximity to hospital facilities. “I wouldn’t have made it if, like other Native Americans, I had been a little further away.” For all the challenges Indigenous communities face—from a lack of federal funding to higher rates of pre-existing comorbidities that increase vulnerability to COVID-19—these communities have taken matters into their own hands. They say Indigenous led-responses are the key to mitigating the impacts of the virus.  “Money is a good start but it’s not the whole story,” says Shannon MacDonald, a Canadian Indigenous physician and deputy chief medical officer for First Nations Health Authority, a health service delivery organization in British Columbia. “It’s about communities having the ability to respond within the communities.” Because Indigenous people often face systemic racism when seeking out medical attention, MacDonald says that “some of our community members are reluctant to access services unless it’s absolutely necessary.” Indigenous health providers, who understand Indigenous cultures, have proven to be better equipped to develop culturally-sensitive public health responses for these communities.  Indigenous-led responses have already proven to be successful, and in some cases, more effective than federal responses.  The Lummi Nation, a sovereign Native American community in the Pacific North-West have been preparing for COVID-19 since the virus appeared in China, gathering additional medical supplies including test kits and creating the country’s first field hospital. The Nation declared a state of emergency on March 3, 10 days before the Trump Administration did and has implemented health measures including social distancing, drive-through testing, essential good deliveries for the elderly and phone call consultation with doctors. The Lummi reservation, home to 5,583 people, has had 40 cases as of May 2—an infection rate in line with the national average. In Australia, Aboriginal communities have been less affected by the virus than anticipated, which experts attribute to having Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander public health practitioners and researchers play a pivotal role in leading response efforts that are culturally sensitive. Aboriginal-led health services ensured that public health messages were communicated to communities in their local languages. Aboriginal communities also protected themselves by camping out in the bush to protect elders. Like many Indigenous Nations in Canada, some Australian Aboriginal communities also shut their borders before the federal government did to avoid disease transmission.  “We can’t be waiting for the government to decide,” says Myrle Ballard, a Canadian Indigenous researcher studying effective health responses to COVID-19 for Indigenous communities. “We Indigenous people know what is best for us.” Please send any tips, leads, and stories to virus@time.com Contact us at editors@time.com.

When registration opened for what was billed as the world’s largest gathering of Holocaust survivors and their descendants, Nathan Leipciger was the first to sign up. Leipciger, a 92-year-old Auschwitz survivor who lives in Toronto, had helped to organized an earlier such conference, and knew that this one — dubbed Liberation 75, making three-quarters of a century since the liberation of Nazi concentration camps and the end of World War II — would be even more of a landmark moment. More than 10,000 people, including students and educators, were expected to attend the event from May 31 to June 2 in Toronto. Now, however, the international gathering has been postponed to 2021 due to the ongoing pandemic. But, given that survivors are now in their 80s and 90s, many are aware that the chances for such a gathering are dwindling — and so are their opportunities to personally encourage the next generation to dedicate themselves to Holocaust education. “Liberation 75 was the last hurrah,” Leipciger tells TIME. “[At the] 80th anniversary, there will be exponentially fewer of us.” There are around 400,000 Holocaust survivors worldwide and about 85,000 in the United States alone, according to estimates by the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany (Claims Conference). But the pandemic has already taken its toll on the group. Recent COVID-19 victims have included Kristallnacht survivor David Toren, 94, a lawyer who fought to recover Nazi-looted art, and Siberian labor camp survivor Joseph Feingold, 97, whose gift of a violin to a Bronx preteen inspired an Oscar-nominated 2016 documentary short. Not knowing when it will be safe to travel again, many survivors are trying to make the most of what is possible, keeping in touch with video chats and phone calls. As they do so, many are finding that these virtual gatherings are meeting an important need — both for their own mental health, and for a world that needs to hear their perspective. So, with Liberation 75 canceled, Toronto-area survivors will be meeting online on Sunday. Since April 12, many have been chatting on Zoom every weekend, a gathering organized by local Holocaust-education advocate Lily Kim. Leipciger himself calls survivors who are living alone weekly to check in. These efforts are two of several virtual gatherings and phone banks reaching out during the pandemic to Holocaust survivors — a population that is vulnerable, not only because seniors are especially at-risk, but also because the experience of living in the time of COVID-19 may trigger memories of the isolation and helplessness they experienced more than 75 years ago. “Some of the survivors are scared to death,” says Dr. Charles Silow, a son of survivors and Director of the Program for Holocaust Survivors and Families of Jewish Senior Life in the Detroit area. He hosts Zoom calls with survivors in places from Amsterdam to Poland. “One of the hallmark symptoms of trauma is the fear of the return of the tragic event, and survivors typically are on guard for bad things to happen. These are scary times for everyone, and I think for the survivors, more so.” Survivors are affected by the economic damage, like so many others. Of the roughly 36,000 survivors who live in the New York City area — the epicenter of the pandemic in America — nearly 40% are living in poverty. Several organizations are stepping in to help. In early April, the Claims Conference announced the creation of a $4.3 million Holocaust-survivor emergency assistance fund. Over the last two months, the new 333 Charity has helped fund the UJA Federation of New York’s weekly food deliveries to 1,525 survivor households, and some restaurants have introduced a way for customers to donate meals to Holocaust survivors. The Blue Card, a social services organization that serves survivors on or below the poverty line, has been providing food deliveries and direct payments. But the psychological side of things does set this population apart. “I’ve been here before,” says Fred Lessing, 84, a psychologist in the Detroit area and a child survivor from the Netherlands, of the war-like atmosphere in the U.S. during the coronavirus lockdown. “Not a day goes by that I’m not crying, and I’m crying about what’s happening here, but it’s triggered off by the past,” Detroit’s Lessing tells TIME. “I feel as though to have merged together my Holocaust past and what’s happening here, and I can’t separate them anymore, and so I cry.” In 30 years of lecturing about his life during the Holocaust, he says, “I’ve never cried about those years” until now. During The Blue Card’s first tele-therapy conference call for survivors, on May 21, Dr. Eva Fogelman, a psychologist who counsels Holocaust survivors, explained the roots of these feelings. Some survivors are “haunted” by memories of quarantining before resettling in other European countries or in the United States. And news coverage of medical-supply shortages and of cities being overwhelmed by dead bodies may be reminiscent of the lack of medical care during the Holocaust. She’s also observed that survivors have told her they’re less likely to seek needed medical treatment, and more afraid of sickness. “Illness was equated with death,” Fogelman told a participant during the session. “Jews in ghettos saw sick people dying because there was no medical care to be had. In concentration camps, sick people were killed because they weren’t fit for work.” At the same time, however, survivors of major trauma may be uniquely equipped to face the needs of a moment like this one — and that’s where the virtual gatherings can help them not only cope with the moment, but help others do the same. In fact, some Holocaust survivors to whom TIME spoke said they’re even finding it hard to keep up with their virtual calendars, with people around the world calling on them as a source of wisdom and hope. Lessing calls this strength “soldier mode,” and Leipciger says it’s a matter of knowing “you have to make the best with what you have and not dwell on what you have lost.” Get your history fix in one place: sign up for the weekly TIME History newsletter “[Americans] complain so much about being home, I don’t get it,” says Goldie Jacoby, 83, in Palm Springs, Calif., who was 6 years old when her family hid in a pig sty in Poland during the Holocaust. For her, exercising that resiliency means pushing through arthritis to make more than 100 face masks for friends, family and even a local seniors’ home. “We were ten people hiding in a barn. We didn’t have room to sleep we slept on each other’s shoulders. There was no pencil, no paper, no nothing. Just sitting and waiting and waiting and sitting and starving. Lice all over us. Hungry all of the time, whimpering with tears.” Dr. Miriam Klein Kassenoff, 83, Director of the University of Miami Holocaust Teacher Institute, a child survivor born in what is now Slovakia, who was on the run for seven months from 1940 to 1941, says Zoom has allowed her to say busy by giving and attending lectures, to chat with family and to do meditation classes. “I believe survival in life depends on looking forward to something, having hope,” she told TIME. Dr. Robert Krell, 79, a retired psychiatrist in Vancouver, British Columbia, who says he left the house a total of three times in three years while in hiding in the Netherlands between the ages of 2 and 5, says his 14-year-old grandson recently asked him how it feels to not be able to leave home today. “I told him I live a fairly comfortable life doing mostly what I’ve always done, and have them around, so it’s an entirely different circumstance,” he says. “The only thing I’m deprived of is kisses and hugs [from my children and grandchildren], but not their attention and love.” Jack Holzberg, 94, a survivor of four concentration camps and now of COVID-19, attributes his survival to “luck.” As the Queens, N.Y., resident tells TIME, “I never thought I would survive [the Holocaust]. Life is lucky. You never know some things. You never know what’s tomorrow. I survived. I don’t know. That’s all.” On the May 21 call, Fogelman became emotional as she told survivors how much society can learn from this kind of attitude. “During this pandemic, Holocaust survivors’ resilience is exemplary,” she said. “Young people today, living through this pandemic, want to know how you survived unimaginable conditions. Your stories provide hope to those today who feel hopeless, [who feel] that life will never be the same again.” And the survivors too know just how much their own experience can help with that: Max Eisen, 91, an Auschwitz survivor in Toronto, says that, for his own dose of wisdom, he has turned to the book Man’s Search for Meaning, by another concentration camp survivor, Viktor Frankl. “We must never forget that we may also find meaning in life even when confronted with a hopeless situation, when facing a fate that cannot be changed,” Frankl wrote. “When we are no longer able to change a situation…we are challenged to change ourselves.” Write to Olivia B. Waxman at olivia.waxman@time.com.

Days before she tested positive for COVID-19 in early April, Tanya Beckford was already worried about dying because of the conditions in the Connecticut nursing home where she has worked for 23 years. She wasn’t feeling well and says she and her co-workers, facing a shortage of masks, gloves and gowns, had started wearing plastic trash bags over their uniforms for protection as they cared for infected residents.  Beckford, a certified nursing assistant (CNA) in the Alzheimer’s unit at Newington Rapid Recovery Rehab Center in Newington, Connecticut, had been running a low-grade fever but says the facility was only sending workers home if their temperature reached 100.4 degrees Fahrenheit — per Centers for Disease Control and Prevention guidelines. In an effort to ensure there were enough staff to care for all the residents, Beckford says, employees had been told they were not allowed to take any more time off.  “I went to the administrator, like, ‘I am sick, and you guys are still keeping me in here, I don’t have the proper PPE (personal protective equipment) to work with now, and I just don’t want to die,'” says Beckford, 48. Days later, she tested positive for COVID-19. The coronavirus pandemic has devastated nursing homes across the country. There have been more than 35,000 COVID-19 deaths in long-term care facilities, according to the Associated Press — a figure that accounts for about a third of the country’s coronavirus deaths. The industry has been sharply criticized by relatives of the dead, who’ve accused nursing homes of being slow to take action against the virus and of trying to dodge responsibility for their loved ones’ deaths. But nursing home employees, who face serious occupational hazards even in non-pandemic times, say they’re caught in an impossible situation and being blamed for problems rooted in America’s failed elder-care system. Keep up to date with our daily coronavirus newsletter by clicking here. They’re struggling to protect themselves and support their families on menial salaries while caring for a population that is among the most vulnerable to COVID-19. Nursing home employees who contract COVID-19 have been forced to use up their limited sick time or vacation time, go without pay, or lose their jobs entirely. Through it all, they have dealt with grief and despair as elderly residents to whom they’ve become emotionally attached become sick with COVID-19 and die. “The worst thing that I get upset about is hearing the word hero, hero, hero being thrown around for us. And no one is treating us as such. We feel disrespected,” says Beckford, who has been on sick leave since April 10 and is still recovering from pneumonia caused by the virus. “I would love to see them give us the proper PPE that we need, give us some kind of compensation, and for goodness sake, I don’t have any more vacation or sick time now, and the year is just beginning. Give me back some kind of compensation and put back my time.” Newington Rapid Recovery Rehab Center denies Beckford’s allegations, including that employees were forced to use trash bags for protection. “At no time has our staff been without appropriate PPE. The building has been properly staffed throughout the crisis,” it said in a statement, adding: “We have been strictly following the CDC protocol for health care workers.” When she recovers, Beckford plans to return to work there. But recent lawsuits — brought by relatives of nursing home workers who died of COVID-19 and by former nursing home employees — are drawing attention to the conditions within some facilities that workers say put them and patients at unreasonably high risk. Carlenia Milanes, a licensed practical nurse, spent weeks unwittingly caring for COVID-19 patients at Alaris Health at Hamilton Park in Jersey City, N.J., while the facility initially prohibited employees from wearing masks, according to a lawsuit filed April 22. The suit claims the nursing home hid coronavirus cases from employees, “refused to test patients and pressured staff to work even if they had symptoms of the highly contagious and deadly disease, all while patients and staff alike were dying of COVID-19.” On April 3, Milanes sent an email to Jersey City officials sounding an alarm and saying the nursing home’s strategy “is to put blinders on even at the cost of human life.” “Something needs to be done or more people and staff get sick and possibly die,” Milanes wrote, according to the lawsuit. “I need your help.” Milanes, 28, called in sick for the following day after developing symptoms of COVID-19, but her suit alleges that she was told she would be fired if she didn’t present a doctor’s note. In her lawsuit, Milanes also alleges the facility allowed seemingly healthy residents to share rooms with residents who had symptoms of COVID-19.  By May 27, there were 110 COVID-19 cases among the facility’s residents, including 31 deaths, and 42 COVID-19 cases among staff, including two deaths, according to data reported to the state. Milanes was among the affected staff members; the COVID-19 test she took on April 6 came positive. “I’m not afraid to work. I would take care of anyone, but if I’m sick, how am I going to be any good for a patient?” says Milanes, a single mother whose 7- and 10-year-old daughters have since shown symptoms of COVID-19 as well. “I’m somebody’s mother. I’m somebody’s sister. I’m somebody’s daughter. And granted yes, this is what I signed up for, but protect me.” LaDawn Chapman, a CNA at the same facility, also filed a lawsuit against Alaris on April 22 that echoes many of Milanes’ allegations, including that the facility lacked adequate protective gear for employees and did not notify employees about coronavirus cases. The lawsuit says Chapman was likely exposed to COVID-19 through a patient and multiple coworkers and had a doctor’s note advising her to self-isolate for two weeks. She was told that unless she had symptoms of the disease, she had to come to work, her lawsuit alleges. Both women say they were fired, but Alaris Health denies this. Five days after the suits were filed, Alaris Health sent each woman a letter saying they were “mistaken” about being fired and setting dates that each was expected to return to work. In a statement, Alaris spokesperson Matt Stanton also denied the lawsuits’ other allegations.  “I can tell you that each and every allegation in this case is false,” he said. “No employees were terminated. At no time was information withheld from staff, our residents or their loves ones [sic]. Thankfully, adequate PPE has never been an issue at any of our facilities. In fact Alaris required N95 masks and PPE for all staff well before the (New Jersey Department of Health) and CDC mandates. Finally, no employees were ever pressured to work while sick. Staff showing COVID-19 symptoms were sent home and required to adhere to strict return to work protocols as published by the NJ DOH.” In Texas, Maurice Dotson, a CNA at West Oaks Nursing and Rehabilitation Center in Austin, died on April 17 after contracting COVID-19. His mother sued the nursing home on May 13, accusing it of failing to provide staff with protective equipment and exposing workers and patients to “unreasonable risks of serious harm.” A spokesperson for West Oaks said Dotson “touched countless lives and was a respected and comforting presence,” but declined to comment on pending litigation.  Leaders in the long-term care industry have argued that nursing homes need more support and funding from state and federal governments. And the industry has sought immunity from potential lawsuits related to the pandemic, but the laws and executive orders granting them immunity from civil liability in some states, including New Jersey, might not protect them from all legal claims. “While I understand that you can’t judge a nursing home that’s in the midst of a pandemic by the same standards you would on a regular day, it doesn’t give these nursing homes the license or the right to behave recklessly or engage in willful misconduct,” says Bill Matsikoudis, an attorney who is representing nursing home workers and residents in the lawsuits against Alaris Health at Hamilton Park.  Infection control has long been a challenge in long-term care facilities, where hands-on care is a necessity, and the pandemic has exacerbated that problem. The U.S. Government Accountability Office, in a report released May 20, said that 82% of nursing homes surveyed from 2013 to 2017 were cited for infection prevention and control deficiencies. Meanwhile, the median pay for nursing assistants was $29,640 last year — just above the national poverty level for a family of four, which is $26,200. By comparison, the median salary for a full-time worker last year was about $49,000, according to weekly earnings data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. In part because of that low pay, many nursing home employees work second jobs, which increases their risk of contracting the virus and unwittingly carrying it to residents. “If the aides were paid a living wage, they would not need to have multiple jobs,” says Joanne Spetz, director of the Health Workforce Research Center for Long-Term Care at the University of California, San Francisco. “That forces the workers to put themselves at more and more risk to support themselves, and that also puts their clients at risk and their residents at risk.” And while staff shortages have long been an issue at nursing homes, the problem becomes worse when workers stay home sick. As their colleagues take on the extra work, the care and time they’re able to give patients suffers. The median pay for nursing assistants was $29,640 last year — just above the national poverty level for a family of four, which is $26,200. “A lot of nursing homes are worried,” says David Grabowski, a professor of health care policy at Harvard Medical school who focuses on long-term care. “Who steps in here? Maybe it’s the National Guard, maybe it’s contract nurses. But it’s not like these places have a big roster of folks ready to plug into these positions.” In New York City on May 20, Mayor Bill de Blasio announced that the city would provide staff to fill in for nursing home workers who contract COVID-19 and must stay home. All of this suggests that the looming shortage of elder care workers in the U.S. is likely to worsen, now that the pandemic has laid bare many of the problems in the industry. “It’s a two-way street. We need to pay them a rate commensurate with all we’re asking of them and support them,” Grabowski says. “Otherwise they’re not going to be there to do this.” The response to coronavirus outbreaks in nursing homes has varied by state. In Maryland— where nursing home residents and staff account for more than half the state’s coronavirus deaths — Gov. Larry Hogan required in early April that all nursing home workers wear masks at all times and then ordered testing of all residents and workers, whether they showed symptoms or not. In New York, Gov. Andrew Cuomo recently mandated twice-weekly COVID-19 testing of nursing home workers. But he also faced criticism from the nursing home industry and residents for originally directing long-term care facilities to accept back coronavirus patients released from the hospital. He walked back that policy on May 10 amid concerns that it would cause the virus to further spread within nursing homes. On May 5, Illinois Rep. Jan Schakowsky and New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker introduced legislation that would require nursing homes to provide workers with training in how to avoid COVID-19 exposure, sufficient personal protective equipment, increased testing and at least two weeks of paid sick leave. Parts of the bill were incorporated into the new $3 trillion pandemic relief package that passed the House, but that legislation is unlikely to become law as it faces overwhelming Republican opposition in the Senate.  Following complaints about a lack of transparency within nursing homes, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is now requiring them to report coronavirus cases to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, as well as to residents and their families. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) — which has received at least 230 COVID-19 complaints related to nursing homes — released guidance on May 14 aimed at reducing workers’ exposure to the virus. It recommends that facilities encourage workers to stay home if they’re sick, develop a process for decontamination and reuse of protective gear, and train workers on how to protect themselves.  Debbie Berkowitz, program director for the worker safety and health program at the National Employment Law Project, says there needs to be stronger oversight at state and federal levels and that nursing homes should ramp up training of employees on treating COVID-19 and increase testing of workers and patients within their facilities. She says any solution will also hinge on staffers having enough protective equipment — a consistent obstacle for frontline workers. “Mentally, physically, emotionally, you’re fighting a disease. And on top of that, we have to fight administrators to give us protective gear,” says Nicole Jefferson, a part-time CNA at Apple Rehab in Rocky Hill, Conn., who thinks of her 3-year-old and 14-year-old daughters each time she enters a COVID-19 room. “I don’t want to die. I don’t want my kids to die. What more can we do?” An Apple Rehab administrator reached by phone said “we have plenty of protective gear,” but directed further questions to a spokesperson, who did not respond to a request for comment. In Illinois, thousands of nursing home employees who are members of the SEIU Healthcare union had voted to strike on May 8, before reaching a last-minute deal on a new contract. It includes an increase in base pay to $15 an hour, an extension of $2 hazard pay and five additional paid sick days for coronavirus.  The new contract also guarantees that staffers won’t be required to work without adequate protective equipment. But Francine Rico, a CNA at the Villa at Windsor Park nursing home in Chicago who was on the bargaining committee, says workers still don’t have enough. Rico says she was given a raincoat to wear for protection and takes care of her N95 mask “like it’s gold.” “How do they expect for this virus, this pandemic, to even lift if we’re still wearing the same PPE gear in and out of the rooms?” says Rico, 52. The nursing home has had 143 cases of coronavirus and 33 deaths as of May 23, according to data reported by the state.  In a statement, Villa at Windsor Park called its workers “heroic” and said the facility is screening staff for symptoms at the start and end of their shifts. “In as much as there has been a national shortage of PPE, Villa at Windsor Park has at all times had sufficient levels PPE, including those necessary for infection control and personal protection, to ensure that we meet the needs within the center,” the statement said. Rico’s sister, Eartha Sears, is a CNA in the same facility and says she recently returned to work after using up all her sick time and vacation time while recovering from COVID-19. “I wish they’d [use] better judgment about safety — not just our safety, the residents’ safety as well,” says Sears, 56. “Because it’s not getting better, it’s getting worse.” Meanwhile, employees are contending with the mental and emotional toll of continuing to work in places ravaged by illness, losing residents and coworkers they’ve known for years. “They teach you when you’re in school as a CNA not to take any of this personally,” says Beckford. “But if you’re a human being with a heart, you’re going to feel something for the people that you’re working with for such a long time.” Beckford graduated with a master’s degree in 2018, planning to transition into social work, but she stayed at the nursing home to continue caring for her oldest residents. “Unfortunately, once I return to work, the majority of my residents will not be there,” she says. Milanes says many of the residents she cared for have died in the past two months. She says she recently received a job offer from a different nursing home, and she plans to start when she tests negative for COVID-19. But everything about the career she once loved has changed. “Maybe I’m afraid because I cared about them, and I know that they’re all dead,” she says. “I’ve cried, I just don’t think that I’ve had time to really grieve.” Write to Katie Reilly at Katie.Reilly@time.com.

The prom is usually reserved for high school students, but a clever and caring seven-year old managed to score an invitation by throwing a prom for his nanny. When the coronavirus hit, seven-year old Curtis Rogers had to spend two months without seeing his nanny, Rachel Chapman, ABC 11 reports. So when he heard that Chapman was upset because her prom was cancelled, he devised a clever plan to see her and cheer her up. He stepped up with an invitation to attend a socially distant prom in his backyard. After making up his mind, he surprised his babysitter with a “promposal” in the form of a sign that read: “Mini prom is not today, but will you join me on Monday,” local CBS news affiliate, WNCN reports. Naturally, she said yes. Rachel Chapman’s mother, Becky Chapman, shared the sweet story on Twitter and it quickly went viral as people online reveled in a story of kindness, generosity, and friendliness. In the photos, Rogers can be seen decked out in a suit and bow tie, which his mother, Elissa, told ABC 11, was chosen specifically to match his babysitter’s dress. When Chapman arrived at his home, her tiny escort was waiting outside with a pool noodle so they could safely keep their distance from each other and he took her to the backyard where he had helped set a table filled with her favorite foods, which reportedly were Chick-fil-A with all her favorite condiments and smoothies. “I could tell he put a lot of thought into it,” she told ABC 11. While Chapman was initially (and understandably) sad about the loss of her prom, what she got instead was an act of kindness potentially even more memorable than a night of dancing with friends. “It was like, really fun,” she told ABC 11. “I’m really glad that he did that.” Contact us at editors@time.com.

People who have been following Naomi Campbell on social media as of late have gotten frequent access to her home, social circles and time. Since the course of social distancing began, she’s been hosting her YouTube miniseries, No Filter With Naomi, where she interviews famous friends like Anna Wintour, Serena Williams and Sean “Diddy” Combs. For those looking to stay fit without leaving the house, she invites her more than 9 million followers to join her daily at-home workout via Instagram Live, and for those looking for recipe guidance, she does food tutorials on her YouTube channel. The iconic supermodel is expectedly grand but surprisingly relatable in all of these settings. She was active on YouTube before this moment, gaining over 21 million views since joining in 2018, and on social media, she’s just shy of over 10 million followers across Twitter and Instagram. But in the last few months, she’s become more prolific, making headlines and endlessly fascinating her audience with her lifestyle and quirks. Of course Campbell, who celebrated her 50th birthday last week, is best known for spending the last 35 years as one of the top talents in fashion. She’s successfully parlayed her larger-than-life glamour into other industries, most recently appearing as a much-lauded judge on the fashion reality competition show Making the Cut. She helped break the color barrier (she was the first black model to appear on the cover of TIME, in 1991, a moment that she told us prompted Gianni Versace to tell her that she had “made it”) in an exclusive business and has used her platform to aid her activism.  And while it can feel like there’s currently an oversaturation of celebrities sharing, streaming, broadcasting and dancing on TikTok and Instagram Live, Campbell has broken through, sans gimmick, with unapologetic candor about living life on her terms and speaking her mind freely — whether that’s wearing a Hazmat suit to the airport or coyly asking Serena Williams for an update on Meghan Markle. She sacrifices none of her dignity as one of fashion’s most revered figures, but also shows her human side — expressing real emotions, from reacting to fellow travelers who don’t exercise the same caution to delivering a tear-filled tribute to her late friend, the influential music executive Andre Harrell. “It’s great, the connectivity of the way the world is today,” Campbell told TIME over the phone. “I didn’t realize it would get the reaction that it did, it wasn’t planned. I loved the whole setup of having your own platform and owning your content and that was appealing to me. I feel safe to open myself, to show my true self because as everyone’s seen me in magazines, you can’t tell who a person is. So you’re getting to see me on YouTube.” The most obvious conversation-driver has probably been Campbell’s extensive cleaning ritual while flying before the virus hit. Ten months ago, Campbell was trending on the Internet after she uploaded a clip titled “Naomi Campbell’s Airport Routine – Come Fly With Me” to her YouTube Channel. In the video, which has netted over 2 million views to date, the supermodel wore a mask and rubber gloves to meticulously clean her seat and all surrounding surfaces with disinfecting wipes, ahead of a flight from Nice, France to Qatar. Her dedication to thorough health precautions while flying was met with both amazement and derision for seeming extreme to some online at the time. But now, amid the coronavirus pandemic, most of the world has adopted similar practices and Campbell has emerged as a prescient (and very chic) oracle of our new reality. Comments like “she was totally ahead of our times,” popped up in March from those who wished they took notes then. “Not passing on germs is something I’ve always been aware of,” Campbell explained. “This is just one of my normal routines and it makes me comfortable when I travel. Some people might have taken it as being arrogant or rude, but to me, it’s not offensive. It’s part of being mindful to others.” Since the pandemic started, Campbell has remained a symbolic character of health and safety measures to her followers on the Internet, especially when she upped the ante for her flying precautions. While traveling now, she wears a Hazmat suit, goggles and a face shield, in addition to her requisite mask and gloves, which has provided plenty of fodder for social distancing memes. Not that she’s flying much these days — she spent the last nine weeks socially isolating at her home in New York City, before relocating to the west coast last week. Keep up to date with our daily coronavirus newsletter by clicking here. Campbell has not only adhered to or exceeded social distancing guidelines outside of her home, but within it, as well. Take, for instance, the pure delight the Internet found in another YouTube video Campbell made in honor of this year’s canceled Met Gala. When watching the clip, which features Campbell showing her favorite dresses from past parties, one eagle-eyed viewer spotted Campbell’s cameraman filming in a full Hazmat suit in the reflective surface of her stairwell, resulting in yet another viral moment sparking comments about her commitment to precautions. “It’s very limited, the people who can come into any of my homes, where I am,” Campbell told TIME of the moment. “Even though I know the person, it’s how I feel comfortable in my home. So I gave them masks, I gave them goggles, I gave gloves, I gave Hazmat suits — some people might think it’s extreme, but that’s how I feel comfortable to let them in my personal space.” Her new 15-part No Filter with Naomi series, which began after the virus hit, feels like listening in on an intimate chat between friends — which is probably because it is. The videos are far from slick or highly produced, with major FaceTime vibes, and Campbell doesn’t shy away from talking about politics or personal affairs, mostly because, as she tells it, “there’s no strategic planning” for the show — just “genuine, authentic conversation.” The series was primarily filmed during stay-at-home orders, which means she was able to reflect on the moment and connect with her guests virtually, filming new segments as part of her social distancing routine, a diversion she was grateful for. “I’m not someone who’s ever been bored in my life and I’m just trying to adapt with the time and keep busy,” she says. “I really am happy for this still time, although I’m not happy for the circumstances and am definitely saddened by the lives that are lost and sad for the people that I’ve lost.”  When she’s not filming, Campbell has used her social distancing time to indulge the hobbies she can’t always do while she’s on the road. She bakes a cake every week and just finished ESPN’s The Last Dance series about Michael Jordan. She has curated the perfect Prince playlist and is re-reading Nelson Mandela’s The Long Road to Freedom, an experience she says has profoundly affected her perspective on social distancing. “It’s really something, reading it now in isolation,” she says. “It’s different because he wrote it in a confined space. We’re not in a confined space out of our will, we’re in a confined space in the luxury of our homes — he wasn’t! Reading it now is just a whole different take.” Campbell is, naturally, looking forward to the post-pandemic future. When asked about the potential of hosting her own reality television show again (she formerly hosted a fashion competition show called The Face,) she said she would do it if it were “right for me.” “I would be open to it. I enjoyed Making the Cut; for me. The most important thing about these shows is about the contestants, it’s not about me. It’s about the opportunity, the skills, and what I can tell them of my knowledge, and how I can give them insight of what they’re about to step into, and just seeing people growing into their passions. I’m happy to be a part of that.”  But make no mistake about it, whether Campbell does another reality show or continues to offer more access to her life by focusing her YouTube channel, the forthrightness that has garnered her such an enthusiastic following so far will remain. “What you get from me in these shows, what I’m saying on-camera — believe me, if the camera wasn’t there, I would be saying the same thing. I’m not sugarcoating anything for the camera.” Write to Cady Lang at cady.lang@timemagazine.com.

(LUXEMBOURG) — Luxembourg started a coronavirus testing program Wednesday to check each and every one of its roughly 600,000 people, as well as cross-border workers, over the next nine weeks. Although formally a Grand Duchy, Luxembourg isn’t all that big — the second-smallest country by area and population in the 27-nation European Union. Shoehorned in between France Germany and Belgium, it’s also one of the richest in the world in terms of GDP per capita. Still, the new coronavirus initiative is also testing its means. The point of the program is to try and blunt a potential second wave before it develops, as many predict will happen after the European summer. So far, Luxembourg has 110 confirmed deaths and almost 4,000 people have been confirmed as having tested positive. “The first aim is to break these infection chains throughout the whole population, to basically dampen a second potential wave that might ensue,” said Paul Wilmes, Luxembourg’s COVID 19 task force spokesperson. The large-scale testing is necessary because it often is unclear to what extent someone is contagious. Read more: There’s Only One Way to Get the U.S. Back to Work: Testing, Testing and More Testing Authorities will have 17 drive-through, walk-through and even cycle-through test stations which should have everyone processed by the end of July. People will undergo a throat swab and results will be known within two days. Positive cases will have to self-isolate while their contacts will be traced. The testing will be done in several stages, with those most at risk, such as nurses, police and hairdressers, invited for the swab first. They will be invited back every two weeks. Testing is voluntary but authorities are counting on enough civic responsibility to make sure almost all citizens will participate. ___ Raf Casert reported from Brussels Contact us at editors@time.com.

(NICOSIA, Cyprus) — Cyprus is pledging to cover all costs for anyone testing positive for the coronavirus while on vacation on the eastern Mediterranean island nation, according to a letter obtained by The Associated Press on Wednesday. The Cypriot government says it will cover lodging, food, drink and medication for COVID-19 patients and their families. Patients will only have to pay for the taxi ride to the airport and the flight back home. A 100-bed hospital will cater exclusively to foreign travelers who test positive. About 112 intensive care units equipped with 200 respirators will be reserved for critically-ill patients. A 500-room “quarantine hotel” will be reserved for patients’ family members and other close contacts. The pledge came in a five-page letter dated Tuesday that was sent out to governments, airlines and tour operators outlining strict health and hygiene protocols that the government is enacting to woo visitors to the tourism-reliant country. Read more: ‘It Will Be Catastrophic.’ Asia’s Tourism-Dependent Economies Are Being Hit Hard by the Coronavirus Tourism directly accounts for 13% of Cyprus’ economy. This year, the country expects to lose as much as 70% of the 2.6 billion euros ($2.85 billion) in tourism-generated revenue. The letter, signed by Cyprus’ foreign affairs, transport and tourism ministers, boasts that the country has one of the lowest coronavirus ratios per capita in Europe after having tested more than 10% of its population. International air travel to Cyprus begins June 9, initially from 19 countries, with passengers required to undergo a COVID-19 test three days prior to departure. That measure will be lifted June 20 for 13 countries, including Germany, Finland, Israel, Greece and Norway. Officials say travel will be expanded to more countries depending on a constant evaluation of their infection rates. Passengers will have to show their test certificate prior to boarding an aircraft and may have to wear masks throughout the flight. Their temperature will be taken on arrival to Cyprus and some random testing may take place at no cost to the traveler. Tourists will also have to fill out a “COVID-19 Traveler Declaration” stating all their travels 14 days prior to their Cyprus trip and that they have neither shown any coronavirus symptoms for 72 hours before departure nor that they have been in contact with infected people 14 days before. While in Cyprus, people who aren’t in the same travel group are obliged to keep apart at least two square meters (21 square feet) outdoors and three square meters (32 square feet) indoors. Regularly disinfected sunbeds will be two meters (6.5 feet) apart for people not belonging to the same travel group. Hotel staff will be obliged to wear masks with rooms being disinfected after every departure. At restaurants, bars, cafes and pubs, tables will be at least two meters (6.5 feet) apart with a maximum party size of 10. Guests will be encouraged to pay by card instead of cash. Contact us at editors@time.com.

What will life be like after the coronavirus pandemic? While it’s impossible to know for certain, Dolly Parton is optimistic.  “When life is good again, it’s going to be better than it ever was,” the ten-time Grammy-winning entertainment icon told TIME’s Editor-in-Chief Edward Felsenthal during a TIME100 Talks: Finding Hope conversation on Thursday. “I know I’ll be a better person. I can see a lot of things that I can do better than I did before.” Parton has used her platform to help combat COVID-19 and comfort people amid the pandemic. In early April, she donated $1 million to Vanderbilt University Medical Center towards research on treating and preventing coronavirus. “I know that I’m in a position to help,” she explained. “That’s why I try to do it in every way that I can.” Parton said her friend Dr. Naji Abumrad — who works at the medical center — had told her of the center’s advancements towards fighting COVID-19 and she felt drawn to make a donation. (Abumrad is also the father of journalist Jad Abumrad, who created the hit podcast Dolly Parton’s America.)  Since the pandemic began, Parton has also launched the YouTube series “Goodnight with Dolly” through her non-profit Imagination Library, a book-gifting program that has donated nearly 140 million books to children. Every week Parton reads a different children’s book live; in its ninth week, the series already has over 700,000 streams.  “I wanted to try to help lift people up and throw a little fun in there,” she told Felsenthal. “And maybe the parents could enjoy it, too.”  The series represents just one of the many ways the decorated singer, songwriter, actress and businesswoman has remained a prominent, beloved figure in mainstream pop culture. In 2019, Parton executive produced the Netflix series Dolly Parton’s Heartstrings, an anthology drama inspired by Parton’s biggest hits. That same year she released a song with Swedish electronic dance duo Galantis, and recently inspired the viral “Dolly Parton Challenge” on Instagram. But while she has been viewed as a role model for women and girls around the world, Parton has been hesitant to call herself a feminist. When asked by Felsenthal to explain her stance, she responded that it was “kind of a tricky question.” “I suppose I am a feminist if I believe that women should be able to do anything they want to,” she said. “And when I say a feminist, I just mean I don’t have to, for myself, get out and carry signs… I just really feel I can live my femininity and actually show that you can be a woman and you can still do whatever you want to do.” Parton stressed that she’s “not ashamed” of the label, but that, “It’s just that there’s a group of people that kind of fit into that category more than me,” she said. “I just always say I don’t really go for titles or this or that,” she continued. “But I’m all for all our gals. I think everybody has the right to be who they are.” Parton’s message of inclusion also appears in her new single “When Life Is Good Again,” the music video of which premiered during Thursday’s TIME100 Talks. Parton told Felsenthal that she’s turned to songwriting during the pandemic, as she often has during times of difficulty. “I really try to write what I think everybody is going through right now,” she shared. “I try to create things that I think people would like to be able to express, because I’ve always been grateful that I’m a writer.”  “When Life Is Good Again” looks forward to a time when the pandemic has ended, and Parton’s message is far from hopeless: she’s sure this time will come. And when it does, the world might even be a kinder place; Parton told Felsenthal that she hopes the pandemic can serve as a catalyst for people to sit down and think about what truly matters to them, just as it has for her.   “I think we have to pull together a little better. I just think we’re just getting so scattered and so selfish,” Parton said, “and we’re just letting too many good things go by.” “And we will get through it,” she added. “Everything has to pass.” This article is part of #TIME100Talks: Finding Hope, a special series featuring leaders across different fields sharing their ideas for navigating the pandemic. Want more? Sign up for access to more virtual events, including live conversations with influential newsmakers. Write to Madeleine Carlisle at madeleine.carlisle@time.com.

As nations around the world scramble to bring coronavirus outbreaks under control, Dr. Raj Panjabi is worried that the world’s poor populations will be excluded from accessing treatments and prevention measures, a scenario he calls “viral apartheid.” “I don’t use that term lightly,” said Panjabi, speaking with TIME Senior Writer Alice Park during a TIME 100 Talks discussion on May 28. “The idea that a group of people—whether it’s the vaccines, the test or treatments—will get access to those vital life-saving tools, and that those will likely be the rich nations and the powerful within those nations, and the poor within those nations and the poorer nations in the world will get excluded from that, is in fact the story of every pandemic that has happened in humanity.” Panjabi, CEO and founder of Last Mile Health, has spent a career batting just those sorts of issues. His organization trains community health workers in essential medical services, like providing vaccines and neonatal care, in order to bridge the “last mile” to remote communities in countries like Liberia, where Last Mile Health has been working for the past 10 years. As Panjabi tells TIME, that sort of community-based health infrastructure can both save lives and help to address the economic portion of the coronavirus crisis. For instance, countries can hire unemployed workers to be contact tracers, a tactic that can mitigate the health crisis while also creating much needed jobs in the health sector. By tracking and isolating exposed individuals before they spread the virus farther, those contact tracers can also help keep economies open and more people employed. “Outbreaks start and stop in the community,” he says. “If we can hire the people from the communities most affected to be part of the medical team, I think we have a better chance of closing the equity gap.” And when vaccines are eventually produced, those newly-trained health workers may be able to expand their skills in order to distribute and administer vaccines. “One of the opportunities I think the United States has, as well as other countries, is to really break this false narrative that’s been created, that we need to save lives or save jobs,” he explains. “We can actually create jobs and save lives.” Panjabi holds no illusions about the magnitude of the worldwide crisis, especially in developing countries. An April United Nations Economic Commission for Africa report predicted that the continent could see between 300,000 and 3.3 million coronavirus-related deaths this year. In places with limited health infrastructure, the pandemic could also create setbacks in battles against other health scourges, like measles, which caused more than 140,000 deaths worldwide in 2018. “We’re seeing that in many low and middle-income countries that there’s a dual threat, the virus itself, but there’s a threat from the fact that people will die from other epidemics because the virus is disrupting the healthcare systems,” Panjabi says. Still, there have been notable successes, Panjabi says, such as South Africa’s deployment of 28,000 contact tracers. “They were able in the first month to screen seven million people. That’s one out of 10 South Africans.” Such measures can offer lessons for building community health infrastructure in the U.S., which on May 27 passed 100,000 coronavirus deaths. “Imagine if Boston screened one out of 10 Bostonians,” Panjabi says. “Community health workers are vital for helping us test, trace, refer those for treatment and those for isolation and supporting them. And we simply can’t do this without a community-based approach.” Write to Alejandro de la Garza at alejandro.delagarza@time.com.

Democratic Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer says partisanship is complicating the response to the coronavirus pandemic, at least in part because President Donald Trump changed the “tenor of political discourse” when he first began criticizing her. The situation overall, she acknowledges, has “become politicized.”  In the last several weeks, Whitmer has seen her political star rise as she’s led the response in her state to one of the country’s worst coronavirus outbreaks. She’s been commended by Democrats for the way she’s handled the crisis, juggling a flooding emergency at the same time. She’s been the target of insults and threats by President Donald Trump. And she’s emerged as a potential running mate for presumptive Democratic Presidential nominee Joe Biden.  “I think it’s so critical that everyone with a platform, whether it’s at the federal level or at the state level, is talking about what the science is, and is promoting best practices — not mocking mask wearing when we know that wearing masks is what we all need to be doing until we have a vaccine or a cure, and that’s months if not longer off,” Whitmer said as part of the TIME100 Talks, in answer to a question about ensuring that people safely follow guidelines while gradually reopening. The latest curveball Trump has thrown her way is a tweet he shot off last week about Michigan’s Democratic Secretary of State, Jocelyn Benson. Trump incorrectly said Benson, who he referred to as a “rogue Secretary of State,” had sent out mail ballots to voters, when in reality she had sent out applications for absentee ballots. (Some of Benson’s Republican counterparts in other states have taken similar action.) Alarmingly, Trump threatened to withhold funding from Michigan over the matter on May 20, inaccurately claiming it would increase voter fraud.  “I spoke with the President that day, later that same day, and he didn’t mention anything of that, and so it is my hope that perhaps that was a focus of the moment and not a long-term plan,” Whitmer said. Whitmer said the President’s threat came as she was visiting Midland, where flooding caused by two failed dams resulted in a massive evacuation in the midst of the pandemic. On Wednesday, Whitmer ordered the Michigan Department of Environment, Great Lakes and Energy to investigate why the dams had failed. Asked by TIME whether she would support an independent investigation into the matter, Whitmer did not commit. “We have to have the people who understand the issue be the ones that investigate it,” Whitmer said. “That’s how these things are done and done well. If it appears that we would need to have additional eyes look at it, that’s certainly something that I’m open to, but the regulation of dams happens in that department, and to ask another to do it that doesn’t have that expertise I think would not be a fruitful endeavor.” With her growing national profile, Whitmer has also come under attack from the right in her own state, by armed protestors complaining of government overreach to an uncooperative state legislature.  After a local docking business reportedly posted on Facebook that Whitmer’s husband had asked whether being the governor’s husband would move him up in line to have his boat put in the water by Memorial Day weekend, Whitmer has come under fire from Republicans. The Governor, who has apologized for the comment on her husband’s behalf, said it was meant as a joke. In her conversation with TIME, she highlighted the importance of bipartisan messaging during this critical moment, noting that she regularly confers with Republican Ohio Governor Mike DeWine. “We are thinking about things in similar ways even though we might be tackling them at different cadences. And I think it’s important that people see their leaders on both sides of the aisle take this seriously and take actions that we know will protect life,” Whitmer said.  “I think right now in this hyperpolarized moment everyone is looking for fault in one another, and it’s unfortunate. I’m hoping that as time goes by we can get back to a place where we give each other the benefit of the doubt. Where we don’t seek to find faults with one another immediately, where we try to all rise to the occasion,” Whitmer said. “That’s exactly what I’ve been trying to implore people of our state to do, and certainly something that is incumbent on all of us.” Whitmer has acknowledged that she’s had a conversation with the Biden campaign on being a potential running mate, but demurred when asked whether she would pick herself as Vice President if she were in his position. When asked about Biden’s pledge to pick a woman, she said simply: “That was his pledge, you know, and I think, for a lot of reasons, that was the right thing to do.”  Write to Lissandra Villa at lissandra.villa@time.com and Molly Ball at molly.ball@time.com.

Nicholas Johnson is Princeton’s first black valedictorian, an empowering achievement, he says in a video series TIME is producing with Katie Couric. In the video above, Johnson speaks with Couric about how Princeton’s historical ties to slavery shaped his feelings about being named valedictorian. Johnson is graduating at the top of a class whose members are entering a world made even more uncertain by the COVID-19 pandemic. As he gets ready to address his classmates on May 31, Johnson says he hopes to inspire them not to feel powerless. “Have faith. This too will pass,” he says. “Just as many challenging events before us have passed.” “I think being the first black valedictorian is an extremely significant event,” he says. “The fact that it has taken so long for there to be a black valedictorian also speaks to how much work still needs to be done. Ideally we need to strive for a world where this type of achievement is more normalized.” Established in 1746, Princeton University is among the oldest higher-education institutes in the United States. As Johnson notes in the video, the first nine presidents of Princeton, as well as several professors, enslaved black people. Black students were not admitted to the school until 1942. This interview is part of a special series produced in collaboration with Katie Couric. See more from TIME Reports with Katie Couric, and sign up for her weekday morning newsletter Wake-Up Call with Katie Couric. Write to Mahita Gajanan at mahita.gajanan@time.com.

When international aid agency Doctors Without Borders took over management of the COVID-19 treatment center at a hospital in the Yemeni city of Aden on May 7, one of the immediate challenges was convincing cleaners, porters, and even some of the hospital’s doctors that the novel coronavirus existed, and could make them sick. “After years of war, after years of having no proper services, people in general don’t trust what the media says, and they don’t trust the authorities,” the center’s deputy project co-ordinator Mohammed Abdulrahim told TIME by phone from Aden on May 24. “At the beginning, we had medical staff getting sick. They had direct contact with patients without taking precautions like putting on masks—they just treated it like a normal disease.” Staff misperceptions of COVID-19 were just one of the obstacles Abdulrahim and his team faced. Before Doctors Without Borders (MSF) took over the al-Amal facility’s management there was no dedicated ambulance for coronavirus patients, and a political dispute meant Yemen’s government had stopped paying staff salaries, leading to a wave of resignations. Three weeks into its tenure, dire shortages of PPE and oxygen remain, and dozens of MSF staff are off sick in Aden. The frontline medics at al-Amal are just a handful of the people struggling to prop up a healthcare system devastated by more than five years of war. After Saudi Arabia, the UAE and other Arab nations intervened to drive Iran-backed Houthi rebels from Yemen’s capital Sana’a in 2015, Yemen’s civil conflict has left more than 100,000 people dead, displaced millions, and led to what the U.N. calls the world’s worst man-made humanitarian crisis. Now, the coronavirus is here and spreading silently through the country. Although testing is almost non-existent, doctors at the only dedicated COVID-19 treatment center in Yemen’s south say they are struggling to cope with a 40% mortality rate and a growing caseload of patients. “The team is under permanent stress with staff missing or not trained enough,” Marc Schakal, MSF’s deputy operations manager for Yemen tells TIME by phone from Dubai. “There are very difficult clinical decisions to take for the doctors to make: We are obliged to set admission criteria based on age and chances of survival at the end.” As harrowing as conditions are inside the treatment center, MSF doctors believe they are seeing “just the tip of the iceberg,” Shakal says, “We are really worried about much older people who are not able to reach the center, and who are dying in the community.” Yemen’s official coronavirus caseload, among the lowest in the Middle East, is almost certainly misleading. As of May 28, the World Health Organization had recorded only 253 confirmed cases and 50 deaths among a population of 28 million. In neighboring Oman, authorities have confirmed over 8,000 cases with a population one-sixth the size. The country has a miniscule casecount only because of the near-total absence of testing. So far, authorities have performed fewer than 1,000 COVID-19 tests, or 31 per 1 million citizens. That’s a lower per capita figure than in northeast Syria, Chad, or Idlib.  The observations of doctors at al-Amal’s COVID treatment center cast further doubt on official figures. Between April 30 and May 24, the center admitted 228 patients suffering from coronavirus-like symptoms. Of those patients, 99 have died, or more than 40%. With the center permanently full, MSF is now expanding capacity to a total of 80 beds, up from 50 when it took over on May 7. Facilities like this are desperately needed in a country with a barely functioning healthcare system. Half of the country’s hospitals and clinics have been destroyed or shut over the course of the war, and earlier this month, the Associated Press reported that 18% of Yemen’s 333 districts do not have a single doctor. The splintered country, which is controlled by various armed factions, is not anywhere close to being equipped to deal with an epidemic —according to a May 18 UNOCHA situation report, Yemen currently has fewer than 150 ventilators, about 500 ICU beds, and only five labs capable of conducting COVID-19 tests.  In Aden “some hospitals have closed because they’re worried about contamination, or because of lack of essential supplies that could protect the health of workers,” says MSF’s Schakal. Others have reportedly turned away patients who have sought help for breathing difficulties. Although the MSF center still lacks sufficient staff numbers and PPE, oxygen is its most urgent need. Every day, the agency says, its COVID-19 center gets through 250 40-liter oxygen cylinders. Yemen has a total stockpile of under 12,000 cylinders for the entire country. Al-Amal’s alarming death rate is in part due to patients arriving at a very late stage in COVID-19’s progression, MSF’s doctors say. But what is especially striking is that most of the dead are between 40 and 60 years old—considerably younger than the majority of those who have succumbed to the disease in European hospitals. While it’s possible that environmental stressors make Yemen’s population more vulnerable to COVID-19, doctors suspect the high death rate means many more people in Aden—particularly the elderly—are dying at home without seeking treatment. It’s a hypothesis reflected in the city’s burial rates. On May 14, Save the Children reported that 380 people in the city had died of “coronavirus-like symptoms” in a single week. On the same date, the official fatality rate for the whole of Yemen was just 13. By late May, government burial statistics revealed that as many as 80 people were dying every day in Aden, compared to a pre-outbreak normal of 10. “We don’t have visibility on the epidemiological curve, so we don’t really know when it stops,” Schakal tells TIME. “We don’t know if we are on the way up, at the top, or on the way down.” All of this is taking place against the backdrop of an ongoing war. Yemen’s conflict pits Houthi rebels, who control Sana’a and the country’s north, against a Saudi Arabia-led coalition that holds sway in the south and is fighting to restore the exiled internationally-recognized government. Saudi airstrikes—using U.S. and U.K. supplied munitions—have been responsible for the majority of the destruction of civilian infrastructure like hospitals. A respite from the fighting might have come on April 8, when Saudi Arabia announced a two-week ceasefire in Yemen, which it extended for an additional month on April 24. But humanitarian groups say the truce—which was denounced as a media ploy by the Houthis—heralded an initial rise rather than a fall in violence. The Saudi Arabia-led coalition accused the Houthis of breaching its unilateral “ceasefire” 241 times in 48 hours. In the two weeks after it was announced “we definitely saw a spike in violence from both sides, there was an increase in the number of casualties, the number of displacements, and the number of airstrikes,” says International Rescue Committee’s Yemen director Tamuna Sabadze. As of May 18, Houthi authorities had reported only four cases of COVID-19 and one death—all in Sana’a. But the Aden-based government in Yemen’s south has accused the rebels of covering up a larger outbreak. “It’s difficult to say how many have it,” the International Committee of the Red Cross’s (ICRC) Yemen director Franz Rauchenstein tells TIME from Sana’a. “We presume that there is a rather widespread transmission in the north.” But it is not only the infected who are impacted. COVID-19 has contributed to increases in the price of basic food items and a drop in remittances from migrant workers—one of the country’s most important sources of income—since the pandemic began. That’s life-threatening in a country where even before the pandemic only 15% of children were eating the minimum acceptable diet for survival, growth, and development; and whose farms face the additional threat of massive locust swarms. Doctors also fear that COVID-19 could inhibit Yemen’s ability to cope with other health crises. Recent flooding across the country has contributed to outbreaks of mosquito-borne malaria, dengue, and chikungunya. In the first six months of 2019, Save the Children recorded almost half a million suspected cholera cases. While Yemen has not experienced a major cholera outbreak this year, it remains a risk in a country where more than 80% of the population lacks access to clean drinking water. Rather than a standalone problem, the global pandemic adds another layer to Yemen’s already complex crisis. “The tricky thing is that corona actually reduces the efficiency of humanitarian actors, and it reduces the efficiency of an economy,” says ICRC’s Rauchenstein. “These secondary effects of the coronavirus are weakening Yemen even more, and lowering its resilience.” On May 24, Mohammed Abdulrahim and his wife, a pharmacist at the nearby MSF managed trauma unit, enjoyed a rare day off work for the Muslim holiday of Eid. Rather than visiting relatives according to tradition, they spent the day together at home. But outside, Aden’s streets were as busy as usual. Despite authorities encouraging people to observe social distancing measures, men still visited markets to buy khat—a narcotic leaf chewed by many Yemenis—children went from house to house collecting candies, and families gathered in parks. Yemenis’ resistance to social distancing is not only down to public skepticism over information authorities have put out, says Abdulrahim. Even if people believe official messaging, most of Aden’s population relies on daily work to feed their families. “Either people stay at home, where the electricity cuts out and they die because they’re starving, or they die because of corona,” he tells TIME. “Both ways, they are dead. So, they stop thinking and they just continue their life.” Write to Joseph Hincks at joseph.hincks@time.com.

(BLANTYRE, Malawi) — Manhunts have begun after hundreds of people, some with the coronavirus, fled quarantine centers in Zimbabwe and Malawi while authorities worry they will spread COVID-19 in countries whose health systems can be rapidly overwhelmed. In Malawi, more than 400 people recently repatriated from South Africa and elsewhere fled a center at a stadium in Blantyre, jumping over a fence or strolling out the gate while police and health workers watched. Police and health workers told reporters they were unable to stop them as they lacked adequate protective gear. At least 46 escapees had tested positive for the virus. Some of those who fled told reporters they had bribed police. And in Zimbabwe, police spokesman Paul Nyathi said officers were “hunting down” more than 100 people who escaped from centers where a 21-day quarantine is mandatory for those returning from abroad. Read more: Few Doctors, Fewer Ventilators: African Countries Fear They Are Defenseless Against Inevitable Spread of Coronavirus “They escape and sneak into the villages … We are warning people to stop sheltering them. These escapees are becoming a serious danger to communities,” Nyathi said. Nearly all of Zimbabwe’s 75 new cases this week came from the centers that hold hundreds of people who have returned, sometimes involuntarily, from neighboring South Africa and Botswana. The quarantine centers have become “our source of danger,” Health Minister Obadiah Moyo told a special parliamentary committee this week. Both Zimbabwe and Malawi have fewer than 200 confirmed cases but regional power South Africa, where many in both countries go to seek work, has more than 25,000. South Africa has the most cases in Africa, where the continent-wide total is nearly 125,000. Zimbabwe’s information minister, Monica Mutsvangwa, on Wednesday told reporters that the government is increasing security at the schools, colleges and hotels used as quarantine centers. Government spokesman Nick Mangwana suggested that security officers guarding centers with high walls and razor wire might be receiving bribes to allow people to leave early. Zimbabwe’s government is also worried about people crossing porous borders and failing to report at quarantine centers. The information ministry has begun sharing a hotline number and asking people to stop harboring “border jumpers” and those who “abscond” from quarantine. Malawi saw another mass escape earlier this week when 26 people left the Mwanza border post while waiting for test results. People arriving in the country face a mandatory 14-day quarantine. The Blantyre district director of health and social services, Gift Kawalazira, said they were overwhelmed when more than 2,000 people turned up at the border post in Mwanza over the weekend. Holding some in the stadium was a last-minute resort after plans to use education facilities failed for lack of funds, he said. “They will be moving around while trying to elude authorities,” he said of the escapees, including a smaller group that slipped away from a Blantyre center on Monday. Eight had tested positive for the virus. “People need to understand that it is not punishment but we are only doing this to protect the general public,” Kawalazira said. Few prevention measures could be seen at the stadium, with people leaving freely to buy food from nearby vendors. They told reporters they had received no food from authorities since Monday. Relatives of some of the returnees entered the stadium to visit, giving loved ones hugs. ___ Mutsaka reported from Harare, Zimbabwe. Contact us at editors@time.com.

Hunger is a powerful force in The Grapes of Wrath, John Steinbeck’s 1939 novel of the Great Depression, but so is the fertility of California’s landscape. The bounty of the harvest, tragically, does not translate into food for the workers — and in fact, with the economy having ravaged the chain of commerce, much of the food is destroyed rather than eaten. “The works of the roots of the vines, of the trees, must be destroyed to keep up the price, and this is the saddest, bitterest thing of all,” Steinbeck wrote. “Carloads of oranges dumped on the ground…a million people hungry, needing the fruit — and kerosene sprayed over the golden mountains.” Steinbeck’s observations were a depiction of reality: During the Great Depression, plummeting prices and adverse weather conditions resulted in a crisis for the U.S. farming industry and its stock. Government intervention in the early 1930s led to “emergency livestock reductions,” which saw hundreds of thousands of pigs and cattle killed, and crops destroyed as Steinbeck described, on the idea that less supply would lead to higher prices. Now, as experts warn that the economic effects of the ongoing coronavirus pandemic could be comparable to the Great Depression in the U.S. and around the world, and as the International Monetary Fund predicts that the “Great Lockdown” could cause the worst recession since the 1930s, similar scenes of crop destruction have taken place, with reports of U.S. farmers having to make difficult choices to dump their milk, slaughter their livestock and smash their eggs. And around the world, COVID-19 has brought food supply chains to a standstill, as farmers in China have been unable to sell their produce at closed wet markets and unable to access animal feed; in the U.K. and Germany, there has been a shortage of workers to help with the spring harvest due to lockdown and self-isolation measures. As advocates mark World Hunger Day on May 28, experts and officials around the world are hoping they can avoid adding mass hunger to the list of parallels many have seen between that period and today. The onset of the Great Depression after 1929 left many U.S. farmers in financial ruin as prices dropped and they were left with huge surpluses of stock; in California alone in 1932, farmers unable to shift their stock lost nearly 3 million watermelons and 22.4 million pounds of tomatoes to rot. Unemployment and poverty soared, not just in the U.S., but in much of Europe and in the U.K., where manufacturing took a major hit due to declining exports. President Herbert Hoover, who downplayed the early impact of the Depression, said in 1931 that “no one is actually starving” — the same year makeshift breadlines popped up around New York City and were serving some 85,000 meals per day, according to historians Jane Ziegelman and Andrew Coe. Across the country, families restricted their diets, which caused health conditions that had consequences even into the interwar years, as prospective soldiers failed their physical examinations due to vitamin deficiency. In 1932 and 1933, both in the U.S. and farther afield in Canada and the U.K, a series of popular protests dubbed “hunger marches” drew attention to the plight of the unemployed. Get your history fix in one place: sign up for the weekly TIME History newsletter After President Franklin D. Roosevelt took office in 1933, one part of his New Deal program to revive the American economy was to eliminate the surplus stock, and pay farmers a subsidy to do so. This policy became the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 (AAA), and led to depressing scenes as farmers were forced to kill their pigs and burn their corn. Under the AAA, even as poverty soared, farmers could receive payment for not producing food. The government would also buy out livestock or harvests — to the tune of six million hogs nationwide — and kill or get rid of it. In Nebraska alone, the government bought hundreds of thousands of cattle and pigs. Millions of acres of cotton in the South were also plowed under. Similar levels of destruction happened in other countries; in Brazil between 1931 and 1934, more than a year’s global supply of coffee, totaling more than 28 million bags, was destroyed. Then as now, people could see the bitter irony of the situation. “There is a failure here that topples all our success,” Steinbeck wrote. “And coroners must fill in the certificates — died of malnutrition — because the food must rot, must be forced to rot.” The U.S. government wasn’t only asking farmers to destroy food; at the same time, it was also purchasing and distributing food to the hungry — but the idea of any such destruction was hard to stomach. “Although one hundred million pounds of pork were processed for relief purposes, the idea of waste, and stories about the bodies of little pigs floating down the Mississippi River continued for years,” writes historian C. Roger Lambert. And while pork products, cheese, flour and butter were initially redistributed to unemployed families, there wasn’t a nationwide effort to redistribute food until later in the year, when criticism of the widespread waste became part of the public debate. In autumn 1933, Roosevelt provided $75 million to purchase agricultural products to feed the needy, and the government set up the Federal Surplus Relief Corporation (FSRC), which helped redistribute surplus food to the hungry. There were complexities and limits to the effectiveness of the AAA and the FSRC. The AAA benefited farmers by raising their incomes, and provided a framework for federal support for agriculture that lasted well beyond the Depression, as the Act was repeatedly revised and amended over a 60 year period. Some farmers at the time felt that the FSRC’s distribution efforts undermined the economics of the AAA, and — at a time when the idea of direct federal relief was still relatively new in the United States — the program was not a silver bullet for solving hunger. In retrospect, some historians have argued that the government ended up prioritizing agricultural demands rather than seeing a responsibility to feed the needy with surplus food. It was a persistent problem; in 1972, historian Lambert wrote that the whims of agricultural bureaucrats and rural congressmen were still consistently opposing “realistic efforts to resolve the paradox of ‘want in the midst of plenty.'” More than three-quarters of a century later, as the world faces another hunger crisis, efforts are already underway to prevent food from going to waste the way it did back then. In April, the U.S. Department of Agriculture announced it was purchasing up to $3 billion in fresh produce, meat and dairy supplies from farmers to redistribute to the needy via relief organizations, and in New York, the state is working with dairy farmers and cheese and yogurt manufacturers to turn excess milk into other products rather than dumping it. Meanwhile, as TIME reported earlier this year, before the pandemic took hold in the U.S., American milk producers have been struggling due to declining demand, and increasing numbers of small family farms have filed for bankruptcy, but many in the struggling industry are looking for ways to keep their businesses afloat while also feeding those who need it. The stakes couldn’t be higher. Earlier this week, the U.N.’s World Food Program’s Chief Economist Arif Husain told TIME that the world is facing an “unprecedented” food crisis due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with an estimated 265 million people projected to go hungry in 2020, adding a global dimension to the contrasting actions of farmers who are having to destroy their stocks. Husain warned that countries need to work together to protect those living in already vulnerable situations, and that agricultural sector workers need to be treated as key workers too. Writing in the late 1930s, Steinbeck too observed the impact of hunger on the working class, and how the paradoxical waste of food destruction would enrage those on the brink of survival. In fact, the passage that gave the novel its title came after a description of burning corn and dumping potatoes in rivers: “In the eyes of the hungry there is a growing wrath. In the souls of the people the grapes of wrath are filling and growing heavy, growing heavy for the vintage.” Contact us at editors@time.com.

(London) — British police said Thursday that Prime Minister Boris Johnson’s adviser Dominic Cummings likely broke the rules by traveling away from home during lockdown, but will not face further action. Cummings has acknowledged driving 250 miles (400 km) to his parents’ house in Durham, northeast England, during the lockdown, and later taking another drive to a scenic town 30 miles (50 km) away. Durham Constabulary said that the second drive, to the town of Barnard Castle, might have been “a minor breach” of lockdown rules “that would have warranted police intervention” had he been caught in the act. But the force said “there is no intention to take retrospective action.” Johnson has resisted calls to fire Cummings for apparently flouting restrictions that the government imposed on the rest of the country. Cummings has defended his actions, saying he traveled to ensure that his 4-year-old son could be looked after if he and his wife, who both had coronavirus symptoms, became sick. He says he drove to Barnard Castle to test whether his eyesight, which had been affected by illness, was good enough for the long trip back to London. His explanation failed to assuage the anger among many Britons who have endured two months of isolation from loved ones during the pandemic and see a double standard at work. Johnson has stood by his aide. His office said “the police have made clear they are taking no action against Mr Cummings over his self-isolation and that going to Durham did not breach the regulations” and the prime minister “regards this issue as closed.” Contact us at editors@time.com.

(Washington D.C.) — An estimated 2.1 million Americans applied for unemployment benefits last week despite the gradual reopening of businesses around the country, bringing the running total since the coronavirus shutdowns took hold in mid-March to about 41 million, the government said Thursday. The figures underscored the continuing damage to businesses and livelihoods from the outbreak that has now killed at least 100,000 people in the U.S., more than the number of Americans lost in the Vietnam and Korean wars combined, and more than 33 times the death toll on 9/11. The U.S. unemployment rate was 14.7% in April, the highest since the Great Depression, and many economists expect it will near 20% in May. First-time applications for unemployment, though still extraordinarily high, have fallen for eight straight weeks, and states are gradually letting stores, restaurants, salons, gyms and other businesses reopen. But other employers are still laying off workers in the face of a deep recession. The Labor Department included a positive sign: The number of people now receiving benefits fell for the first time since the outbreak intensified in mid-March, from 25 million to 21 million. That suggests companies are starting to rehire and could mean that total job losses will peak in May. Elsewhere around the world, India saw another record daily jump in coronavirus cases, while Russia reported a steady increase in its caseload, even as the city of Moscow and provinces across the vast country moved to ease restrictions in sync with the Kremlin’s political agenda. India, home to more than 1.3 billion people, reported more than 6,500 new infections, bringing the nation’s total to over 158,000. The spike comes as the nation’s 2-month-old lockdown is set to end Sunday. The country has recorded over 4,500 deaths. Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s government is preparing guidelines to be issued this weekend, possibly extending the lockdown in hard-hit areas. Earlier this month, the country allowed the reopening of shops and factories and the resumption of some train service and domestic flights. Meanwhile, India’s top court ordered state authorities to provide free train rides and proper food and water to hundreds of thousands of poor migrant workers returning to their villages in the blazing heat after being thrown out of work in the cities and towns. TV images have shown desperate and hungry migrants looting food carts at train stations, and at least four people have died on the trains this week as daytime temperatures climbed to 113 degrees Fahrenheit (45 Celsius). South Korea on Thursday reported its biggest jump in coronavirus cases in more than 50 days, a setback that could erase some of the hard-won gains that have made it a model for the rest of the world. In Russia, President Vladimir Putin announced earlier this week that the country’s postponed Victory Day military parade marking the 75th anniversary of the Nazi defeat in World War II will be held June 24, declaring the nation has passed the peak of the outbreak. Russian media reported that the Kremlin now also plans to go ahead with another high-priority item on Putin’s political agenda — a referendum on constitutional amendments that could allow him to remain in power through 2036. He postponed the vote in April because of the outbreak. The government reported more than 8,300 new infections Thursday, down from more than 11,000 earlier this month. The total number of infections topped 379,000, the world’s third-largest caseload behind that of the United States and Brazil. Russian officials reported 174 new deaths, for a total of almost 4,150. Some Kremlin critics allege that the relatively low mortality rate reflects manipulation by authorities trying to set a positive environment for the parade and the constitutional vote. Russian officials have angrily rejected the allegations. Moscow, which accounted for about half of all infections, ordered an easing of the tight lockdown in place since late March, saying that non-food stores, dry cleaners and repair shops can reopen on Monday. The mayor also announced that residents will be allowed to walk in the parks with some restrictions and engage in sports in the mornings. Across the vast country, numerous provinces already have eased the lockdowns. In the U.S., Las Vegas casinos and Walt Disney World have made plans to reopen, and crowds of unmasked Americans are expected to swarm beaches over the summer months. Public health officials predict a resurgence by fall. Despite the risks, the pressure for easing restrictions has risen across the globe as the economic pain has worsened. French unemployment claims jumped 22% in April, as 843,000 more people sought work and the virus lockdown prevented companies from hiring. The jobless ranks in France don’t include 8 million people who received paycheck subsidies from the government. Worldwide, the virus has infected more than 5.7 million people and killed over 355,000, with the U.S. having the most confirmed cases and deaths, according to a tally by Johns Hopkins University. Europe has recorded about 170,000 deaths. The true death toll from the virus is widely believed to be significantly higher, with experts saying many victims died without ever being tested. Some nations are seeing improvements. New cases in Spain and Italy have fallen steadily for two months. China reported just two new cases on Thursday, both from abroad. New Zealand has reported no new cases for six days and has just eight active cases remaining. Contact us at editors@time.com.

On May 7, Craig Martin sent what would be the first of many emails to administrators at the company that runs The Wellington at Lake Manassas, his mother’s assisted living facility in Gainesville, Va. Another resident had tested positive for COVID-19 days earlier while being treated at a local hospital, and Martin and his brother were getting nervous. In their eyes, The Wellington was relying on measures, like social distancing and monitoring residents for symptoms, that were designed to keep the virus out—when the virus was already inside. In his email, Martin urged administrators to test residents “early and often,” even if they weren’t showing symptoms. “We just want to be sure that Wellington is doing all that it can to prevent a massive outbreak and additionally ensure that our mother is not infected,” Martin wrote. By May 11, his 81-year-old mother had tested positive for COVID-19. She’d developed a fever and gastrointestinal distress, so Martin and his brother called her physician outside the facility, who requested a coronavirus test for her. Though her condition is stable as of May 27, Martin says he fears the worst. “What’s infuriating,” Martin says, “is I think it could have been avoided.” Families like Martin’s are learning a hard truth. Assisted living facilities, home to about 800,000 older Americans, have been largely overlooked in coronavirus-relief efforts, leaving many facilities underregulated, understaffed and underfunded. As a result, families and caregivers say, their residents are “falling through the cracks.” Assisted living facilities struggled with safety, funding and staffing issues well before COVID-19 hit. They’re set up mainly to provide domestic support to seniors, as opposed to nursing homes, which can perform a higher level of medical care; they’re also less likely to be covered by Medicaid or Medicare than nursing homes. Accordingly, assisted living facilities are not subject to as many federal regulations as nursing homes. Nursing homes—which themselves have a spotty safety record—have become a high priority for lawmakers and public-health officials during the pandemic, following several devastating coronavirus clusters in long-term care facilities. Roughly 42% of U.S. coronavirus deaths have occurred in nursing homes and assisted living facilities, according to a May 22 analysis from the Foundation for Research on Equal Opportunity.     As a result, about a dozen states have taken steps to support, and in some cases even mandate, universal coronavirus testing for nursing home residents and employees, and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) called universal testing a prerequisite for nursing homes thinking of easing disease-containment restrictions. Nursing homes have a long way to go, and many are still struggling to get access to the tests they need—but assisted living facilities are even further behind. Many of the policies on the books for nursing homes don’t apply to assisted living facilities, meaning many facilities have no legal requirement to carry out precautions like wide-scale testing, and few resources even if they want to do so. The Department of Health and Human Services has so far earmarked at least $4.9 billion in aid funding for skilled nursing facilities, but none for assisted living. “We are asking for additional consideration for all long term care facilities, whether it be in regard to additional testing, personal protective equipment, or funding,” the American Health Care Association and National Center for Assisted Living said in a May 22 statement. As Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren noted at a May 21 Senate Special Committee on Aging hearing, assisted living facilities are also not subject to the same reporting requirements as nursing homes, which must notify residents, their families and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention when they confirm a COVID-19 case on their premises. “Assisted living facility residents and their families deserve to know whether their facilities are experiencing a coronavirus outbreak, just like nursing home residents,” Warren said, adding that she and colleagues in the Senate are launching an investigation into America’s assisted living facilities. That focus is long overdue, families say. “I understand the focus on nursing homes, but I feel like assisted living facilities haven’t gotten as much attention,” says Craig Crawford, a 62-year-old living in Washington, D.C., whose 93-year-old father lives in a Florida assisted living facility. “Assisted living facilities have been kind of the orphans in this process.” Without state assistance, Crawford’s father’s facility was so desperate for help securing supplies like tests and personal protective equipment (PPE) that it urged family members to call Florida’s elected officials, he says. On the same day Crawford called the office of Val Demings, the Democratic Representative for Florida’s 10th district, the facility announced it had gotten PPE and access to tests, Crawford says. Other families have had a tougher road. When Martin first contacted staff at The Wellington’s parent company, Retirement Unlimited, Inc. (RUI), he claims they told him they had no obligation to test all residents since they ran an assisted living facility, not a nursing home. “It’s the same demographic,” Martin says. “The virus doesn’t care [where] it’s going to spread.” When Martin raised his concerns with the company’s executive vice president of clinical services, he was allegedly told it wasn’t feasible to test all staff members, because doing so could create staffing shortages if employees tested positive and needed to be quarantined. “At that point I knew his goal was very different than mine,” Martin says. “He saw having a staffing concern as a bigger problem than a global pandemic ravaging through his assisted living facility.” A spokesperson for RUI said The Wellington is following guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and its local health department, and noted that there are “many and varied reasons why universal testing may or may not be prescribed by the Department of Health.” The spokesperson said the facility has implemented precautions including restricting visitors and resident trips in and out of the facility, enforcing social distancing, doing extra cleaning, monitoring residents and staff members for symptoms and requiring employees to wear PPE—though Martin says he and his brother have seen staffers flouting that rule during video chats and socially distant visits. The Wellington tested all residents within its memory care unit, where Martin’s mother lives, for COVID-19 on May 14, the spokesperson says, but Martin continues to push for testing for all residents and staff members. One man, who asked to remain anonymous to avoid possible negative consequences for his father’s care, had a similar experience with his dad’s facility: Brookdale Senior Living in Arlington, Va. The roughly 120-person facility has suffered multiple deaths and more than 30 COVID-19 cases, but for weeks refused to test any residents who were not showing symptoms, even when questioned by family members on weekly video calls with the facility’s administrators, the man says. His father finally got a test on May 18 and results came back negative, but the man says Brookdale still has no plan for consistent testing moving forward. A spokesperson for Brookdale says the facility is following state and local public-health guidance, and performed universal testing as soon as it had the resources to do so. “As soon as community-wide testing for assisted living communities was available in Virginia, Brookdale Arlington worked with the National Guard, who was charged with overseeing such testing, to ensure the residents and associates of the community were tested,” the spokesperson said. The Brookdale representative said case and fatality counts are shared with residents, their families and health authorities, but cannot be disclosed externally. The whole experience, the resident’s son says, has made him painfully aware that his father’s facility was not ready for a disease outbreak. “You start recognizing what ‘assisted living’ is,” he says. “I refer to them as motels, basically. But they present themselves as health care facilities.” Kayla Van Rossum, who directs an assisted living facility outside Phoenix, Az., says it’s more complicated than that. She says she’s desperate for testing and PPE, but isn’t getting what she needs from the state government. When it came time to designate essential businesses during the pandemic, Arizona declared long-term care facilities necessary for “human services”—but Van Rossum says Arizona hasn’t offered the support and resources she needs to function like an essential service during the crisis. So far, at least one of Van Rossum’s 70 residents has gotten seriously ill with COVID-19, and two of her 70 staff members have tested positive and been quarantined. And just down the road, a similar facility lost 30 of its residents when the virus started spreading inside, Van Rossum says—a constant reminder of how much could go wrong for hers. “It’s horrible and absolutely heartbreaking because we don’t have what we need,” she says. Other assisted living directors are also speaking out. The CEO of Sunrise Senior Living, a national chain of long-term care facilities, is coordinating a letter-writing campaign to Congress, asking for federal funding to help with testing, PPE acquisition and other coronavirus-related necessities. But for many families, the damage has already been done. The Brookdale resident’s son says he was never happy knowing his father was in an assisted living facility—it’s an area of contention within his family—but he’s now become even more disillusioned with the system. “I think assisted living is an oversold product,” he says. “It basically is our laziness in dealing with aging care in our country.” But people like Martin continue to fight for better testing and disease-control practices in his mother’s facility, even as she lies sick with COVID-19, in hopes of securing a safer future. “It might be too late for mom,” Martin says. “But if my experience can help others, that could be of value—I hope.” Write to Jamie Ducharme at jamie.ducharme@time.com.

WASHINGTON (AP) — Defense Secretary Mark Esper said that as the U.S. military prepares for another potential wave of the coronavirus, it may do things a bit differently, providing more targeted aid for cities and states and possibly shorter quarantine times for troops. Speaking as he flew back from a trip to the Marine Corps recruit base at Parris Island, South Carolina, Esper said the Pentagon is looking at a variety of plans. But he said U.S. forces may not be deployed the same way if or when the virus surges in a second large wave or even, more likely, a series of smaller bursts. He also said that the military has already started doing antibody tests on service members who had COVID-19 and recovered, in order to determine if their plasma can be used in others to prevent or treat the virus. Esper said he spoke with military service leaders the other day and asked if they would be interested in getting units of blood or plasma to send aboard ships or with deployed forces to use as needed. And he said they all responded that it would be helpful. Esper said he has taken the test to see if he has the virus antibodies but doesn’t yet have the results. Unlike the nasal swab tests being used to diagnose active infections, antibody tests look for blood proteins called antibodies, which the body produces days or weeks after fighting an infection. The blood test could show if someone had the coronavirus in the recent past, which most experts think gives people some protection. It’s not yet known what antibody level would be needed for immunity or how long any immunity might last and whether people with antibodies can still spread the virus. The Pentagon, Esper said, is also taking a broad look at how best to respond to any future outbreaks. Noting that a lot of the military aid rushed to communities as the pandemic struck ended up going unused or was used much less than anticipated, he said the military may send medical staff rather than entire hospital ships and Army field hospitals. The two U.S. Navy hospital ships that went to New York City and Los Angeles, for example, treated few patients. And Army field hospitals deployed to other cities also got less use than initially anticipated. Instead, they ended up pulling doctors and nurses out of those facilities and sending them to local hospitals, where they could bolster overworked and stressed medical staffs. “I think that’s a big lesson learned,” Esper said. Saying that he and Gen. Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, think the virus may come back in smaller waves, Esper said the result may be that the military may be more likely to provide personal protective equipment and doctors to cities in need. “If one were to assume that the biggest wave that hit is the first wave, we’ve demonstrated that we have the hospital capacity, the ventilator capacity, all those other,” Esper said. “If we can handle that first wave, we can handle anything else after that.” Esper added that Dr. Anthony Fauci, the federal government’s top infectious-disease expert, and Dr. Deborah Birx, the White House coronavirus task force coordinator, suggested in a recent Pentagon meeting that a 14-day quarantine may not be necessary. He said they thought fewer days might work, and the Pentagon is looking at that idea now. Contact us at editors@time.com.

O’FALLON, Mo. — The owner of a business that hosted crowded pool parties over the Memorial Day weekend at Missouri’s Lake of the Ozarks says no laws were broken and safety measures were in place to protect against the spread of the coronavirus. Social media postings over the weekend showed large crowds of mostly young people without masks and not adhering to social distancing guidelines at pools along the central Missouri lake that is a popular weekend getaway for people in the state and the surrounding region. Many of photos and videos showed people in an area of the lake nicknamed “Party Cove.” Political leaders in St. Louis, St. Louis County and Kansas City, along with Kansas’ health secretary, encouraged 14-day self-quarantines for anyone involved in the parties. Some labeled the gatherings “reckless” and worried that revelers would return home after becoming unwittingly exposed to the virus that causes COVID-19 and potentially spread it to others. St. Louis County Executive Sam Page, a Democrat and a medical doctor, noted studies suggest people can be infected with the virus without feeling sick. Those people can then spread the virus to older adults and people with existing health problems who are more vulnerable to more severe illness, including pneumonia, and death. “The pictures that emerged from Lake of the Ozarks over the weekend were an international example of bad behavior,” Page said Wednesday. Backwater Jacks, a bar and restaurant that has a pool, was among the places with big crowds. Owner Gary Prewitt said in a statement that no laws were broken, though the images appeared to show people violating Republican Gov. Mike Parson’s state order requiring social distancing. Prewitt’s statement said temperatures were checked at the pool entrance by medical staff hired for the event and free bottles of hand sanitizer were distributed. Staff members were given the option not to work. The statement noted that the business is seasonal and about one-third of its busy season has already been lost due to coronavirus-related closures. “We stand by our decision to move forward with Memorial Day Weekend plans,” Prewitt’s statement said. Although Missouri’s social distancing order gives enforcement authority to both the state and local health departments, Parson has said enforcement responsibility lies with local health departments. The health director in one lake-area county, Morgan, said he had no enforcement authority. The health director in Camden County, where Backwater Jacks is located, did not respond to email messages seeking comment. Parson allowed businesses and attractions to reopen May 4, but the state order requires 6-foot (2-meter) social distancing through at least the end of May. St. Louis and St. Louis County are just now phasing in reopening because COVID-19, the illness caused by the virus, was so devastating there. More than half of Missouri’s confirmed cases have occurred in those locations, along with more than two-thirds of the state’s deaths. The state health department on Wednesday reported 201 new cases, bringing the total to 12,492, and 10 more deaths, reaching 696. Parson, asked during his afternoon news conference if the state would make layoffs due to the economic fallout of the shutdown, said it’s too early to know but didn’t rule it out. “Everything’s going to be on the table right now to make the budget balance,” Parson said. ___ Ballentine reported from Columbia, Mo. Contact us at editors@time.com.

In one cruise-ship coronavirus outbreak, more than 80% of people who tested positive for COVID-19 did not show any symptoms of the disease, according to a new paper published in the journal Thorax. The research shows just how prevalent asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 may be—a reality that both suggests official case counts are drastic underestimates, and emphasizes the importance of practicing social distancing even if you feel healthy. Researchers have known for months that asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 is possible and common, but without population-wide testing, it’s been difficult to estimate how many people get infected without showing symptoms. The new paper provides an example of how widespread asymptomatic transmission can be, at least in a contained environment. The (unnamed) cruise ship in the new paper left Argentina in mid-March, with plans to travel around the Antarctic Peninsula and over to South Georgia Island in the south Atlantic ocean. All passengers were checked for coronavirus symptoms before departure, and people who had traveled through COVID-19 hotspots were not allowed on board. Even still, a passenger developed a fever eight days into the trip, triggering a ship-wide lockdown. Crew members and additional passengers began to develop coronavirus symptoms over the next few days. The ship was not allowed to re-dock in Argentina after the country closed its borders, so it continued on to Uruguay, where eight people were evacuated to a hospital. Uruguayan officials eventually arranged for everyone remaining on board to get tested before the boat docked. Out of 217 people on board, 128 tested positive for COVID-19—but only 24 of those people showed symptoms prior to testing. The remaining 104 people—81% of those who tested positive—had not experienced any symptoms, the researchers report. There were also 10 instances of people testing negative even when their cabin mate tested positive, which the authors say suggests there were some false-negative test results. It’s difficult to extrapolate the results to larger populations, since the people on board the ship were living in close quarters while entirely isolated from outside life for about a month. Even still, the results are a stark reminder of how likely COVID-19 is to spread within communities, and how difficult it can be to tell when it does. That’s a particularly important lesson to consider as states reopen and nice weather eats away at many people’s resolve to stay home. The virus can and does spread undetected—and an asymptomatic case can still cause serious illness if it spreads to someone else. Until a vaccine is available, the safest way to keep coronavirus from spreading is to keep your distance from others, whether you’re sick or not. Write to Jamie Ducharme at jamie.ducharme@time.com.

Four months after the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed in the U.S., the nation’s coronavirus death toll has surpassed 100,000, hitting 100,047 as of 6 p.m. Eastern Time on May 27, according to data compiled by the Center for Systems Science and Engineering at Johns Hopkins University. That’s the most confirmed deaths of any country in the world. It’s equivalent to the entire population of mid-sized cities like Albany, N.Y. or Boca Raton, Fla. It’s more American lives than were lost to the Korean War, the Vietnam War and the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks combined. It’s also on the low end of projected death estimates. In April, for example, White House officials warned that between 100,000 and 240,000 Americans could die from COVID-19, even with preventive measures like social distancing. Independent researchers have often produced even higher estimates. A Harvard health policy expert told NPR on May 26 that the U.S. could see an additional 100,000 COVID-19 deaths this summer alone. Daily U.S. coronavirus cases and deaths have declined substantially since a peak in April—including in many of the country’s hardest-hit areas, like New York City—but experts have warned that rural areas may not have seen the worst of COVID-19 yet. And despite the progress we’ve seen so far, hundreds of people in the U.S. are still dying from coronavirus each day. During the week ending May 26, about 7,000 people in the U.S. died from COVID-19, according to data from Johns Hopkins University’s COVID-19 tracker.  Though new diagnoses are starting to decrease, the U.S. leads the world in coronavirus cases, as well as deaths. As of 6 PM eastern on May 27, nearly 1.7 million cases have been reported in the U.S., according to Johns Hopkins data. (That’s an underestimate, if anything, given inadequate testing capacity and the number of people who develop mild illnesses and do not seek medical attention.) And after steady declines in the numbers of new confirmed cases each day, the trend seems to have reversed itself in recent days.  That’s likely in part because the country’s commitment to social distancing appears to be faltering as states reopen and summer weather draws people out of their homes. Though it may feel like the worst of the pandemic is behind us, a top World Health Organization official warned on May 26 that “we’re right in the middle of the first wave [of coronavirus cases] globally” and said “we’re still very much in a phase where the disease is actually on the way up” in many parts of the world. It’s impossible to predict exactly when COVID-19 cases and deaths will level off for good. But experts do know that, in the absence of a vaccine that can provide widespread immunity, social distancing is among the best—and only—ways to keep infection, hospitalization and death rates as low as possible. A Columbia University analysis published May 20 estimated that 36,000 lives could have been saved if the U.S. broadly adopted social-distancing policies a week earlier than many places did, in mid-March. The 100,000 lives already lost in the U.S. serve as a painful reminder of what happened instead. Write to Jamie Ducharme at jamie.ducharme@time.com.

President Trump wanted to see a rocket launch. On the day the U.S. topped 100,000 deaths from COVID-19, Trump was at Florida’s Kennedy Space Center to watch two astronauts blast off inside a capsule built by billionaire Elon Musk. The President may have been hoping for an escape—maybe not from the Earth, but from the drumbeat of devastating headlines. The stormy skies above Cape Canaveral seemed to echo Trump’s temper.  A tragic time for the country has become a dire moment for the President’s re-election prospects. The toll of the coronavirus pandemic is mounting, nearly 40 million Americans are out of work, and Trump is trailing presumptive Democratic nominee Joe Biden among key sectors of the population and in crucial swing states. His ability to communicate directly to his voters has been undercut by Twitter’s decision to begin fact-checking misinformation in his feed, and he still cannot hold the large rallies that are crucial to his campaign strategy.  The circumstances have left Trump fuming behind the scenes. The President believes he’s being unfairly blamed for the number of COVID-19 deaths in the U.S. and is losing the public relations battle over his handling of the pandemic, says a White House official.  In response, Trump has lashed out repeatedly at his critics, to a degree that is rare even for him. He has been stoking  unfounded conspiracies about a decades-old accidental death in the former congressional office of Joe Scarborough, now his cable news nemesis, prompting the family of the deceased woman to ask Trump to stop. He has suggested without evidence that President Barack Obama spied on his campaign and engaged in criminal activity in a conspiracy theory he calls “Obamagate.” He has continued to undermine public-health efforts by refusing to wear a mask in public. He’s further frayed the country’s democratic institutions by conducting a purge of the inspectors general tasked with ferreting out government waste. And he’s sought to undermine faith in November’s election, attacking states’ use of mail-in ballots, which are legal, have a track record of expanding voter access and have not been linked to wide-spread fraud. “It’s the instinct to punch back which sometimes plays out in ways like this,” the White House official says, warning against trying to ascribe “too much grand strategy” to the outbursts. Aides close to Trump have come to see his Twitter feed as a release valve for the President, and have given up on trying to rein in his impulses on the platform. Some observers see in Trump’s outbursts an attempt to change the subject. “The headlines tomorrow will read 100,000 deaths,” says Gregory Goodale, an expert in political communication at Northeastern University. “Does Trump want Fox News to carry that headline, or Joe Scarborough is a murderer or Joe Biden is PC for wearing a mask or mail-in voting will rig the election?” This isn’t the first time Trump has lobbed incendiary tweets to try to deflect. But a “look over there” strategy has rarely been tested during a public health crisis in a time of national grief, with American lives on the line and a presidential election just months away. As the pandemic continues, Trump’s electoral prospects are worsening. The Real Clear Politics polling average finds Trump trailing Biden by an average of more than 5 points nationally, and losing to the former Vice President in most key swing states, including Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania—the troika that delivered him the White House in 2016. Trump is losing support among senior citizens, who were an important part of his 2016 coalition. Some of the voters who cast ballots for him in 2016 out of antipathy for Hillary Clinton say they are abandoning him now, disillusioned by his response to the coronavirus.  Some prominent Republicans say the President has crossed the line with the attacks he’s lobbed in recent days. “We’re in the middle of a pandemic, he’s the Commander-in-Chief of this nation, and it’s causing great pain to the family of the young woman who died, so I would urge him to stop it,” Rep. Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the chair of the House Republican Conference, said May 27, referencing Trump’s repeated implication that Scarborough had been involved in the death of staff member Lori Klausutis in 2001. (Police ruled the death an accident; at the time, Scarborough was hundreds of miles away.) Mitt Romney, the only Republican senator to vote to convict Trump on abuse of power during his impeachment trial, called Trump’s suggestions about Scarborough’s involvement in Klausutis’s death “vile” and “baseless.” “Enough already,” the senator from Utah tweeted. For its part, Trump’s 2020 campaign is attempting to reframe his tantrums as part of his blunt personality that gets results. A new national ad released May 27 champions Trump as “a bull in a China shop,” arguing that Trump’s brusque, provocative manner can break entrenched Washington gridlock. “President Trump’s not always polite,” the ad says. “Mr. Nice Guy won’t cut it.”  But as Trump continues grasping for distractions, even the rocket launch couldn’t provide the outlet he craved. Just 16 minutes before liftoff, the launch was scrubbed because of bad weather. Write to Tessa Berenson at tessa.berenson@time.com.

It’s bad, but it’s not all bad. To be confined in your home with the people you love most against an invisible plague may be, at times, uncomfortable. But it can also be like living inside a poem, the pressures of form and protocol concentrated on the everyday. For me, especially early in the pandemic, it was also more than a little like living in a war zone again. The danger is real but also in some ways random. You gauge risk constantly. In the first days of New York’s lockdown , at the market closest to my house, the handle of the shopping cart stared up at me. It was a bluish-purple strand of plastic that seemed to hold death in its opacity. I had left the house without wipes. My son was climbing on everything. People said it felt like living in a horror movie. That was not the sensation. A horror movie glides on the space between fear and the delighted anticipation of fear. The feeling in the market was the leaden tug of dread. It was steady, and pressed you down, the way a survivor of a bombing says a blast wave does. It was also a kind of gift. Against this backdrop, what you value in life is more vivid. You can’t call it a silver lining, but there is a quality of light involved, a limning that illuminates edges: say, the rail of a child’s bed. The contrast has been turned up, but not way up like the flat screens in the Television and Home Theater department. Just enough to add definition, and a certain depth. As a friend said after receiving a stage 4 cancer diagnosis, “A mirror doesn’t work without backing. You need the black.” That is the value in these days. Ordinarily, to experience what much of the country was experiencing in kitchens and family rooms, you would have had to get yourself down to a recruitment office, produce proof of age and ask for the infantry. In the days when news organizations had steady incomes, you might also get posted as foreign correspondent. In Baghdad, I ran a news bureau for a while. The danger was real but also in some ways random. We gauged risk constantly. And it was understood that any one of us would die for the other: Rifaat, Anthony, Omar, Pamela, Mohammed. This is what experts call “small unit cohesion.” It is the basis of any military. “The truth of war,” David Finkel wrote in Thank You For Your Service, “is that it’s always about loving the guy next to you.” And if you’re already in love with that person? Think of a man in bed, his family asleep down the hall as he dreams of faraway places. I was in faraway places, dreaming of a family asleep down the hall. After we left the market I kept telling my son not to touch his face. (Remember those days?) So of course he reached for his cheek. Then he scampered down a sidewalk that was all but empty. Knowing what’s important, people were staying home. Contact us at editors@time.com.

(Fort Lauderdale, Fla.) — SeaWorld and Walt Disney World will reopen in Orlando, Florida, in June and July after months of inactivity because of the coronavirus pandemic, according to plans a city task force approved Wednesday. The proposals will now be sent to Florida Gov. Ron DeSantis for final approval. The plan calls for SeaWorld to open to the public on June 11. Disney plans a tiered reopening, with Magic Kingdom and Animal Kingdom opening on July 11, followed by Epcot and Hollywood Studios on July 15. Last week, Universal Orlando presented its plan to reopen on June 5. That plan also has been approved by the Orlando task force, which sent its recommendation to the governor. “We are developing a series of ‘know before you go’ communication vehicles and our objective is to reinforce our health and safety messages to guests before they arrive on our property so they are aware and prepared for the new environment,” Disney’s senior vice president of operations, Jim McPhee told the task force. He also said the parks would open with limited capacity, but he didn’t specify the number of guests who would be allowed in initially. In a statement, the company said attendance will be managed through a new system that requires advance reservations for park entry. Disney World also plans smaller, soft openings prior to July 11, but no specifics were provided. SeaWorld is planning an employee appreciation event on June 10 before opening to the public the next day, said Interim CEO Marc Swanson. When Disney Springs, a complex of restaurants and shops near Disney World, reopened, the company formed “social distancing squads,” which McPhee said have been popular with guests. He said they are “a dedicated team of highly energetic and informative cast members who are committed to engaging and inspiring our guests to follow the appropriate guidelines.” Both parks said they will require guests and employees to wear face coverings and social distancing will be enforced throughout their properties. Guests and employees will also undergo temperature checks before entering the parks. Disney employees will be required to do temperature checks before heading to work, McPhee said. They’ll also undergo temperature checks at the park, he added. Fever is one of the symptoms of the coronavirus. Fireworks shows, character meet-and-greets and parades will be suspended to meet social distancing requirements, McPhee said. An inspection team from Orange County visited SeaWorld and Disney on Tuesday to see whether proposed plans would be in compliance with guidelines recommended by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, officials from the parks told the task force. Earlier this month, Shanghai Disneyland became the first of Disney’s theme park resorts to reopen, with severe limits on the number of visitors allowed in, mandatory masks and temperature checks. Contact us at editors@time.com.

Aspen was an early COVID-19 hot spot in Colorado, with a cluster of cases in March linked to tourists visiting for its world-famous skiing. Tests were in short supply, making it difficult to know how the virus was spreading. So in April, when the Pitkin County Public Health Department announced it had obtained 1,000 COVID-19 antibody tests and that they would be offered to residents at no charge, it seemed like an exciting opportunity to evaluate the efforts underway to stop the spread of the virus. “This test will allow us to get the epidemiological data that we’ve been looking for,” Aspen Ambulance District director Gabe Muething said during an April 9 community meeting held online. However, the plan soon fell apart amid questions about the reliability of the test from Aytu BioScience. Other ski towns such as Telluride, Col., and Jackson, WY, as well as the less wealthy border community of Laredo, TX, were also drawn to antibody testing to inform decisions about how to exit lockdown. But they, too, determined the tests weren’t living up to their promise. The allure of antibody tests is understandable. Although they can’t find active cases of COVID-19, they can identify people who previously have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes the disease, which could give health officials important epidemiological information about how widely it has spread in a community and the extent of asymptomatic cases. In theory, at least, antibodies would be present in such people whether they had a severe case, little more than a dry cough or no complaints at all. Even more enticing: These tests were billed as a path to restart local economies by identifying people who might be immune to the virus and could therefore safely return to the public sphere. But, in these and other communities, testing programs initially slated to test hundreds or thousands have been scaled back or put on hold. “I don’t think these tests are ready for clinical use yet,” says University of California-San Francisco immunologist Dr. Alexander Marson, who has studied their reliability. He and his team vetted 12 different antibody tests and found all but one turned up false positives—implying that someone had antibodies when they didn’t―with false-positive rates reaching as high as 16%. (The study is preliminary and has not been peer-reviewed yet.) More than 100 antibody tests are currently available in the U.S., including offerings by commercial labs, academic centers and small entrepreneurial ventures. As serious questions emerged in early May about the accuracy of these tests and the usefulness of their results, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said it will require companies to submit validation data and apply for emergency-use authorizations for their products. (Previously, companies were allowed to sell their tests without review from the FDA, as long as they did their own validation and included a disclaimer.) The American Medical Association said on May 14 that the tests should not be used to assess an individual’s immunity or when to end physical distancing. And this week, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention released new guidelines warning that antibody test results can have high false positive rates and should not be used to make decisions about returning people to work, schools, dorms or other places where people congregate. Once hailed as a solution, the current crop of tests, which have not been thoroughly vetted by any regulatory agency, now seem more likely to add chaos and uncertainty to a situation already fraught with anxiety. “To give people a false sense of security has a lot of danger right now,” says Dr. Travis Riddell, the health officer for Teton County, which includes Jackson, WY. The gold standard for confirming an active COVID-19 infection is to take a swab sample from the nasopharynx and test it for the presence of viral RNA. So far, there is no gold standard for the test that can determine if the infection has come and gone—the antibody tests that parse the blood for antibodies produced by the immune system to fight off SARS-CoV-2. It takes time for an infected person to produce antibodies, so these tests can’t diagnose an ongoing infection, only indicate that a person has encountered the virus. In Aspen, county officials knew the FDA had not approved the test from Aytu BioScience, which the Colorado-based company was importing from China. So they first conducted their own validation tests, says Bill Linn, spokesperson for the Pitkin County Incident Management Team. “We weren’t reassured enough by our own testing to feel like we should move ahead.” In Laredo, officials had been told by one of the community members helping to arrange the purchase of 20,000 tests from the Chinese company Anhui DeepBlue Medical Technology that they were FDA-approved, but the city’s own validation trials revealed only about a 20% accuracy rate, says Laredo spokesperson Rafael Benavides. Before Laredo could pay for the tests, Benavides says, an arm of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement seized them and launched an investigation. Neither Anhui DeepBlue Medical Technology, nor Aytu returned requests for comment. In March, Covaxx, a company led by two part-time Telluride residents, offered to test residents of town and the surrounding county with an antibody test it had developed. But the project was suspended indefinitely after results from the first of two intended rounds of testing were delayed when the company’s testing facility fell behind on processing them. The county is committed to doing a second round of testing but is evaluating how to proceed, says San Miguel County spokesperson Susan Lilly. “The question is how do you target it to be the most relevant clinically and for the public health team’s decision-making moving forward?” On May 4, the FDA updated its antibody test policy to require that manufacturers submit validation data, but it is still allowing the tests to be sold without the normal lengthy vetting and approval process, which includes demonstrating safety and effectiveness. In some wealthy areas, government officials had been offering free tests from startups with local investors. In Jackson, WY, for example, a venture capitalist with an investment in Covaxx, the test used in Telluride, offered to help the city obtain 1,000 tests. But after reviewing the offer, Teton County declined over concerns about the test’s accuracy. “If a person tests positive, what does that mean? And is that useful information? We just don’t know yet,” Riddell says. Covaxx spokesperson John Schaefer said in a statement that the test had been validated on more than 900 blood samples and is being reviewed by the FDA. After Teton County officials decided against community antibody testing, a private nonprofit, Test Teton Now, sprung up to provide free COVID-19 antibody testing for roughly 8,000 people, about a third of the county’s residents. As of May 22, they’d raised $396,000 from the community and tested 843 samples. The group has “done a lot” to verify the Covaxx tests, says Test Teton Now president Shaun Andrikopoulos. “I don’t want to call it validation, because we didn’t go through an independent review board, but we have sent our samples out to other labs.” Organizers of Test Teton Now don’t share others’ concerns about the test’s utility. “We don’t encourage people to make any decisions about what they’re going to do or how they’re going to behave based on the results,” says the nonprofit’s spokesperson, Jennifer Ford. What good is a test that can’t be used for practical purposes? “We think knowledge is power, and data is the beginning of knowledge,” Ford says. But unreliable data doesn’t give knowledge, it gives an illusion of knowledge. So many unknowns remain, and false data may be worse than none. Even a very accurate test will produce a large number of false positives when used in a population where few people have been infected. If only 4% of people have actually been infected, a test with 95% accuracy would produce nine positive results for every 100 tests, five of which are false positives. And that creates a danger that the tests could lead people to incorrectly think that they have antibodies that make them immune, which could have disastrous consequences if they changed their behavior as a result. Consider, for example, a person falsely told she had antibodies going to work at a nursing home, believing she couldn’t catch or spread the virus to anyone. It’s not even known for sure that having antibodies makes someone immune. Researchers are hopeful that exposure can confer some level of immunity, but how strong that immunity might be and how long it might last remain unknown, says Harvard epidemiologist Marc Lipsitch. So, having been burned once, Aspen has put antibody testing on hold and is instead focusing on identifying and isolating people who are sick or at risk of becoming so. “It’s actually a step back to where we started,” Linn says. Given the remaining unknowns about immunity and COVID-19, the best methods for addressing the pandemic in communities may be the most time-tested ones, Linn says. “Put the sick people in places where they can’t get anyone else sick. It’s the bread and butter of epidemiology.” Kaiser Health News (KHN) is a nonprofit news service covering health issues. It is an editorially independent program of the Kaiser Family Foundation that is not affiliated with Kaiser Permanente. Contact us at editors@time.com.

